
While Graham could project a determined confidence at times, at work she began to rely on other people as
she constantly rethought and questioned her own decisions. “I just kept trying to learn the issues from the
men who were running things,” she wrote. “And of course, they were all men.” She never trusted them or
anyone else—but, of course, no one close to her had ever treated her in a trustworthy way. She would
tentatively extend her confidence to someone, then second-guess herself and pull back. Alternately enthused,
then disenchanted with her executives, she gained a fearsome reputation in the office. And all the while, she
never stopped seeking advice.
“As decisions would come along in the course of a day where she was very uncertain how to proceed,” says
her son Don, “she was literally reinventing the wheel. She would be called upon to be a top manager of a
company when she’d never been a bottom manager of a company. She hadn’t watched people who were
CEOs, except the way you watch your husband or your dad.
“And so she had the great habit, when she faced what she thought of as a difficult decision—it usually was a
difficult decision—she would call directors, she would call friends whom she thought might have a relevant
experience. It was partly getting advice to help her handle the problem. And it was partly trying out the
friends as advisers to see who seemed to make sense and whom she’d call the next time.”18
Early on, Graham began to lean on Fritz Beebe, a lawyer and the chairman of the Washington Post
Company, finding him a strong source of support as she struggled with her new job.19 By then, the Post was
the smallest of three remaining Washington newspapers, with $85 million in yearly revenues and $4 million in
profits.
Gradually she grew into her role. She and her managing editor, Ben Bradlee, had a vision of a national paper
that would set a standard to rival the New York Times. Bradlee, born the WASPiest of Boston WASPs, a
Harvard graduate whose Brahman of a first wife was the daughter of a U.S. Senator, had worked closely with
intelligence agencies before turning to journalism. He was funny, brilliant, had an unexpected saltiness that
belied his background, brought out the best in Graham—and encouraged reporters to thrive in an informal
atmosphere of ambition and competition. Before long, the Post had developed a reputation for solid
journalism. Three years after taking over the paper, Graham made Bradlee executive editor.

In 1970 Kay was freed from the tyranny of her mother, Agnes, who died in bed while Kay was visiting
Mount Kisco on Labor Day weekend. Kay went up to her mother’s bedroom to check on her after the maid
told her that Agnes had not rung for her breakfast, and found her in bed, “weirdly inert and already cold,”
Graham wrote in her memoir. She did not cry; while superficial books and movies could turn her into “a
weeper” and she sometimes cried when angry or hurt—as she explained in her book—she never cried when
anyone died.20 And while the death of Agnes Meyer relieved Graham of a burden, it did not cure her
insecurities.
In March 1971, amid continuing protests of the Vietnam War, the New York Times was leaked a copy of the
Pentagon Papers—a top-secret and ruthlessly honest history of the decision-making that led the country into
and through Vietnam that had been commissioned by former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.21
Comprising forty-seven volumes totaling seven thousand pages, the Pentagon Papers showed conclusively
that the government had perpetrated a vast deception on the American public. The Times published its
account of the scheme on Sunday, June 13.
On June 15, about two weeks after Buffett and Munger had gone down to Washington to meet Graham in her
office, a federal district court enjoined the Times from publishing most of the Pentagon Papers. It was the
first time in history that a U.S. judge had restrained publication by a newspaper, raising a major constitutional
question.
The Post, mortified at having been scooped, was determined to get its hands on the Pentagon Papers.

Through informed guesswork and contacts, an editor tracked down their source, Daniel Ellsberg, an expert on
the Vietnam War. The editor flew to Boston with an empty suitcase and brought the Pentagon Papers back to
Washington.
By then Graham had mastered some of the basics of being a publisher, though she remained deferential and
ill at ease. Further, “we were in the middle of going public [but] we hadn’t sold the stock,” she recalled. “It
was a terribly sensitive time for the company, and we could have been very badly hurt if we’d been to court
or criminally enjoined…. The business people were all saying either don’t do it or wait a day, and the lawyers
were saying don’t do it. And the editors were on the other phone saying you’ve got to do it.”
“I would have had to quit if we hadn’t published it,” says Ben Bradlee. “A lot of people would have quit.”
“Everybody knew we had those papers,” Graham wrote later. “It was terribly important to maintain the
momentum after the Times had been stopped, because the issue was the government’s ability to prior-restrain
newspapers. And I felt what Ben said, that the editors would really be demoralized, that the news floor would
be demoralized, that a great deal depended on our doing it.”
Notified on the terrace of her Georgetown mansion that beautiful June afternoon that she had a call, Graham
went into her library and sat down on a small sofa to pick up the phone. Post chairman Fritz Beebe was on
the line. He told her, “I’m afraid you are going to have to decide.” Graham asked Beebe what he would do,
and he said that he guessed he wouldn’t.
“Why can’t we wait a day?” said Graham. “The Times discussed this for three months.” Now Bradlee and
other editors joined the call. The grapevine, they said, knows we’ve got the papers, journalists inside and out
are watching us. We’ve got to go, and we’ve got to go tonight.
Meanwhile, in the library, Paul Ignatius, president of the Post, was standing at Graham’s side, saying, “each
time more insistently—‘Wait a day, wait a day.’ I had about a minute to decide.”
So she parsed Fritz Beebe’s words and his lukewarm tone when he said that he guessed he wouldn’t and
concluded that he would back her if she chose a different course.
“I said, ‘Go ahead, go ahead, go ahead. Let’s go. Let’s publish.’ And I hung up.”22
In that moment the woman who reached for the advice of others on every decision realized that only she
could choose; when forced to reach inside to form her own opinion, she found that she did know what to do.
Before the afternoon was out, the government filed suit against the Post. The following day, June 21, Judge
Gerhard Gesell ruled in the newspaper’s favor, refusing to grant an order restraining it from publishing the
Pentagon Papers. Less than two weeks later, the Supreme Court upheld him, saying the government had not
met “the heavy burden” required to justify, on the grounds of national security, restraining publication.
With the Pentagon Papers, the Post transcended its status as a decently run business that produced good local
journalism and began its transformation into a great paper of national importance.
“Her skill,” wrote reporter Bob Woodward, “was to raise the bar, gently but relentlessly.”23

37
Newshound
Washington, D.C. • 1973

Nearly two years later, the Post was deep into reporting the Watergate story, while in Omaha, the Sun’s
reporters were basking in the glow of the Boys Town exposé. Reporting on Watergate, which began in June
1972 when the break-in occurred, had gradually picked up steam as Woodward and Bernstein linked a check
made out to one of the burglars to the Nixon re-election campaign. The scandal unfolded over many months
as a secret FBI informant, Mark Felt—code-named “Deep Throat” and known to no one but Bob Woodward
until thirty-three years later—funneled information to them about CREEP, the Campaign to Re-elect the
President, and about various CIA and FBI officials involved in funding and aiding the burglars. But other
papers largely ignored the scandal, as did the public. Nixon was re-elected by a huge majority that fall, having
vehemently denied any knowledge of or involvement in the break-in. The Nixon White House, which was
already actively hostile to the Post because of the Pentagon Papers episode, dismissed Watergate as “a
third-rate burglary attempt” and kept up a barrage of threats and harassment against the paper. Attorney
General John Mitchell, who had managed Nixon’s election campaign, told Woodward and Bernstein that
“Katie Graham’s gonna get her tit caught in a big fat wringer” if the Post continued to report the story. A
Wall Street friend with administration contacts advised her “not to be alone.”
In early 1973, a Republican fund-raiser who was a friend of Richard Nixon challenged the renewal of the
Post’s two Florida television licenses. The challenge, which was probably politically motivated, threatened
half of the company’s earnings, an attack on the heart of the business.1 In response, WPO stock plunged
from a high of $38 to as low as $16 a share.
Yet even with a Pulitzer in hand, the Watergate burglars convicted and sent to prison, and a growing body of
evidence linking top Nixon administration officials to the break-in, Graham kept second-guessing herself
about whether the paper was being set up or misled.2 Most of her time and attention now went to fighting
these fires. Her chairman, Fritz Beebe, was ill with cancer and declining rapidly,3 and still in need of an
authority figure to rely upon, she increasingly turned toward another of her board members, André Meyer,
senior partner of the investment bank Lazard Frères.
Vindictive, ruthless, secretive, snobbish, and sadistic, Meyer “crushed other people’s personalities.” He was
known as “the Picasso of Banking” and a man with “an almost erotic attachment to money,” and called the
greatest investment banker of the twentieth century, “a genius of the art of acquisitiveness,” according to his
colleagues.4 He was also the well-connected man who had warned Graham during Watergate not to be alone.
He “had an ability to relate to people at times of distress in a way that created loyalty and exposed him to
grand opportunities in the future,” said a former Lazard executive.5 He soon took up Graham socially as well
and was seen with her at restaurants, parties, and the theater.
Beebe died on May 1, 1973, and a week later his lawyer, George Gillespie, who was also Graham’s personal
lawyer and one of her advisers, began settling his estate. Gillespie got wind that a big investor out in Omaha
had been buying Post stock, so from his summer house in Maine, he called Buffett and offered a block of
fifty thousand of Beebe’s shares that needed to be sold. Buffett snapped it up.
If he could, at the right price, Buffett would have bought almost any newspaper in sight for Berkshire
Hathaway. When the bankers from Affiliated Publications, publisher of the Boston Globe, were struggling to
place its deal, Buffett broke his unwritten rule against buying public offerings and took four percent of
Affiliated at a discount price. Berkshire wound up its largest shareholder. He grabbed stock in Booth
Newspapers, Scripps Howard, and Harte-Hanks Communications, a San Antonio–based chain. The Sun’s
elevated status as a Pulitzer Prize winner enabled him to network his way through the newspaper world,
talking with publishers as one of their peers. He chatted up the owners of the Wilmington News Journal,
hoping to buy the paper. Alas, while newspaper stocks were cheap because investors failed to see their value,
newspaper owners were not so blind. Competing with them, Buffett and Munger’s efforts to buy whole
newspapers had all come to naught.
Still, by late spring 1973 Buffett had accumulated more than five percent of the Washington Post stock.6 He

now sent a letter to Graham. She had never lost her terror that somehow her company would be taken away
from her, even though Beebe and Gillespie had structured the Washington Post’s stock in two classes so that
an unfriendly buyer could never do that.7 Buffett’s letter told her that he owned 230,000 shares and meant to
buy more. But instead of legalistic boilerplate, he wrote a highly flattering, personal missive that linked their
common interest in journalism and stressed the Sun’s Pulitzer. The letter began:
This purchase represents a sizable commitment to us—and an explicitly quantified compliment to the Post as
a business enterprise and to you as its chief executive. Writing a check separates conviction from
conversation. I recognize that the Post is Graham-controlled and Graham-managed. And that suits me fine.8
Nonetheless, Graham panicked. She reached out for advice.
“At times,” Jim Hoagland, one of her reporters, wrote, Graham was “capable of being taken in by
mountebanks of the moment,” and “particularly if they were adroit at a certain kind of kidding flattery.”9 She
was a “pretty dreadful snob” and “too easily impressed by people with big titles,” according to another
reporter.10 Moreover, while she instinctively pursued women’s equality—she had given the seed money to
Gloria Steinem for Ms. magazine, she was known to chide men for referring to professionals as if all members
of the class were men, and she once hurled a paperweight at a Post executive who refused to allow girls to
deliver papers—deep inside she still thought that only men knew anything about business. Thus, when André
Meyer was “irate” and told her that Buffett meant her no good, she took him seriously.11 And it also carried
weight when another of Graham’s acquaintances, Bob Abboud, a fellow trustee at the University of Chicago,
warned her away.
“André Meyer really wanted to think he controlled everything. And it was easy when he got a woman like
Kay—he would make her feel like she’d better not go to the bathroom without checking with him. He had
that style. André kept referring to me as her new boss because I bought this stock. You had all these guys
who could see their power being diluted if I got in the inner circle.
“She was very sensitive to the idea that anyone would manipulate her, for political purposes or for the
paper, which is understandable. She was used to everybody in the world trying to use her. But what you
could do with Kay is you could play on her fears. If you wanted to work her over, you could make her feel
so insecure. And she knew you were doing it to her, but she couldn’t resist it.”
“She would second-guess herself,” says fellow Post board member Arjay Miller. “She would fall in and out
of love with people. She could be bullied. She would get overwhelmed by certain people in business. She
would meet somebody and be sort of dazzled with them for a little while and think they knew all the answers.
She thought men knew all about business and women didn’t know anything. At the bottom, that was the real
problem. Her mother told her that and her husband told her that, over and over and over and over again.”12
Graham tried to find out what she could about Buffett. She barely remembered him from their brief
encounter two years earlier.13 She and her colleagues bought copies of Supermoney and devoured the
chapter on him, wondering what the man from Nebraska had in store for them. Those unfriendly to Buffett
made sure she also saw an unsigned article in the September 1 issue of Forbes about Buffett’s purchase of
stock in San Jose Water Works, which cast a shadow on the sunny portrait that Supermoney had painted of
the mystery man.
This Forbes piece struck a very different tone than the glowing article the magazine had published two years
before. It described a San Jose Water Works shareholder who wanted to unload his stock. He went to a
company director who sent him to Buffett. The article insinuated that Buffett must have known that a deal
was brewing for the city to take over the water works at a higher price than he was paying for the stock—
simply because a director had referred a seller to him. He had connections, so he must have known something
—right? The article ended: “…the American Stock Exchange and the San Francisco office of the Securities
Exchange Commission are making inquiries and asking questions.”14

But there was nothing illegal about a director referring a seller of stock to a buyer.15 Indeed, no deal ever
took place. Yet to anyone checking him out, this would be the most prominent, public, recent mention of his
name apart from Supermoney.16 Buffett felt like a cat’s scratching post. If this cascaded into a series of
expanding stories, it could wreck his newly gilded reputation even though the story had no substance to it. He
was not the type to storm and shout, however, but to brood and plan. Thus, while angry, he was too clever to
confront the magazine and denounce its nameless reporter. He wanted retribution and vindication, so he used
the opportunity to bring himself to the attention of magazine publisher Malcolm Forbes, writing him an
artfully worded letter in which he talked of the pitfalls of journalism, complimented him on the magazine’s
good “batting average” in investigative reporting over the years—to which the article on San Jose Water
Works was some kind of unfortunate exception—and mentioned the Sun’s Pulitzer.17 On the same date he
wrote a crisper letter, sans the flattery, to the editor, stating the facts to support his innocence.
Sure enough, Forbes ran a correction. Buffett knew, however, that corrections were rarely read and had no
impact as compared to the initial story. So he also sent one of his proxies, the loyal Bill Ruane, to talk to the
editors, not to complain but to position Buffett as an expert who could write an article about investing.18 The
attempt failed, at least initially.
Buffett now had a new cause—outrage at bias in news reporting—which wound itself around his sense of
justice and his interest in journalism in general. That a reporter could lie by inference or omission without any
accountability drove him wild. He knew that even well-intentioned news publications flew into a state of high
dudgeon and defended their reporters’ dubious behavior on the premises of newsroom morale and press
independence. This stance, he would later learn, was referred to at the Washington Post as the “defensive
crouch.”19
Eventually, he would end up helping to fund the National News Council, a nonprofit organization that
arbitrated complaints of journalistic malpractice. The council’s position was that media had become
dominated by monopolies and concentrated in a few hands; this lack of competition meant that the First
Amendment’s right of freedom of the press gave publishers “power without responsiblity.” The council
offered redress to victims who had been “traduced, misquoted, libeled, held up to unjustified ridicule, or
whose legitimate views have been ignored in a one-sided report.” Unfortunately, those very monopolies and
the few publishers who dominated the media had no interest in publishing the News Council’s rulings, which
exposed their biases and the carelessness and incompetence of their reporters. The News Council eventually
folded after its findings were spiked, time and time again, by the free and independent press that was
supposed to publish them.20
The National News Council was a worthy crusade, indeed perhaps ahead of its time, like many of the causes
on which Buffett spent his energy. But by 1973, Susie Buffett had seen him expend a tidal wave of energy on
each new crusade or obsession, sometimes changing entire coastlines in his wake. While many people shift
their interests over time, the shy, insecure man she had married seized on one obsession after another. From
his childhood hobby of collecting license-plate numbers to reforming the jiggery-pokery of journalism, three
roles invariably interested him. The first was the relentless collector, expanding his empire of money, people,
and influence. The second was the preacher, sprinkling idealism from the lectern. The third was the cop,
foiling the bad guys.
The perfect business would allow him to do all of these at once: preach, play cop, and collect money to ring
the cash register. The perfect business, therefore, was a newspaper. That was why the Sun had been a sliver
of something that he wanted more of, much, much more.
But he and Munger had struck out at trying to buy major city newspapers. Now here was Katharine Graham,
unsteady on her feet when it came to business, manipulated by those around her, flailing, seeking a lifesaver
ring from anyone she could find. Yet despite her insecurities and vulnerabilities, because of her position at
the helm of the Washington Post, she had become one of the most powerful women in the Western
Hemisphere. And Buffett had always had a strong attraction to powerful people.
Graham was afraid of him. She asked George Gillespie whether he was crooked. She could not afford to

make a mistake. For several years the Nixon administration had been waging an all-out war to discredit the
Post. The Senate Watergate Committee was holding hearings. Woodward and Bernstein had unearthed
Nixon’s “enemies list.” A set of newly discovered tapes implicated the President, who had refused to hand
over information he claimed was privileged, information that could answer the question of what happened
and who was involved. Graham labored every day over the Watergate story. In a sense, she had staked the
Post’s franchise on it.
She relied heavily on the opinion of the devoutly religious, utterly respectable Gillespie. He had served the
Graham family ever since, as a twenty-eight-year-old trust lawyer at Cravath, Swaine & Moore, he had
drafted Eugene Meyer’s final will, witnessing the signature of the fading old man. “He’s going to take over
the Washington Post,” she said about Buffett. “Kay, he can’t take over the Post,” Gillespie said. “Forget it.
It’s not possible. It doesn’t make any difference how much B stock he owns. He has no rights. All he could
do would be to elect himself to the board if he owned the majority of the B stock.”
Gillespie had called a San Jose Water Works director and was convinced that Buffett had had no inside
information. He made it clear that he disagreed with the powerful André Meyer, going out on a limb, given
Meyer’s position and connections. He told her to talk to Buffett, that he would be good for her to know.21
Graham wrote Buffett, quaking as she dictated the letter, suggesting that they get together in California,
where she would be traveling late that summer on business. He agreed eagerly, and when she arrived at an
office provided by the Los Angeles Times, the Post’s West Coast news-service partner, she looked exactly as
she had two years before: impeccably tailored shirtdress, her pageboy hairdo lacquered into place, lips pursed
in a small smile. When she saw Buffett, Graham said, his “very appearance surprised” her.
“The great blessing and curse in my mother’s life,” says her son Don, “was she had very high standards when
it came to taste. She was used to traveling in high-falutin circles. She thought there was one right way to dress
and eat and one circle of people to be paid attention. Warren violated all her standards when it came to these
things, yet he didn’t care.”22 Wearing a suit that looked tailored for some other man, the hair no longer
crew-cut and beginning to float up slightly at the ends, “he resembled no Wall Street figure or business
tycoon I’d ever met,” she later wrote. “Rather, he came across as cornfed and Midwestern, but with that
extraordinary combination of qualities that has appealed to me throughout my life—brains and humor. I liked
him from the start.”23
But at the time, that certainly didn’t show. Instead, she came across as frightened, unsure of both him and
herself.
“When I first met with Kay, she was wary and scared. She was terrified by me, and she was intrigued by me.
And one thing about Kay was that you could tell. She was not a poker-face type.”
Buffett could see that Graham knew nothing about business and finance and that she thought her board and
managers outclassed her in running the business despite what was by now a decade of experience. He told
her he thought Wall Street did not see the value of the Post. Graham relaxed her guard slightly. In her
patrician accent, she invited him to meet with her in Washington a few weeks later.
Warren and Susie arrived November 4, the evening before the meeting, drove up in a taxi to the Madison
Hotel, directly across the street from the Post headquarters, and, as they were checking in, found that the
newspaper was in the middle of a printers’ union work stoppage. Federal marshals were evicting the mutinous
printers amid rumors of pressmen carrying guns. Commotion, glaring lights, and television cameras carried on
until dawn. Given what was happening in the political sphere, it would be hard to find a worse time to shut
down a newspaper, which of course was exactly what the union intended. Vice President Spiro Agnew had
been under criminal investigation but suddenly pleaded “no contest” less than a month ago to a tax-evasion
charge, then resigned. The Watergate scandal had reached an explosive crisis. Two weeks after Agnew’s
resignation, U.S. Attorney General Elliot Richardson and Deputy Attorney General William Ruckelshaus
resigned in protest rather than execute President Nixon’s order to fire special prosecutor Archibald
Cox—who had been appointed to investigate the unfolding scandal—and abolish his office. Nixon did so
