
other ways. Some of them used a hollow wand, filled with gold or silver dust, and
stopped at the ends with wax or butter. With this they stirred the boiling metal in their
crucibles, taking care to accompany the operation with many ceremonies, to divert
attention from the real purpose of the manoeuvre. They also drilled holes in lumps of
lead, into which they poured molten gold, and carefully closed the aperture with the
original metal. Sometimes they washed a piece of gold with quicksilver. When in this
state they found no difficulty in palming it off upon the uninitiated as an inferior metal,
and very easily transmuted it into fine sonorous gold again, with the aid of a little
aquafortis.
Others imposed by means of nails, half iron and half gold or silver. They pretended that
they really transmuted the precious half from iron, by dipping it in a strong alcohol. M.
Geoffroy produced several of these nails to the Academy of Sciences, and showed how
nicely the two parts were soldered together. The golden or silver half was painted black
to resemble iron, and the colour immediately disappeared when the nail was dipped into
aquafortis. A nail of this description was, for a long time, in the cabinet of the Grand
Duke of Tuscany. Such also, said M. Geoffroy, was the knife presented by a monk to
Queen Elizabeth of England; the blade of which was half gold and half steel. Nothing at
one time was more common than to see coins, half gold and half silver, which had been
operated upon by alchymists, for the same purposes of trickery. In fact, says M.
Geoffroy, in concluding his long report, there is every reason to believe that all the
famous histories which have been handed down to us, about the transmutation of metals
into gold or silver, by means of the powder of projection, or philosophical elixirs, are
founded upon some successful deception of the kind above narrated. These pretended
philosophers invariably disappeared after the first or second experiment, or their powders
or elixirs have failed to produce their effect, either because attention being excited they
have found no opportunity to renew the trick without being discovered, or because they
have not had sufficient gold dust for more than one trial.
The disinterestedness of these would-be philosopher looked, at first sight, extremely
imposing. Instances were not rare, in which they generously abandoned all the profits of
their transmutations - even the honour of the discovery! But this apparent
disinterestedness was one of the most cunning of their manoeuvres. It served to keep up
the popular expectation; it showed the possibility of discovering the philosopher's stone,
and provided the means of future advantages, which they were never slow to lay hold of - such as entrances into royal households, maintenance at the public expense, and gifts
from ambitious potentates, too greedy after the gold they so easily promised.
It now only remains to trace the progress of the delusion from the commencement of the
eighteenth century until the present day. It will be seen, that until a very recent period,
there were but slight signs of a return to reason.
JEAN DELISLE.
In the year 1705, there was much talk in France of a blacksmith, named Delisle, who had
discovered the philosopher's stone, and who went about the country turning lead into

gold. He was a native of Provence, from which place his fame soon spread to the capital.
His early life is involved in obscurity; but Longlet du Fresnoy has industriously collected
some particulars of his later career, which possess considerable interest. He was a man
without any education, and had been servant in his youth to an alchymist, from whom he
learned many of the tricks of the fraternity. The name of his master has never been
discovered; but it is pretended that he rendered himself in some manner obnoxious to the
government of Louis XIV, and was obliged, in consequence, to take refuge in
Switzerland. Delisle accompanied him as far as Savoy, and there, it is said, set upon him
in a solitary mountain-pass, and murdered and robbed him. He then disguised himself as
a pilgrim, and returned to France. At a lonely inn, by the road-side, where he stopped for
the night, he became acquainted with a woman, named Aluys; and so sudden a passion
was enkindled betwixt them, that she consented to leave all, follow him, and share his
good or evil fortune wherever he went. They lived together for five or six years in
Provence, without exciting any attention, apparently possessed of a decent independence.
At last, in 1706, it was given out that he was the possessor of the philosopher's stone; and
people, from far and near, came flocking to his residence, at the Chateau de la Palu, at
Sylanez, near Barjaumont, to witness the wealth he could make out of pumps and fire
shovels. The following account of his operations is given in a letter addressed by M. de
Cerisy, the Prior of Chateauneuf, in the Diocese of Riez, in Provence, to the Vicar of St.
Jacques du Hautpas, at Paris, and dated the 18th of November 1706:-"I have something to relate to you, my dear cousin, which will be interesting to you and
your friends. The philosopher's stone, which so many persons have looked upon as a
chimera, is at last found. It is a man named Delisle, of the parish of Sylanez, and residing
within a quarter of a league of me, that has discovered this great secret. He turns lead into
gold, and iron into silver, by merely heating these metals red hot, and pouring upon them,
in that state, some oil and powder he is possessed of; so that it would not be impossible
for any man to make a million a day, if he had sufficient of this wondrous mixture. Some
of the pale gold which he had made in this manner, he sent to the jewellers of Lyons, to
have their opinion on its quality. He also sold twenty pounds weight of it to a merchant of
Digne, named Taxis. All the jewellers say they never saw such fine gold in their lives. He
makes nails, part gold, part iron, and part silver. He promised to give me one of them, in
a long conversation which I had with him the other day, by order of the Bishop of Sends,
who saw his operations with his own eyes, and detailed all the circumstances to me.
"The Baron and Baroness de Rheinwald showed me a lingot of gold made out of pewter
before their eyes by M. Delisle. My brother-in-law Sauveur, who has wasted fifty years
of his life in this great study, brought me the other day a nail which he had seen changed
into gold by Delisle, and fully convinced me that all his previous experiments were
founded on an erroneous principle. This excellent workman received, a short time ago, a
very kind letter from the superintendent of the royal household, which I read. He offered
to use all his influence with the ministers to prevent any attempts upon his liberty, which
has twice been attacked by the agents of government. It is believed that the oil he makes
use of, is gold or silver reduced to that state. He leaves it for a long time exposed to the
rays of the sun. He told me that it generally took him six months to make all his
preparations. I told him that, apparently, the King wanted to see him. He replied that he

could not exercise his art in every place, as a certain climate and temperature were
absolutely necessary to his success. The truth is, that this man appears to have no
ambition. He only keeps two horses and two men-servants. Besides, he loves his liberty,
has no politeness, and speaks very bad French; but his judgment seems to be solid. He
was formerly no more than a blacksmith, but excelled in that trade without having been
taught it. All the great lords and seigneurs from far and near come to visit him, and pay
such court to him, that it seems more like idolatry than anything else. Happy would
France be if this man would discover his secret to the King, to whom the superintendent
has already sent some lingots! But the happiness is too great to be hoped for; for I fear
that the workman and his secret will expire together. There is no doubt that this discovery
will make a great noise in the kingdom, unless the character of the man, which I have just
depicted to you, prevent it. At all events, posterity will hear of him."
In another letter to the same person, dated the 27th of January 1707, M. de Cerisy says,
"My dear cousin, I spoke to you in my last letter of the famous alchymist of Provence, M.
Delisle. A good deal of that was only hearsay, but now I am enabled to speak from my
own experience. I have in my possession a nail, half iron and half silver, which I made
myself. That great and admirable workman also bestowed a still greater privilege upon
me -- he allowed me to turn a piece of lead which I had brought with me into pure gold,
by means of his wonderful oil and powder. All the country have their eyes upon this
gentleman: some deny loudly, others are incredulous; but those who have seen
acknowledge the truth. I have read the passport that has been sent to him from Court,
with orders that he should present himself at Paris early in the spring. He told me that he
would go willingly, and that it was himself who fixed the spring for his departure; as he
wanted to collect his materials, in order that, immediately on his introduction to the King,
he might make an experiment worthy of his Majesty, by converting a large quantity of
lead into the finest gold. I sincerely hope that he will not allow his secret to die with him,
but that he will communicate it to the King. As I had the honour to dine with him on
Thursday last, the 20th of this month, being seated at his side, I told him in a whisper that
he could, if he liked, humble all the enemies of France. He did not deny it, but began to
smile. In fact, this man is the miracle of art. Sometimes he employs the oil and powder
mixed, sometimes the powder only, but in so small a quantity that, when the lingot which
I made was rubbed all over with it, it did not show at all."
This soft-headed priest was by no means the only person in the neighbourhood who lost
his wits in hopes of the boundless wealth held out by this clever impostor. Another priest,
named De Lions, a chanter in the cathedral of Grenoble, writing on the 30th January
1707, says, -- "M. Mesnard, the curate of Montier, has written to me, stating that there is
a man, about thirty-five years of age, named Delisle, who turns lead and iron into gold
and silver; and that this transmutation is so veritable and so true, that the goldsmiths
affirm that his gold and silver are the purest and finest they ever saw. For five years, this
man was looked upon as a madman or a cheat; but the public mind is now disabused with
respect to him. He now resides with M. de la Palu, at the chateau of the same name. M.
de la Palu is not very easy in his circumstances, and wants money to portion his
daughters, who have remained single till middle age, no man being willing to take them
without a dowry. M. Delisle has promised to make them the richest girls in the province

before he goes to Court, having been sent for by the King. He has asked for a little time
before his departure, in order that he may collect powder enough to make several quintals
of gold before the eyes of his Majesty, to whom he intends to present them. The principal
matter of his wonderful powder is composed of simples, principally the herbs Lunaria
major and minor. There is a good deal of the first planted by him in the gardens of La
Palu; and he gets the other from the mountains, that stretch about two leagues from
Montier. What I tell you now is not a mere story invented for your diversion: M. Mesnard
can bring forward many witnesses to its truth; among others, the Bishop of Senes, who
saw these surprising operations performed; and M. de Cerisy, whom you know well.
Delisle transmutes his metals in public. He rubs the lead or iron with his powder, and puts
it over burning charcoal. In a short time it changes colour; the lead becomes yellow, and
is found to be converted into excellent gold: the iron becomes white, and is found to be
pure silver. Delisle is altogether an illiterate person. M. de St. Auban endeavoured to
teach him to read and write, but he profited very little by his lessons. He is unpolite,
fantastic, and a dreamer, and acts by fits and starts."
Delisle, it would appear, was afraid of venturing to Paris. He knew that his sleight of
hand would be too narrowly watched in the royal presence; and upon some pretence or
other, he delayed the journey for more than two years. Desmarets, the Minister of
Finance to Louis XIV, thinking the "philosopher" dreaded foul play, twice sent him a safe
conduct under the King's seal; but Delisle still refused. Upon this, Desmarets wrote to the
Bishop of Sends for his real opinion as to these famous transmutations. The following
was the answer of that prelate:-"Copy of a report addressed to M. Desmarets, Comptroller-General of the Finances to His
Majesty Louis XIV, by the Bishop of Senes, dated March 1709.
"SIR,
"A twelvemonth ago, or a little more, I expressed to you my joy at hearing of your
elevation to the ministry; I have now the honour to write you my opinion of the Sieur
Delisle, who has been working at the transmutation of metals in my diocese. I have,
during the last two years, spoken of him several times to the Count de Pontchartrain,
because he asked me; but I have not written to you, sir, or to M. de Chamillart, because
you neither of you requested my opinion upon the subject. Now, however, that you have
given me to understand that you wish to know my sentiments on the matter, I will unfold
myself to you in all sincerity, for the interests of the King and the glory of your ministry.
"There are two things about the Sieur Delisle which, in my opinion, should be examined
without prejudice: the one relates to his secret; the other, to his person; that is to say,
whether his transmutations are real, and whether his conduct has been regular. As regards
the secret of the philosopher's stone, I deemed it impossible, for a long time; and for more
than three years, I was more mistrustful of the pretensions of this Sieur Delisle than of
any other person. During this period I afforded him no countenance; I even aided a
person, who was highly recommended to me by an influential family of this province, to
prosecute Delisle for some offence or other which it was alleged he had committed. But

this person, in his anger against him, having told me that he had himself been several
times the bearer of gold and silver to the goldsmiths of Nice, Aix, and Avignon, which
had been transmuted by Delisle from lead and iron, I began to waver a little in my
opinions respecting him. I afterwards met Delisle at the house of one of my friends. To
please me, the family asked Delisle to operate before me, to which he immediately
consented. I offered him some iron nails, which he changed into silver in the chimneyplace before six or seven credible witnesses. I took the nails thus transmuted, and sent
them by my almoner to Irabert, the jeweller of Aix, who, having subjected them to the
necessary trial, returned them to me, saying they were very good silver. Still, however, I
was not quite satisfied. M. de Pontchartrain having hinted to me, two years previously,
that I should do a thing agreeable to his Majesty if I examined into this business of
Delisle, I resolved to do so now. I therefore summoned the alchymist to come to me at
Castellane. He came; and I had him escorted by eight or ten vigilant men, to whom I had
given notice to watch his hands strictly. Before all of us he changed two pieces of lead
into gold and silver. I sent them both to M. de Pontchartrain; and he afterwards informed
me by a letter, now lying before me, that he had shown them to the most experienced
goldsmiths of Paris, who unanimously pronounced them to be gold and silver of the very
purest quality, and without alloy. My former bad opinion of Delisle was now indeed
shaken. It was much more so when he performed transmutation five or six times before
me at Senes, and made me perform it myself before him without his putting his hand to
anything. You have seen, sir, the letter of my nephew, the Pere Berard, of the Oratoire at
Paris, on the experiment that he performed at Castellane, and the truth of which I hereby
attest. Another nephew of mine, the Sieur Bourget, who was here three weeks ago,
performed the same experiment in my presence, and will detail all the circumstances to
you personally at Paris. A hundred persons in my diocese have been witnesses of these
things. I confess to you, sir, that, after the testimony of so many spectators and so many
goldsmiths, and after the repeatedly successful experiments that I saw performed, all my
prejudices vanished. My reason was convinced by my eyes; and the phantoms of
impossibility which I had conjured up were dissipated by the work of my own hands.
"It now only remains for me to speak to you on the subject of his person and conduct.
Three suspicions have been excited against him: the first, That he was implicated in some
criminal proceeding at Cisteron, and that he falsified the coin of the realm; the second,
That the King sent him two safe-conducts without effect; and the third, That he still
delays going to court to operate before the King. You may see, sir, that I do not hide or
avoid anything. As regards the business at Cisteron, the Sieur Delisle has repeatedly
assured me that there was nothing against him which could reasonably draw him within
the pale of justice, and that he had never carried on any calling injurious to the King's
service. It was true that, six or seven years ago, he had been to Cisteron to gather herbs
necessary for his powder, and that he had lodged at the house of one Pelouse, whom he
thought an honest man. Pelouse was accused of clipping Louis d'ors; and as he had
lodged with him, he was suspected of being his accomplice. This mere suspicion, without
any proof whatever, had caused him to be condemned for contumacy; a common case
enough with judges, who always proceed with much rigour against those who are absent.
During my own sojourn at Aix, it was well known that a man, named Andre Aluys, had
spread about reports injurious to the character of Delisle, because he hoped thereby to

avoid paying him a sum of forty Louis that he owed him. But permit me, sir, to go
further, and to add that, even if there were well-founded supicions against Delisle, we
should look with some little indulgence on the faults of a man who possesses a secret so
useful to the state. As regards the two safe-conducts sent him by the King, I think I can
answer certainly that it was through no fault of his that he paid so little attention to them.
His year, strictly speaking, consists only of the four summer months; and when by any
means he is prevented from making the proper use of them, he loses a whole year. Thus
the first safe-conduct became useless by the irruption of the Duke of Savoy in 1707; and
the second had hardly been obtained, at the end of June 1708, when the said Delisle was
insulted by a party of armed men, pretending to act under the authority of the Count de
Grignan, to whom he wrote several letters of complaint, without receiving any answer, or
promise that his safety would be attended to. What I have now told you, sir, removes the
third objection, and is the reason why, at the present time, he cannot go to Paris to the
King, in fulfilment of his promises made two years ago. Two, or even three, summers
have been lost to him, owing to the continual inquietude he has laboured under. He has,
in consequence, been unable to work, and has not collected a sufficient quantity of his oil
and powder, or brought what he has got to the necessary degree of perfection. For this
reason also he could not give the Sieur de Bourget the portion he promised him for your
inspection. If the other day he changed some lead into gold with a few grains of his
powder, they were assuredly all he had; for he told me that such was the fact long before
he knew my nephew was coming. Even if he had preserved this small quantity to operate
before the King, I am sure that, on second thoughts, he would never have adventured with
so little; because the slightest obstacles in the metals (their being too hard or too soft,
which is only discovered in operating) would have caused him to be looked upon as an
impostor, if, in case his first powder had proved ineffectual, he had not been possessed of
more to renew the experiment and surmount the difficulty.
"Permit me, sir, in conclusion, to repeat that such an artist as this should not be driven to
the last extremity, nor forced to seek an asylum offered to him in other countries, but
which he has despised, as much from his own inclinations as from the advice I have
given him. You risk nothing in giving him a little time, and in hurrying him you may lose
a great deal. The genuineness of his gold can no longer be doubted, after the testimony of
so many jewellers of Aix, Lyons, and Paris in its favour. As it is not his fault that the
previous safe-conducts sent to him have been of no service, it will be necessary to send
him another; for the success of which I will be answerable, if you will confide the matter
to me, and trust to my zeal for the service of his Majesty, to whom I pray you to
communicate this letter, that I may be spared the just reproaches he might one day heap
upon me if he remained ignorant of the facts I have now written to you. Assure him, if
you please, that, if you send me such a safe-conduct, I will oblige the Sieur Delisle to
depose with me such precious pledges of his fidelity, as shall enable me to be responsible
myself to the King. These are my sentiments, and I submit them to your superior
knowledge; and have the honour to remain, with much respect, &c.
"* JOHN, Bishop of Senes."

"To M. Desmarets, Minister of State, and "Comptroller-General of the Finances, at
Paris."
That Delisle was no ordinary impostor, but a man of consummate cunning and address, is
very evident from this letter. The Bishop was fairly taken in by his clever legerdemain,
and when once his first distrust was conquered, appeared as anxious to deceive himself as
even Delisle could have wished. His faith was so abundant that he made the case of his
protege his own, and would not suffer the breath of suspicion to be directed against him.
Both Louis and his minister appear to have been dazzled by the brilliant hopes he had
excited, and a third pass, or safe-conduct, was immediately sent to the alchymist, with a
command from the King that he should forthwith present himself at Versailles, and make
public trial of his oil and powder. But this did not suit the plans of Delisle: in the
provinces he was regarded as a man of no small importance; the servile flattery that
awaited him wherever he went was so grateful to his mind that he could not willingly
relinquish it and run upon certain detection at the court of the Monarch. Upon one pretext
or another he delayed his journey, notwithstanding the earnest solicitations of his good
friend the Bishop. The latter had given his word to the minister, and pledged his honour
that he would induce Delisle to go, and he began to be alarmed when he found he could
not subdue the obstinacy of that individual. For more than two years he continued to
remonstrate with him, and was always met by some excuse, that there was not sufficient
powder, or that it had not been long enough exposed to the rays of the sun. At last his
patience was exhausted; and fearful that he might suffer in the royal estimation by longer
delay, he wrote to the King for a lettre de cachet, in virtue of which the alchymist was
seized at the castle of La Palu, in the month of June 1711, and carried off to be
imprisoned in the Bastille.
The gendarmes were aware that their prisoner was supposed to be the lucky possessor of
the philosopher's stone, and on the road they conspired to rob and murder him. One of
them pretended to be touched with pity for the misfortunes of the philosopher, and
offered to give him an opportunity of escape whenever he could divert the attention of his
companions. Delisle was profuse in his thanks, little dreaming of the snare that was laid
for him. His treacherous friend gave notice of the success of the stratagem so far; and it
was agreed that Delisle should be allowed to struggle with and overthrow one of them
while the rest were at some distance. They were then to pursue him and shoot him
through the heart; and after robbing the corpse of the philosopher's stone, convey it to
Paris on a cart, and tell M. Desmarets that the prisoner had attempted to escape, and
would have succeeded, if they had not fired after him and shot him through the body. At
a convenient place the scheme was executed. At a given signal from the friendly
gendarme Delisle fled, while another gendarme took aim and shot him through the thigh.
Some peasants arriving at the instant, they were prevented from killing him as they
intended; and he was transported to Paris, maimed and bleeding. He was thrown into a
dungeon in the Bastille, and obstinately tore away the bandages which the surgeons
applied to his wound. He never afterwards rose from his bed.
The Bishop of Senes visited him in prison, and promised him his liberty if he would
transmute a certain quantity of lead into gold before the King. The unhappy man had no
