
The defrauded farmers had no idea that their moldering paper was now worth something. Howard had been
quietly buying the stock back from them on the cheap for years through his younger brother Hayden, who ran
National American. By now the Ahmansons owned seventy percent of the company.
Warren admired Howard Ahmanson. “Nobody else was quite as audacious at managing capital as Howard
Ahmanson. He was very shrewd in a lot of ways. Formerly, a lot of people came in to Home Savings and
paid their mortgages in person. Howard put the mortgage at the farthest branch away from where you lived
so that you paid by mail and didn’t spend half an hour of one of his guys’ time telling them about your kids.
Everybody else had been to see It’s a Wonderful Life and felt that you should do this Jimmy Stewart stuff,
but Howard didn’t want to see his customers. His operating costs were way under anybody else’s.”
National American was earning $29 per share, and Howard’s brother Hayden was buying its stock for around
$30 per share. Thus, as with the rarest and most attractive of the cheap stocks that Warren stalked, the
Ahmansons could pay virtually the entire cost of buying a share of stock out of one year’s profits from that
single share. National American was the cheapest stock Warren had ever seen—except for Western
Insurance. And it was a nice little company, too, not a soggy cigar butt.
“I tried to buy the stock for a long time. But none of it was getting to me, because there was a security
dealer in town and Hayden had given this guy the shareholders list. This stockbroker—he regarded me as a
punk kid. But he had the list. And I didn’t have the list. So he was buying the stock at thirty for Hayden’s
account.”
Cash on the barrel from Hayden Ahmanson sounded good to some of the farmers compared to their worthless
certificates. Though they had paid around $100 per share many years before and were only receiving $30,
many of them had gradually convinced themselves that they were better off without the stock.
Warren was determined. “I looked it up in some insurance book or something. If you went back to the
twenties you could see who were the directors. They made some of these bigger stockholders the directors
from the towns they worked the hardest for sales. There was a town called Ewing, Nebraska, which has got
no population at all. But somebody sold a lot of stock out there. And that’s how they probably got the local
banker on the board thirty-five years earlier.”
So Dan Monen, Warren’s partner and proxy, went off to the countryside carrying wads of Warren’s money
and some of his own. He cruised around the state in a red-and-white Chevrolet, showing up in rural county
courthouses and banks, casually asking who might own shares of National American.26 He sat on front
porches, drinking iced tea, eating pie with farmers and their wives, and offering cash for their stock
certificates.27
“I didn’t want Howard to know because I was topping his price. He had been picking it off at thirty bucks,
and I’d had to raise the price some. The shareholders had been listening for probably ten years at thirty
bucks, so it was the first time the price moved.”
The first year Warren paid $35 each for five shares of the stock. The farmers’ ears pricked up. Now they
realized that buyers were competing for the stock; they began to think maybe they weren’t better off without
it. The price had to keep moving up. “Finally, toward the end, I paid a hundred. That was the magic
number, because it was what they’d paid in the first place. A hundred bucks, I knew, would bring out all the
stock. And sure enough, one guy came in when Dan Monen was doing this and he said, ‘We bought this like
sheep, and we’re selling it like sheep.’”28
That they were. Many had sold at less than three times the $29 a year the company was earning. Monen
eventually accumulated two thousand shares, ten percent of National American’s stock. Warren kept it in the
original shareholders’ names, with a power of attorney attached that gave him control, rather than
transferring it into his name. “That would have tipped Howard off to the fact that I was out there competing
with him. He didn’t know. Or, if he did, he had insufficient information. I just kept collecting shares. Then,
the day I walked into Hayden’s office, I plopped them all down and said I wanted to transfer them to my

name. And he said, ‘My brother’s going to kill me.’ But in the end, he transferred the stock.”29
The brainstorm behind Warren’s National American coup had been more than just the price. He had learned
the value of gathering as much as possible of something scarce. From license plates to nuns’ fingerprints to
coins and stamps, to the Union Street Railway, and National American, he had always thought this way, a
born collector.30
Alas, this voracious instinct could steer him awry on occasion. Tom Knapp, who had gone to work for a small
broker, Tweedy, Browne and Reilly, after helping Jerry Newman close down the remnants of GrahamNewman, came out to visit Warren and to go hear Ben Graham give a speech in Beloit, Wisconsin. Driving
through the Iowa cornfields on the way, Knapp mentioned that the U.S. government was about to take the
four-cent Blue Eagle stamp out of circulation. The cash register dinged! in Warren’s head. “Let’s stop at a
few post offices and see if they have any four-cent stamps,” he said on the way back. Knapp went into the
first post office and returned to say that it had twenty-eight stamps. “Go buy them,” said Buffett. They talked
about it some more and decided to write to post offices after they returned home, to offer to buy their stamp
inventory. The stamps started coming in a few thousand at a time. Then Denver replied and said they had
twenty pads. A pad is a hundred sheets of a hundred stamps. That meant Denver had two hundred thousand
stamps.
“We might as well control the issue,” Warren said. They spent $8,000 and bought the pads.
“And that was our mistake,” says Knapp. “We should have let the Denver post office send them back to
Washington to reduce the supply.”
Through expending enormous effort to become virtual post offices themselves—with most of the work done
by Knapp—they gathered more than six hundred thousand Blue Eagle stamps, collectively spending roughly
$25,000. For Warren that was a lot, considering his attitude about money and his net worth. They stored the
piles of stamps in their basements. And then they realized what they had done. They had laboriously acquired
basements full of stamps that would never be worth more than four cents apiece. “When you have so many
stamps,” Knapp explains, “there are not many collectors.”
So the next task became disposing of the stamps. Warren expertly delegated the problem of getting rid of
$25,000 worth of four-cent stamps to Tom. Then he simply put it out of his mind, except for the funny story,
and instead turned back to what was actually important: raising money for the partnerships. In June 1957,
another one of the original partners, Elizabeth Peterson, Chuck’s mother, asked Warren to set up a fourth
partnership, to be called Underwood, investing another $85,000.31
A few months later, in the summer of 1957, “I got a call from Mrs. Edwin Davis. They used to be customers
of the Buffett grocery store. Her husband, Dr. Davis, was a very prominent urologist in town. They lived
just a few blocks from here. She said, ‘I understand you manage money. Would you come down and explain
it to us?’”
Dr. Edwin Davis was nationally known. One of his patients, Arthur Wiesenberger of New York City, was one
of the most famous money managers of the era. He had at some point come to Omaha to be treated for
prostate problems, and Davis became his client.
Wiesenberger published Investment Companies, an annual “bible” on closed-end investment funds. These
were like publicly traded mutual funds, except that they did not accept new investors. They nearly always
sold at a discount to the value of their assets, which made Wiesenberger a proponent of buying them.32 In
short, they were like mutual-fund cigar butts. The summer before graduate school, Warren had sat in a chair
at Buffett-Falk’s office, reading Wiesenberger’s bible while Howard worked. “Before I went to Columbia,”
he says, “I used to spend hours and hours reading that book from cover to cover, religiously.” He bought
two of Wiesenberger’s cigar butts, United States & International Securities and Selected Industries, which in
1950 had made up more than two-thirds of his assets.33 While at Graham-Newman, he also managed to meet
Wiesenberger and had impressed him, “even though I wasn’t very impressive in those days.”

In 1957, Wiesenberger called Dr. Davis out of the blue and explained that, although it was not necessarily in
his own interest to do so, he was recommending a young man to him. “I tried to hire him myself,” said
Wiesenberger, “but he was forming a partnership and so I couldn’t.”34 He urged Davis to consider investing
with Buffett.
Shortly afterward, Warren scheduled a meeting with the Davis family on a Sunday afternoon. “I went down
to their place and sat in their living room and talked to them for about an hour. I said, ‘Here’s how I
manage money and the arrangement I have.’ I was probably twenty-six. I looked about twenty years old at
the time.” Actually, he looked more like eighteen, according to Eddie Davis: “His collar was open; his coat
was too big. He talked so very fast.” At the time, Warren went around Omaha wearing a mangy sweater
—which one person observed probably should have been given to Goodwill—an old pair of pants, and
scuffed shoes. “I acted immature for my age,” Buffett recalls. “The kind of things I talked about were what
you would expect from a much younger person.” In fact, there was still more than a trace of the
hand-drumming, “Mammy”-singing boy from Penn. “You had to overlook a lot back then.”
Yet not when he was talking about the partnerships. Warren was not there to sell the Davises. He laid out his
ground rules. He wanted absolute control over the money and would tell his partners nothing about how it
was invested. That was the sticking point. Not for him was Ben Graham’s handicap of people riding on his
coattails. And his solution to the problem of people being disappointed was that he wasn’t going to give them
the score after every hole, only once a year after playing eighteen holes. They would get an annual summary
of his performance, and they could put money in or withdraw it only on December 31. The rest of the year,
their money would be locked into the partnership.
“All the while, Eddie paid no attention to me. Dorothy Davis listened very intently, asking good questions.
Eddie was over in the corner doing nothing. He seemed like a very old guy to me, but he was not yet
seventy. When we got all the way through, Dorothy turned to Eddie and said, ‘What do you think?’ Eddie
said, ‘Let’s give him a hundred thousand dollars.’ In a much more polite way, I said, ‘Dr. Davis, you know,
I’m delighted to get this money. But you weren’t really paying a lot of attention to me while I was talking.
How come you’re doing it?’
“And he said, ‘Well, you remind me of Charlie Munger.’35
“I said, ‘Well, I don’t know who Charlie Munger is, but I really like him.’”
But the other reason the Davises were so willing to invest with Warren was because, to their surprise, he
“knew more about Arthur Wiesenberger than they did.”36 They also liked the way he laid out his
terms—clear and transparent, so they knew whose side he was on. He would win or lose along with them. As
Dorothy Davis put it, “He’s smart, he’s bright, and I can tell he’s honest. I like everything about this young
man.” On August 5, 1957, the money from the Davises and their three children seeded the fifth partnership
with $100,000. It was called Dacee.37
With Dacee, Warren’s business jumped another leg upward. He could now land bigger positions in larger
stocks. In his personal portfolio, he still played with things like the “penny” uranium stocks that had been in
vogue a few years earlier when the government was buying uranium. These were now fantastically cheap.38
Warren bought companies like Hidden Splendor, Stanrock, Northspan. “There were some attractive
issues—it was shooting fish in a barrel. They weren’t huge fish, but you were shooting them in a barrel. You
knew you were going to make good money. It was minor. The bigger stuff I was putting in the partnerships.”
Having new partners meant more money, of course, but it also meant that the number of stock certificates
and amount of paperwork managing the five partnerships plus Buffett & Buffett increased substantially. He
had to hustle, but it felt good. The shortfall, as always, was money—he never seemed to have enough. The
kind of companies he was researching often had market values of one to ten million dollars, so he wanted as
much as $100,000 to get a significant position in their stocks. Getting more money to manage was key.

By this time Dan Monen was ready to get back into the partnership, and he and his wife, Mary Ellen, formed
the nucleus of Warren’s sixth partnership, Mo-Buff, on May 5, 1958. Thanks mostly to National American,
the Monens, who had had only $5,000 to invest two years earlier, were now able to put in $70,000.39
At the time, Warren Buffett probably understood the potential of money management to beget more money
better than anyone on Wall Street. Every dollar added to a partnership would net him a share of what he
earned for his partners.40 Each of those dollars, reinvested, would generate earnings of its own.41 Those
earnings, reinvested, would beget still more earnings. The better his performance, the more he would earn,
and the larger his share of the partnerships would grow, enabling him to earn even more. His talent for
investing could exploit that potential of managing money to the hilt. And despite Warren’s apparent
awkwardness, he was indisputably successful at merchandising himself. Even though he was nearly invisible
in the investing world, the snowball was starting to roll.
With momentum behind him, Warren realized it was time to leave a house where there was barely room for a
family with two young children—one an unusually energetic three-and-a-half-year-old—and a third on the
way. The Buffetts bought their first house. It stood on Farnam Street, a Dutch Cape set back on a large
corner lot overlooked by evergreens, next to one of Omaha’s busiest thoroughfares. While the largest house
on the block, it had an unpretentious and charming air, with dormers set into the sloping shingled roof and an
eyebrow window.42 Warren paid $31,500 to Sam Reynolds, a local businessman, and promptly named it
“Buffett’s Folly.”43 In his mind $31,500 was a million dollars after compounding for a dozen years or so,
because he could invest it at such an impressive rate of return. Thus, he felt as though he were spending an
outrageous million dollars on the house.
Just before the moving van left the house on Underwood Avenue, Warren took five-year-old Little Susie
back up the stairs to the wrought-iron balcony. “The glasses man is staying here,” he said. “You need to say
good-bye to him.” Susie Jr. said good-bye, and, indeed, the glasses man remained behind.44
Big Susie’s job was to oversee the move, get them settled into the house, and lasso Howie while more than
eight months pregnant with her third child. As longtime friends observed, Howie was a “hell-raiser.” The
inexhaustible Buffett energy poured from him in such a whirlwind that he was nicknamed the Tornado, a
cousin to Warren’s childhood nickname, Firebolt—but with a very different connotation. As soon as Howie
could walk, says Buffett, he became peripatetic. He dug up the garden with his Tonka toys, and Susie took
them away, then he tore the house apart to find them. Once he did, he dug the garden up again. Susie
snatched away the front-loader, and the battle repeated itself.45
A week after arriving at Farnam Street and just a day before the Mo-Buff partnership was born, the Buffetts’
second son, Peter, arrived. From the start he was a quiet, easy baby. But shortly after his birth, Susie came
down with a kidney infection.46 Since her rheumatic fever and ear infections as a child, she had always
considered herself healthy. The kidney infection did not concern her as much as shielding Warren from
dealing with it; his discomfort around illness was so great that she had trained the family to pay attention to
him whenever somebody got sick, as if he, too, were ill and required care. Her real focus was on having a
home of her own at last. Even illness and the demands of caring for a new baby and two small children could
not suppress her urge to decorate. As it sprang to life, she redid the house in cheery contemporary style, with
chrome-and-leather furniture and huge, bright modern paintings covering the white walls. The $15,000
decorating bill totaled almost half of what the house itself had cost, which “just about killed Warren,”
according to Bob Billig, a golfing pal.47 He didn’t notice colors or respond to visual aesthetics and so was
indifferent to the result, seeing only the outrageous bill.
“Do I really want to spend $300,000 for this haircut?” was his attitude. If Susie wanted to spend some trifling
sum of money, he would say, “I’m not sure I want to blow $500,000 that way.”48 But since Susie wanted to
spend money that he wanted to withhold, and since he wanted Susie to be happy and she wanted to please
him, their personalities were gradually meshing into a system of bargaining and trades.
The outrageous bill included the cost of a device that became an object of wonderment among their friends

and neighbors—one of the first color television sets in Omaha.49 Susie liked having her house as the hub of
the neighborhood, so before long, on Saturday mornings, all the kids from the block would pile onto the black
leather sofa in the little TV room and watch cartoons.50
Willa Johnson, a large, capable black housekeeper who quietly became Susie’s extra set of hands, eyes, and
ears, joined the household, freeing Susie to find an outlet for her creativity. She and a friend, Thama
Friedman, decided to set up a contemporary art gallery. As with everything involving money, the decision
had to be cleared with Warren. Before forking over Susie’s share, he “interviewed” them in his sitting room
and asked, “Do you expect to make money?” Friedman answered, “No,” whereupon Buffett replied, “Okay,
Susie can come in as an ‘investor.’”51 He liked the idea of her doing something of her own and, according to
Friedman, wanted them to step back and think about the gallery in a businesslike way while being realistic
that it was a hobby. Warren always thought of money in terms of the return on capital laid out, and since the
gallery wasn’t going to make a profit, he wanted them to limit their spending. Susie’s involvement in the
gallery was truly a hobby, says Friedman, who managed it day to day.
Susie was considered a flexible, easygoing, but attentive mother by her friends and relatives. Now that the
Buffetts lived closer to both their parents, the children spent more time with their grandparents. The
atmosphere at the Thompsons’, a block and a half away, was relaxed and enjoyable; they didn’t care if
Howie broke a window or the kids made a mess. Dorothy Thompson got into the spirit of things, playing
games, organizing Easter egg hunts, and making elaborate multilayered ice-cream cones. The children loved
Doc Thompson, despite his sober self-importance and the way he pontificated. Once he sat Howie on his
knee. “Don’t drink alcohol,” he said, over and over. “It will kill your brain cells, and you don’t have any to
waste.”52
On Sundays, Doc Thompson sometimes came over and preached in a jelly-bean-colored suit right in Warren
and Susie’s living room. Otherwise, Howie and Susie Jr. went to the Buffetts’, where Leila towed them off to
church. Compared to the Thompsons, she and Howard seemed stiff and straitlaced. Howard remained such a
Victorian throwback that when he called Doris and Warren with news about their sister Bertie, he could only
choke out, “All hell’s broken loose!” They finally managed to discover, from someone else, that she had lost
her baby. Howard couldn’t bring himself to say the word “miscarriage.”
With their large new house, Warren and Susie began to play host for the families. At her first family
Thanksgiving dinner, Susie prepared the turkey herself, thinking the easy way would be to cook it overnight
at 100 degrees. After the turkey fell apart, she called on Mrs. Hegman, a cook inherited from Leila, to come
and help. Someone other than Warren had to carve, however, since he was useless with a knife. And at
family gatherings when his mother was present, as soon as he could get away with it, he disappeared upstairs
to work.
Susie had covered Warren’s new little office off the master bedroom with greenback-patterned wallpaper.
Comfortably surrounded by money, he now set about buying cheap stocks as fast as his fingers could fly
through the Moody’s Manuals: businesses that sold basic items or commodities that could be easily valued,
like Davenport Hosiery, Meadow River Coal & Land, Westpan Hydrocarbon, and Maracaibo Oil
Exploration. For the partnership, for himself, for Susie, or for all of these whenever he had money, he put it
to work as fast as he could bring it through the door.
Often he needed secrecy to execute his ideas and he used intelligent, willing people like Dan Monen to act as
his proxies. Another of these proxies was Daniel Cowin, a value hunter who worked for the small brokerage
firm Hettleman & Co. in New York. Warren had met Dan through their late friend from Columbia, Fred
Kuhlken.53 Hettleman made investments in little stocks with capitalizations of a few million, often the kind of
obscure bargains that Warren liked.
“Fred had written and described Dan as a young star on Wall Street and said we were made for each other.
I immediately decided that Fred was one hundred percent right on both counts. In the next few years, Dan
and I were constantly together whenever I visited New York.”54
