
on Cap Cities/ABC in the first twelve months it owned the stock; now the very mention that Buffett had
bought a stock could, all by itself, move its price and revalue a company by hundreds of millions of dollars.
Ralph Schey, the head of Scott Fetzer, an Ohio conglomerate, got his company into a jam by trying to take it
private in a leveraged buyout. With its stable of profitable businesses, from Kirby vacuums to the World
Book encyclopedia, Scott Fetzer made appealing prey, and corporate raider Ivan Boesky quickly intervened
to make a bid of his own.
Buffett sent Schey a simple letter saying, “We don’t do unfriendly deals. If you want to pursue a merger, call
me.” Schey leaped at the proffer, and $410 million later, Berkshire Hathaway owned Scott Fetzer.52 Two and
a half years after buying the Nebraska Furniture Mart, Buffett had bought a company eight times its size. For
the first time, the CEO of a public—rather than private—company had approached Buffett because he would
rather work for Buffett than work for (or be fired by) someone else.
The next to recognize the power of Buffett’s reputation was Jamie Dimon, who worked for Sanford Weill,
the CEO of the brokerage firm Shearson Lehman, an American Express subsidiary.53 American Express
wanted to sell its insurance arm, Fireman’s Fund, to Weill in a management buyout. Weill had already
recruited Jack Byrne to leave GEICO and run Fireman’s Fund. Dimon approached Buffett to invest his
money—and his reputation—in the deal.
Despite their friendship, Buffett was not sorry to lose Byrne. After repairing GEICO’s woes, the perpetually
itchy Byrne had embarked on a series of acquisitions and entered into new business lines. Buffett wanted
GEICO to concentrate on a sure thing, its core business. Furthermore, he had hired a new chief investment
officer for GEICO, Lou Simpson, a retiring Chicagoan who had a distaste for rapid trading and expensive
growth stocks. Buffett had added Simpson to the Buffett Group right away, and by now Simpson had become
the only person besides himself whom Buffett trusted to invest in other stocks—he allowed Simpson to
manage all of GEICO’s investments. But Simpson and Byrne acted like brothers who fought and made up.
Periodically, Simpson tried to bolt; Buffett lured him back. Without Byrne, keeping Simpson would be easier.
Nonetheless, Buffett knew that Byrne was a powerful moneymaker for any business he touched. “Never let
go of a meal ticket” was Buffett’s verdict when asked to invest in the Fireman’s Fund deal. American
Express decided to cut Weill out of the deal, however, and unload Fireman’s Fund in a public offering, with
Byrne as CEO. To keep Buffett on the menu to attract investors, it offered Berkshire a sweetheart
reinsurance deal. Buffett took the deal, and became an informal adviser to Byrne and his board. Weill,
feeling double-crossed, blamed Buffett. He went on to buy Travelers Insurance and build it into a small
empire, but by some accounts carried a grudge against Buffett from then on.
From American Express to Sandy Weill, however, the financial world now understood the power of Buffett’s
name. At this point, Buffett was tending to so many major investments and advising so many managements
that he was either an actual or de facto board member of Cap Cities, Fireman’s Fund, the Washington Post
Company, GEICO, and Omaha National Corp. And now he reached a turning point, the moment when he
had to consider whether to cross the Rubicon.
Buffett had for some time played a dual role. He ran Berkshire Hathaway as if he still managed money for his
“partners”—albeit without collecting any fee. He wrote them letters explaining that he made decisions based
on personal criteria; he set up the shareholder contribution program, a personal solution to the problem of
corporate giving; he refused to split the stock, had never listed it on the New York Stock Exchange, and
considered the shareholders tantamount to members of a club. “Although our form is corporate, our attitude
is partnership,” he had written—and meant it.
At the same time, he enjoyed living the life of a major-company CEO. He served on board after board; he
bumped with the biggest elephants. He took pride in the way politicians, journalists, and other CEOs sought
out his knowledge and advice. More recently, his clout on Wall Street had become so great that entire
deals—important deals—turned on whether he would participate. Above all, he was now so attached to
Berkshire that it had become a virtual extension of himself.

The loosely defined dual role he was playing had so far suited him and his shareholders. Now, however, a
decision faced him that required him to choose—he could either run a de facto partnership or continue his
role as a major-company CEO. But he could no longer do both.
The reason was taxes. Berkshire was already burdened with corporate income taxes, a cost the partnership
had not faced. On the other hand, Buffett charged his Berkshire partners no “fee” to manage their money.
That was a good deal (for everyone but Buffett) or at least the shareholders’ loyalty suggests they saw it that
way. Now, however, in 1986, Congress passed a major tax-reform act that, among other things, repealed
what was called the General Utilities Doctrine. Formerly, a corporation could sell its assets without paying
any taxes as long as it was liquidating and distributing the assets to the shareholders. The shareholders would
be taxed on their gain, but the gain would not be taxed twice.
Once the General Utilities Doctrine was repealed, any liquidation of a corporation and distribution of its
assets would result in a tax on the corporation’s profits and another tax on the shareholders upon distribution.
Since the double tax added up to a staggering amount of money, closely held and family corporations all over
the country rushed to liquidate themselves before the act went into effect. Buffett, who regularly said in his
shareholder letters that Berkshire had gotten so large that its money was a barrier to investing success, could
have distributed its assets, then raised a more manageable sum—still in the billions—set up a new
partnership, and started over investing within weeks (collecting his fee again, to boot). With $1.2 billion of
unrealized profits on Berkshire’s balance sheet, had Buffett liquidated Berkshire, he could have given his
shareholders a total tax avoidance of more than $400 million and the chance to start over in a partnership
free of the corporate double tax.54 But he didn’t.
Buffett wrote a lengthy dissertation on taxes in his annual letter, in which he addressed this topic and
dismissed the idea of liquidating out of hand: “If Berkshire, for example, were to be liquidated—which it
most certainly won’t be—shareholders would, under the new law, receive far less from the sales of our
properties than they would have if the properties had been sold in the past.”55
The Warren Buffett of old would not have sneered at an extra $185 million in his own bank account and the
chance to start over earning fees without the corporate income tax—which is what his decision not to
liquidate Berkshire Hathaway in 1986 cost him personally. But ordinary greed no longer drove his
decisions—for this cost him far more than any other shareholder. His long-standing attachment to Berkshire
held him so firmly in its grip that he gave up the option of keeping Berkshire as a virtual partnership.
Otherwise, he would have liquidated without a second’s hesitation.
Instead he had crossed the Rubicon and chosen the role of being the CEO of a major corporation, like
Procter & Gamble or Colgate-Palmolive, one that would continue to exist after he was gone.
This company, Berkshire, with its disparate parts, was hard to value. Munger liked to joke that Berkshire was
the “Frozen Corporation,” since it would grow endlessly but never pay a penny in dividends to its owners. If
the owners couldn’t extract any money from their money-making machine, how much was that company
really worth?
But Buffett was growing Berkshire’s book value far faster than his shareholders could have accumulated
such wealth themselves, and he had the scorecard to prove it. Moreover, it was a long-term scorecard, far
more comfortable for him than the year-to-year pressure of beating the market’s bogey. By shutting down the
partnership, he had freed himself from that tyranny; in fact he no longer presented numbers in a fashion that
allowed someone to calculate his investing performance from inception.56 Besides, being CEO of the Frozen
Corporation was fun. He got to own a newspaper in Buffalo; he got to use his shareholder letters as the
editorial column in a newspaper. Yet even though he had now officially joined the CEO club, he had no
desire to acquire most of their habits—visiting five-star resorts, collecting wine or art, buying a yacht, or
acquiring a trophy wife. “I’ve never seen a trophy wife yet that looks like a trophy,” he would later say. “To
me they always look like a booby prize.”
One day in 1986, however, he called his friend Walter Scott Jr., a down-to-earth hometown boy who had

worked for Peter Kiewit Sons’, Inc, all his life, just like his father before him. Scott was businesslike yet
refreshingly open and relaxed. He had succeeded Peter Kiewit, then made his reputation during a federal
highway bid-rigging scandal that threatened Kiewit’s existence by disqualifying it from bidding on any
contracts that got government funds. By forthrightness, “groveling,” and thorough reforms, Scott led the
company through a long restoration—a model for dealing with the government in a corporate life-or-death
situation.57 He was such a trusted friend of Buffett that Katharine Graham stayed in the Scotts’ apartment on
the few occasions that she visited Omaha.
“Walter,” Buffett asked, “how do you justify buying a private airplane?” Buffett knew that Kiewit had a fleet
of private jets because it was always having to ferry its employees to remote construction sites.
“Warren,” said Scott, “you don’t justify it. You rationalize it.”
Two days later, Buffett called back. “Walter, I’ve rationalized it,” he said. “Now, how do you hire a pilot and
maintain a plane?”
Scott offered to let Buffett piggyback the maintenance of his proposed new jet on Kiewit’s fleet, and Buffett
went off and sheepishly bought a used Falcon 20—the same type of plane that Kiewit employees flew—as
Berkshire’s corporate jet.58 It gave him an extraordinary degree of privacy, as well as control over his travel
schedule—privacy and control over his time ranking in the top handful of things that Buffett cared most
about on earth.
Of course, buying a private jet conflicted with another of the things he cared most about: not wasting money.
Buffett had never lived down an incident in an airport in which Kay Graham had asked him for a dime to
make a phone call. He pulled out the only coin he had, a quarter, started to bolt off to get change, but
Graham had stopped him by teasing him into letting her waste fifteen cents. So, for Buffett, it was like
leaping in one bound over Mount Kilimanjaro to go from justifying twenty-five cents for a phone call to
rationalizing two pilots and an entire airplane to carry him around like a pharaoh on a litter. But he was doing
a fair amount of rationalizing this year, having just rationalized giving up $185 million in tax avoidance as
well.
Still, it bothered him—the jet so plainly contradicted his upbringing and self-image. His tortured rationale to
his former roommate from Penn, Clyde Reighard, explained with great earnestness and obvious
embarrassment, was that the plane was going to save him money by getting him around faster.59 Next he
started to make fun of himself to the shareholders, saying, “I work cheap and travel expensive.”
The plane ushered in a new phase of his life. Buffett clung tenaciously to his corn belt—even while wearing
black tie—yet fraternized ever more often with hoity-toity sosoity, as CEO of the Frozen Corporation. In
1987, Ambassador Walter Annenberg and his wife, Leonore, invited Warren and Susie out to Palm Springs
for a weekend with their friends Ronald and Nancy Reagan. Buffett had dined at the White House and
already knew both the Reagans from visiting Kay Graham’s house on Martha’s Vineyard, but he had never
spent a whole weekend with a sitting president.
“It was kind of like an elaborate minuet or something. Sunnylands was designed to be sort of a court for
Walter. You had two people living there and fifty-something servants. You had a billion dollars’ worth of
art on the walls, and I’m the only guy that was ever there that didn’t ooh and aah over the art. I’d just as
soon have a bunch of old Playboy covers on the walls.” (Susie, however, might not have enjoyed herself
quite as much.)
“They put us in the Blue Room. The bedspreads, the covers on the books were all blue. Everything was blue.
The jelly beans were blue. Every guest room had two maids, so they could serve us breakfast in bed at the
same time, and the trays would be placed down at the exact same time and they would lift the covers at the
exact same time.
“When we would walk out in the evening dressed for dinner, there would be one maid on each side of the

door. And Susie’s maid would say, ‘Madame looks beautiful tonight.’ And then my maid would look at me
and just sort of gurgle. She’d had a week to prepare for me and think of what to say, and she can’t come up
with anything.
“Walter had his own private nine-hole golf course at Sunnylands. He had his own driving range with ten
tees lined up and all these golf balls piled in perfect little neat pyramids. And there wasn’t anybody there.
The course was immaculate. If he had four foursomes, Walter would say, ‘That’s too much play for my
course,’ and send one of them off to play at Thunderbird Country Club. I’d go out there and hit four golf
balls, and somebody’d run out and replace the pyramids. And that was the day at Sunnylands. It was as
fancy as living gets.”
Buffett, of course, had his own views about pyramids and pharaohs, but he liked Annenberg and was happy
to play golf with him. Though he would never spend his money that way, Buffett believed that people had the
right to spend their own money any way they chose. Besides, he would never dream of criticizing the
ambassador. Annenberg paired Buffett that weekend with Reagan as a golf partner, so Secret Service agents
trailed them—but refused to fetch golf balls out of water traps as Buffett had hoped.
Buffett had a mixed view of Reagan as President. He admired Reagan’s handling of geopolitics. However,
under Reagan the United States went from being the world’s largest lender to its largest borrower. Just as
junk bonds and leverage were ballooning on Wall Street, the government had been running up mountains of
debt—which Buffett considered the Wimpy style of economics: I will gladly pay you Tuesday for a
hamburger today.60 Buffett’s style was to own the cattle ranch—and he had the balance sheet to prove it.
Armored by Berkshire Hathaway’s balance sheet—and a golf scorecard signed by the President of the United
States—Buffett was now a fortress of power, a fount of widely acclaimed wisdom. After his role rescuing
Scott Fetzer, people thought of him as a high-profile protector. Every financial statistic pertaining to him and
his company rang with exclamation points. Berkshire Hathaway’s book value per share had grown by more
than twenty-three percent a year for twenty-three years! Buffett’s first group of partners had reaped $1.1
million for each $1,000 put into the partnership! Berkshire was trading at the dizzying price of $2,950 per
share! Buffett himself had a net worth of $2.1 billion! A Wall Street money manager—an investor—was the
ninth-richest man in the U.S.! Never in history had anyone climbed from the ranks of those who managed
other people’s wealth to join the celebrated few on top of the feeding chain of riches. For the first time, the
money from a partnership of investors had been used to grow an enormous business enterprise through a
chess-game series of decisions to buy whole businesses as well as stocks. Inevitably, more people were going
to call him for help.
The next person to pick up the phone was John Gutfreund, the man who ran Salomon Brothers and had
endeared himself to Buffett by helping to save GEICO in 1976.
That he had done so showed both the strength and weakness of Salomon. The GEICO stock underwriting had
been based on the opinion of one equity research analyst. If the firm had any stature in the marketplace of
selling stocks, it would have passed on the deal as far too small to be worth the legal liability if it failed—as
all the other firms had done. But Salomon, bold and decisive rather than bureaucratic, dared the risk because
it needed the business. Buffett had always taken a liking to people who extended themselves and helped him
make money. And Gutfreund’s reserved, intellectual prep-school personality, coupled with a domineering
brutality, seems to have added to Buffett’s trust in him as overseer of an unruly-by-nature investment bank.
Gutfreund had grown up the son of a well-to-do meat-truck company owner in Scarsdale, New York, a
golf-course-ringed suburb of commuters close to New York City. He’d majored in literature at Oberlin
College and considered teaching English, but was drawn to the trading floor by a golfing friend of his
father’s, Billy Salomon, a descendant of one of the firm’s three founding brothers.
Salomon Brothers was born in 1910 when Arthur, Herbert, and Percy Salomon, carrying $5,000 of capital,
knocked on Wall Street’s doors to broker short-term loans. Less than a decade later, the U.S. government
became the tiny firm’s client by adding Salomon to its list of registered dealers of government securities.
With this endorsement, Salomon, a game little terrier, scrapped its way to respectable size over the next three

decades by sticking to its core business of trading bonds using its wits, nerve, and fidelity to clients.61
Meanwhile, dozens of other small brokers closed shop or were swallowed up by larger ones.
Billy Salomon had installed Gutfreund as a trading assistant. Joining a roomful of men who spent their days
buying and selling bonds for clients on the phone, Gutfreund, like the rest, carved off a little slice of
everything for Salomon in return for his labors. He proved a deft trader and made partner in 1963 at the age
of thirty-four. Partners at Salomon were bound by the edict of Billy Salomon, all of their interests welded
together by the capital he forced them to leave at risk in the firm—instead of taking it out year by year as
bonuses and profits.
In 1978 Billy Salomon promoted Gutfreund to head of the firm, then retired. Three years later, Gutfreund
showed up on his friend and mentor’s beachfront porch in East Hampton to say that he was selling Salomon
to Phibro, a giant commodities dealer, to create Phibro-Salomon Inc. Gutfreund and his partners walked
away with an average of nearly $8 million apiece in profit from the sale, while those who had built the firm
and were now retired—like Billy Salomon—got zero, zilch.62 One former partner thought it a Greek tragedy:
the story of Oedipus, who had killed his own father.
Gutfreund became co-CEO with Phibro’s David Tendler. Running a firm with a co-CEO is like trying to
balance two ends of a seesaw in the air. When Phibro’s business slumped after the sale just as Salomon’s was
soaring, Gutfreund wasted no time. He slammed his end of the seesaw to the ground and sent Tendler flying.
After Gutfreund took control, he added a foreign-currency business, broadened into equity trading and
underwriting, and expanded the bond business into Japan, Switzerland, and Germany. For the next few years,
the witch doctors from academia with their computers and formulas filtered onto Wall Street, and PhibroSalomon’s floor became populated with PhDs who unlocked the mathematical secrets of stripping, slicing,
packaging, and trading mortgages and other bonds. By inventing a whole new segment of the bond market,
Salomon (for the Phibro-Salomon name never quite replaced “Solly” in people’s minds and was dumped in
1986) grew in a few short years from a second-tier firm to the top of the Street, with a swagger to match, as
its traders stayed many steps ahead of other banks.
They ruled from “The Room,” Solly’s trading floor, a smoky palace about a third the size of an airplane
hangar, filled with long double rows of desks where the traders, salespeople, and assistants crouched in front
of banks of screens with a slice of pizza in one hand and a telephone receiver in the other. The daily battle
took place as a symphony of groans and curses and farts and screams punctuating the background babble,
yelps, and mutterings of trader talk. Eccentrics were welcome, as long as they produced. Gutfreund shot
down the aisles every morning from his desk on the floor as if fired from a cannon. He glared through
horn-rimmed spectacles, chomping his stogie, and shredded screwups into piles of mulch on the trading floor.
The characters on the trading floor bartered with a camaraderie born of competition and a united obsession
with killing the other team. They so dominated the bond-underwriting market that BusinessWeek crowned
Salomon “The King of Wall Street.”63 The story also said it was the kind of place where the “long knives”
could come out if things went south—in other words, that Gutfreund would purge anyone suspected of
dissent in order to still a revolt.64
Salomon’s profits peaked in 1985, when the firm made $557 million after tax. But the new businesses
—principally equities—didn’t earn their keep; thus, internal competition started to get out of hand. The
traders who had built Salomon’s unique and profitable business started to leave, enticed by million-dollar
offers from other firms. Soon they populated Salomon’s competitors. Gutfreund ratcheted the pay upward to
stem the tide. But he did not crack down on departments like equity trading and investment banking when
they failed to produce, then came in with new five-year plans to fix their failures. His intimidating personality
covered a soft underbelly: He shrank from hard decisions and substantive confrontations. As time passed, he
spent less time in The Room and presided with a somewhat distracted air over a kingdom in which the threat
of poison hung in the air. “My problem is that I am too deliberate on people issues,”65 he would later say.
Somewhat unfairly, observers blamed not him but his wife, Susan.
