
CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

F I G U R E

27

2.1

The 24-hour and day-only CME Globex index futures can tell vastly different tales. A half hour after the open,
5-3-3 Stochastics points to a buy signal on the day-only 15-minute Nasdaq-100 index futures chart and a
sell signal on the 24-hour chart. These conflicts are common in the morning hours of the U.S. session.
Divergence between the indicators during this period advises caution, while convergence tells the trader to
act more aggressively.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

one piece of the trend puzzle and shouldn’t be used in a vacuum to make
sweeping judgments about market direction.
Institutions use the index futures and corresponding exchangetraded funds to initiate major algorithmic strategies because it doesn’t
take much capital to put a trend into motion. These programs are symbiotic, meaning they attract waves of capital from other sources looking to
piggyback onto the strategies. It’s urgent that traders recognize directional
program-related activity as early as possible because they have a domino

28

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

effect in which sector after sector responds to the trending impulse and
then follows in lockstep. Adding to the effect, traders and market-making
sources then back away from their bids, close adverse positions, and take
new positions in sympathy with short-term momentum.
Futures-related program trading has its greatest impact on the
broad equity markets when the public is on the sidelines. Conversely,
contrary programs (buying in a downtrend, selling in an uptrend) are far
less effective when the public is driving a strong equity rally or dumping
positions in a major selloff. This general rule has become more significant
in recent years due to the breaking of multiple bubbles that kept public
traders and investors fixated on their stock market portfolios.
How can equities hold natural support or resistance levels given the
endless tug and pull of the index futures and ETFs? The answer is that
they don’t hold these levels nearly as well as they did in the past. This
is the primary reason pattern failure strategies have become so important to survival in the last 10 to 15 years. Index futures domination
has contributed to another mutation in equity price action, known as
channeling behavior. As it turns out, these instruments affect short-term
patterns to a much greater degree than long-term patterns. Well-established
stock trends can survive this time-delimited volatility but tend to carve
out much wider price swings than they did in past years. In turn, this
stretching behavior contributes to a flood of channel patterns on daily and
60-minute charts.
Profits on longer-term positions require stops outside the boundaries
of these volatility-driven channels, which raises all sorts of new reward:risk
considerations. It’s our nature and training to place a stop loss under an
old low or above a moving average, but swing size is now attuned, in the
short term at least, to index futures oscillations and not the technicals of
the individual pattern. In a nutshell, it’s nearly impossible to place a successful stop without first estimating the impact of non-stock-specific volatility triggered by the intraday markets.
Fortunately, this process is easier than it sounds because it requires
just two more charts on your trading screen—one for each of the two major
futures contracts. I recommend simple 15-minute charts, with 50- and
200-bar EMAs and a 5-3-3 Stochastics. Then go trendline crazy because
futures traders are fully aware of every trendline, moving average, and
high-low pivot in their special universe. Once you’ve drawn out those
lines, it’s simply a matter of expecting volatility to spike during breakouts,
breakdowns, and when index futures move into those magical zones of
conflict known as gaps.

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

29

While index futures are vitally important for short-term trading
strategies, it’s a mistake to avoid positions lasting one to three weeks just
because you’re afraid of adverse index swings. Technical analysis, as I’ll
discuss in Part Four, tends to work more reliably as patterns and trading
opportunities move farther out on the time spectrum. So when holding
periods can be measured in weeks rather than a few hours or a single
day, broad relative strength measurements offer more actionable data than
wiggles and waggles in the futures markets.

Program Trading
Program algorithms have delivered massive liquidity into the tape,
but at a major cost to the human population because computers don’t
suffer from the twin emotions of greed or fear. That sounds OK until we
consider that every market crisis in history has been resolved when rising
fear induced a crescendo of selling pressure that triggered a capitulation
event or phase. These transactions now account for the vast majority of
all market activity. This huge volume lets the institutional desks running
these programs control short-term direction with a single switch because
piggyback strategies will “pile on,” creating a positive feedback loop that
cascades price from one level to another.
The gargantuan effect of program trading can be traced back to the
advent of decimalization in 2001. Average transaction size has collapsed
since then, as computers slice and dice obscure strategies into smaller
and smaller pieces. In turn, this dampens perceived volatility while it
undermines the routine flow of buying and selling pressure.
I say perceived because VIX has risen sharply since the advent of
program algorithms. However, it’s likely these new-age strategies have
mastered VIX’s internal code and can make markets move without triggering traditional volatility patterns.
This has macabre implications for the market’s future because greed
and fear are natural tempering mechanisms for price discovery. Imagine
a world in which 400-pound market gorillas can take index futures and
equities prices anywhere they want them to go at any time, and with relatively limited monetary risk. Pretty scary stuff, huh? In this regard, I recommend picking up The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable
by Nassim Nicholas Taleb. Black Swan Theory examines our willingness
to ignore the impact of large-scale events on historic market outcomes.

30

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

The author points out—correctly, I believe—the likelihood of calamitous
market events occurring with far greater regularity than admitted to or
expected by the purveyors of Wall Street and investment mythology.
If his theory holds true, the cold-hearted trading machines of the twentyfirst century could be hurling us into a series of 2008-like disasters in
future decades.
Electronic options exchanges and exchange-traded funds aggravate
the influence of equity program trading. Many algorithms hedge their
plays through the various derivatives markets to create a variety of buying,
selling, or neutral strategies. In turn, these cross-market influences trigger
a powerful directional impact on equities that may be counter to the program’s net result. This is bad news for technically oriented traders staring
at double tops and moving average crossovers, because we think our
charts should follow the natural laws of supply and demand even though
algorithms passing through multiple cross-markets are undermining
order flow and camouflaging directional bias. To complicate matters, institutional bias and their computer programs don’t necessarily follow
identical paths. For example, contrary algorithms work overtime when
institutions are reallocating capital but want to hide their intentions from
the public. During those stealthy events, artificial buying will hide real
selling activity, while artificial selling hides real buying activity.
It’s no mystery how traders need to respond to the overriding
influence of program trading. We need to stop fighting their activity and
retool our day-to-day strategies to work in harmony with the institutions
executing these “bots.” This transformation requires three basic shifts in
thought process, trade planning, and position management:
• Trade in the same direction as the institutional money flow.
• Execute a previously devised escape plan when adverse programs
hit the market.
• Stand aside or reduce size in the choppy middle ground, when
programs are focused on grinding out small profits.
We must follow institutional money flow if we want to be profitable.
This is difficult to accomplish in the real world because there’s a persistent
belief that program trading follows common technical analysis rules. In
fact, nothing could be further from the truth. Program algorithms apply
complex math that’s disconnected from common sense or popular trading
strategies. Just consider the background of algorithm guru James Simons,
who was a mathematics professor breaking military codes during the

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

31

Vietnam War before turning his attention to the financial markets. In other
words, try to visualize Wall Street’s Gordon Gecko tapping John Nash’s
Beautiful Mind to find and formulate market-moving trading strategies.
That’s the explosive reality of our electronic market landscape. The
bottom line: it’s highly doubtful that double bottoms or pretty triangles
ever come up for discussion in the control rooms of these multibilliondollar operations.
Another workable response in a computer-dominated market is to
stand aside while the index futures swing between major pivot prices.
As I noted earlier in this chapter, program activity is tied intimately to
the index futures because equity players, pile-on strategies, and arbitrage
mechanisms all react instantly to futures oscillations. This symbiosis gives
quants, funds, and institutions a cost-effective means to impact short-term
market direction. However, the interests of human and silicon traders tend
to converge at large cycle support or resistance levels. For this reason, it
still makes sense to sell near the top and to buy near the bottom of a broad
range. The difficulty lies in the mental mechanics that induce traders to feel
bullish at resistance and bearish at support. Computers aren’t burdened
by this emotional baggage and just do their jobs, as long as someone hits
the right buttons. This transistorized edge highlights the psychological
side of the human-algorithm interface. In a nutshell, programs never fail
to pull the trigger when their signals go off, unlike their flesh and blood
counterparts.
Finally, keep in mind that program trading doesn’t work as well when
speculators and the public are active in the financial markets. Their emotional participation works to balance out the equation, allowing common
support and resistance levels to hold more firmly despite algorithms
keeping up pressure near contested price levels. This, in turn, yields those
wonderful periods of low-hanging fruit that we depend upon for a good
share of our annual profits.

Program Trading: Observations and
Strategies
Organizations running computer algorithms are highly secretive, which
means we’ll have to wait for a tattletale book before learning the dark
mysteries of the quant universe. However, traders have a powerful tool at
their disposal that lets them deconstruct these black boxes and formulate

32

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

sympathetic strategies. It’s called tape reading. Indeed, in the market’s
long history, nothing has ever come along to bypass, undermine, or denigrate this near legendary skill set.
So, in no particular order, here are a few things we know about
trading bots and their considerable influence on intraday price action:
• The market often prints the highs or lows of the day near the lunch
hour.
• Directional programs are more numerous in the first hour, near
2:15 p.m., and in the last 30 minutes of the session.
• Up-down volume higher than 80:20 or lower than 20:80 predicts
trend days that show persistent channeling behavior.
• Support and resistance levels are vulnerable to repeated traps,
characterized by gaps in the opposite direction of the prior day’s
closing momentum.
• Open-to-close daily program strategies are prevalent, with early
themes persisting through the entire session but then disappearing
overnight.
• As a result of open-to-close strategies, rotation is now a daily
event, which is nearly unpredictable through routine technical
analysis.
• As a result of open-to-close strategies, intraday trend reversals are
less likely than they were 5, 10, or 15 years ago.
These observations take us into new territory as traders because they
go against the grain of common market wisdom. For example, we expect
that a strong close in a trending market will yield a strong open (followthrough) the next day, but this popular strategy has been a complete
loser’s game in our modern electronic environment. On the flip side, since
first hour price action, whether strong, weak, or choppy, tends to persist
through the entire session, we can take advantage of this expectation with
sympathetic strategies. These include building positions during intraday
countertrends, buying/selling 15-minute breakouts or breakdowns, and
simply standing aside because the chop favors no risk at all.
As illustrated in Figure 2.2, the Nasdaq-100 Trust (previously
the Powershares QQQ Trust) gaps down on June 22. The selloff carries
through support (1) at 35.45 at the end of the first hour. Two tape reading
clues point to the opening phase of a downside trend day. First, the fund
fails to rally back into the gap by the end of the first hour, or even bounce.
Second, the selloff breaks a notable support level that isn’t remounted in

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

F I G U R E

33

2.2

Nasdaq-100 trend day.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

the same time period. The first hour range (2) gives us narrow boundaries
to set up our first trade of the day. Price falls to an intraday low between
10:30 a.m. and 10:45 a.m. and then consolidates (3) for nearly an hour,
testing the boundaries of the broken range. We sell short this bounce into
resistance, with a stop loss within the gray box, or wait for a breakdown
from the small sideways pattern and then sell short. The earlier entry is
more favorable because 5-3-3 Stochastics (6) is starting to roll higher by
the time that price hits another intraday low, during the lunch hour. Our
next trade comes in the final hour, when the fund bounces higher in a bear
flag (4), which finally breaks to the downside. The small candlestick at the

34

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

top of the flag, thrusting toward 35.40, is typical of swing highs and lows
during trend days. With diabolical precision, the intraday market rarely
changes direction until the controlling side (bear flag buyers in this case)
makes a final commitment, which is then punished almost instantly.
This late entry demands one final and urgent decision—whether or
not to hold the short sale overnight. It’s a tough call because of the observation that program strategies tend to disappear at day’s end. However,
this is counterweighted by an equally powerful observation that intraday
lows on trend days will be tested or broken before the market finally
reverses. You’ll note the final hour low near 35 doesn’t get tested by the
closing bell, increasing the likelihood of more selling pressure (5) early the
next day.
Of course, there are other favorable entries in this example, including
a momentum short sale right after the open. But we have less information
to work with early in the session because it takes time for program algorithms to reveal their strategic footprint. We also have access to less macrodata, like market breadth and up-down volume. Both of these elements
point to downside trend days through lopsided numbers, like 1800 to 2000
down issues on the NYSE and Nasdaq, as well as 80% down volume on
both exchanges.
Now let’s consider the impact of program algorithms on the traditional Level II screen, better known these days as market depth. First,
realize that market making itself has become a specialized form of
program trading, replacing the traditional middlemen of prior decades.
Now, add in the destabilizing impact of Regulation NMS, a.k.a. the tradethrough rule, which requires a “best price” display at all times. The end
result: computer-driven bid-ask spreads that zoom higher and lower at
the speed of light. Bid-ask size has become a vestigial organ in this
headache-inducing display because computers can back away from quotes
faster than you can hit your execution button. In addition, orders can now
be subdivided among numerous market centers, with iceberg quotes
hiding real size, interest, and intention. Finally, the explosion of thirdparty centers of liquidity, like the infamous dark pools, guarantees the
information you see on the Level II screen doesn’t represent true supply
and demand.
However, the survivalist trader still watches the market depth screen
closely because the electronic paint job tells valuable tales, in spite of all the
smoke and mirrors. Here are three strategies to help you take advantage of
your observations:

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

35

1.	Empty at the open. Without middlemen to ensure orderly markets,
the opening has become a wasteland of illiquidity. In fact, it isn’t
unusual to find dollar bid-ask spreads on stocks that trade in
excess of 2 million shares per day on average. This vacuum is especially prevalent on flat mornings, when electronic market makers
display no quotes at all because they’re sitting back, waiting to see
which way the wind is blowing.
	  Observant traders can step into these issues with lowball quotes
during the last two minutes before the open and often get filled
for instant profits. You can take this predatory strategy one step
further on the NYSE, which often delays the opening quotes for
5 to 15 minutes, in a throwback to the specialist era. Following
entry, take profits immediately by posting a quote just inside the
opposite extreme. If this isn’t possible, wait for the bid-ask spread
to tighten, and place a profit protection stop just behind your
entry.
2.	Step down, step up. The bid-ask spread on targeted stocks will
step up or step down in a persistent oscillation when a major
buying or selling program hits the index futures. Recognize
this phenomenon by the rapid reset of prices at lower levels (in
response to a selling program) followed by a sudden uptick that
fails to reach the last level of stability. Price action then evolves
into rinse and repeat mode, which mimics the two-steps lower,
one-step higher dynamic over and over gain.
		  The trading trick, when you come across this phenomenon, is
to enter the market at the same time the programs complete their
work and exit the market. You can recognize this turnaround in
the first counterimpulse that retakes 100% of the last level of stability. When you see this happen, enter the trade during the next
oscillation in the program direction.
T A B L E

2 .1

Impulses during a Program Selling Event

1) 38.01 – 37.80
2) 37.85 – 37.65
3) 37.70 – 37.55
4) 37.65 – 37.30
BUY 5) 37.68 – 37.45

36

PART ONE

Parsing the Modern Markets

	  In the Table 2.1 example, price drops in selling impulses ranging
from 15 to 35 cents. Following the third impulse, it bounces to 37.65
and then sells off to 37.30. The next bounce reaches 37.68, which
triggers a buy signal on the subsequent down wave, with a logical
stop loss just under the low of the fourth impulse, at 37.30.
3.	Pop tops/bottoms. This is a twenty-first-century variation of a
tape-reading strategy that was popular in the early days of Level
II, back in the 1990s. It starts with an assumption that trading bots
can see the hidden location of liquidity pools. It then relies on a
long-observed tendency for price to surge into these magnetic
levels, in wide range bars, before it reverses. For the strategy to
work, however, the stock needs to be trending in the direction of
the eventual spike as opposed to oscillating in a trading range that
suddenly thrusts higher or lower.
	  Use these magnetic moves to initiate fading entries (i.e., positions in the opposite direction of the spike) or to take windfall
profits on open positions. The contrary strategy is even more
effective when the short-term trend has traded into an easily
observed support or resistance level, with the surge then pushing
price through it. This sounds contradictory according to classic TA
principles, but consider how often you’ve watched an intraday
play wind up and rally through resistance, draw in excited
traders, and then reverse, trapping them in a swift decline. This
thrust-and-failure dynamic takes us back to the concept of hidden
liquidity pools. Simply stated, the majority of electronic market
making is geared toward whatever direction yields the greatest
volume. From an outsider’s standpoint, we can view this activity
as a continuous search and destroy mission, with trading bots
hunting down and triggering stop losses, common entry/exit
signals, and large retail orders.
  Risk increases on open positions whenever electronic market-making
activity combines with larger-scale buying or selling programs. Just as
smaller hedge funds respond to program impulses by piggybacking or
by stepping aside, we need to consider our options when big trading
bots take firm control of the tape. Our first tendency when this happens
is to loosen stops, so they aren’t triggered by the whirlwind. This makes
perfect sense, except for one diabolical aspect of our modern electronic markets—algorithms are insanely effective at adjusting to intraday volatility. This is why loose stops that survive routine buying and

CHAPTER 2

The Crooked Playing Field

37

selling impulses get hit with amazing precision during program events.
Even worse, the program-driven strategies usually die out, like clockwork,
right after we get shaken out of perfectly good positions.
  This increases the utility of our second option, which is to just back
away with other market players. Of course, this has an emotional cost
because we’re committed to our positions and want to outlast the bots.
However, with transaction costs almost nil in our modern environment, it
often makes sense to just hit the exit button and reestablish the position, or
basket of positions, after the storm clouds have passed.
