to know long before the conditions deteriorate to the levels of desperation.
To do this requires that we incorporate into our mental system three very
fundamental assumptions that will help us to maintain a healthy
relationship with the environment and generate the energy behind the
willingness that we will need to start such a process, after which
experiencing the benefits will act as the driving force behind our
willingness.
The first assumption is that we haven't learned everything there is to
know. And, as a result, there are always going to be unknown forces
acting upon us until our understanding of everything outside of us evolves
to the point where we have simultaneous awareness of everything going on
in the environment. The implications here are that we need to be in a
constant state of learning from the moment we are born to the moment we
die because our intellect has not yet evolved to the point of simultaneous
perception of all information that is available in any given moment. Until
then, we are forced to pick and choose the information we experience
based on what we have learned to believe.
The second assumption is that what we have learned to believe either by
force—unwillingly thrust upon us, as an expression of the outside
environment—or by choice—as an expression of inner forces that operate
within us like our curiosity and attractions—may not be very useful with
respect to fulfilling ourselves in some satisfying manner.
The third assumption is that what we have learned that is useful and
works to our satisfaction is still subject to change because of the changing
environmental conditions. In other words, what we may need to know to
experience more satisfaction and happiness in our lives will often have to
replace partially or invalidate completely what we have already learned.
Refusing to change what we have already learned is virtually the same as
saying that we already know everything there is to know and don't need to
learn anything further. Of course, we could easily know if we didn't need
to adapt because we would be in a perpetual state of satisfaction. Anything
less than a feeling of satisfaction from our interaction with the environment
is an indication that we need to learn something.
THE PERFECTION OF THE MOMENT
If you operate out of the foregoing assumptions, you will begin to recognize
how every moment becomes a perfect indication of your state of
development and what you need to do to improve yourself. For example,
let's look at a hypothetical trader whose goal is to make money from his
trading. He perceives what he believes to be an opportunity to do so and
puts on a trade. However, he is operating out of a fear of being wrong. As a
result, his fear will act on his perception of information to block from his
awareness any evidence that would indicate that he is wrong. Remember that
fear is a natural mechanism to warn us of threatening conditions so that
127

we can avoid them. Now what is threatening about being wrong? In this
case, as in most all cases, it is all the accumulated pain and humiliation
inside of him from his past experiences. If the market—or anyone else for
that matter—presents him with any information that conflicts with what he
wants, his fear will cause him to distort it perceptually or he will angrily
scream at the person who offered such information "Don't tell me that" so
that he can avoid feeling the pain already inside of him from his past. In
effect, his fears will create for him the very experience that he is trying to
avoid because he is avoiding information that would indicate what the
markets have to offer in relationship to what he wants or expects. If the
market does move against him, he probably won't confront the evidence
until the pain of doing so is less than the pain of not confronting it,
meaning that his losses accumulate to the point where it is easier to admit
he is wrong than to suffer any more losses. The results of our efforts will be
reflected in the environment as the sum total of who we are in any given
moment, as it was for our trader in the foregoing example. A goal is an
intent that we have projected out into the environment. It is a need to be
fulfilled in some future moment. The need arises out of a recognition of
some lack. Recognizing the need automatically focuses our attention to
scan the environment for ways (paths) to fulfill that need. The
environmental information we perceive (quality and depth of insight) will
be a function of the number of distinctions we can make minus any
information that gets blocked by any fears we are operating out of. How we
express ourselves to fulfill the need will be function of (1) our
perceptions, (2) the steps that we choose as a result of those perceptions,
and (3) the skills we have developed minus any conflicting beliefs,
memories, and associations, making each moment that we interact with
the environment a perfect indication of what we know and how well we
can act on what we know.
When we refuse to acknowledge or accept the perfection of each
moment in our lives, we deny ourselves access to the information that we
need to expand ourselves. Any skill that we need to learn to express
ourselves more effectively has a true starting point. To find that true starting
point requires our acceptance of each outcome as a reflection of the sum
total of who we are so that we can first identify what skill needs to he learned
and how we might go about the task of learning it. Without this true starting
point, we will operate from a base of illusion.
Illusions result from beliefs that we know more than we do and can do
more than we can. We erroneously assume the environment shares our
perception of it or of ourselves and then we actively block any information to
the contrary. Illusions are the difference between accepting each moment as
a perfect indication of who we are so that we can identify what we need to
learn to move forward and believing we are already perfect the way we are,
in which case we need learn nothing. Certainly if any of us were in a perfect
state of knowledge and abilities, then we would never need to complain
128

about anything or make excuses, rationalizations, or justifications for why
things didn't turn out as we planned.
Every "should have," "could have," "would have," or "if only" is an
indication of the degree of illusion in which we are indulging ourselves. If
we could have, we would have, meaning that at each moment we are doing
the best we can when taking into account all the components—both
conscious and subconscious—that affect what we perceive and do.
Acknowledging and accepting this perfection will always give us our true
starting point to indicate what we need to learn so that we can perceive the
conditions differently or what resources we need to develop to respond
differently.
If our hypothetical trader wants to develop into an effective and
consistently successful trader, he will need to engage in some selfimprovement. He will need to understand that the market is always right and
that he can profit from that tightness if he doesn't impose a rigid mental structure
on its behavior. He needs to release himself from his fear of being wrong so that
he can observe the market's behavior from an objective perspective. Otherwise,
his fear of being wrong will have the effect of making him wrong. He will also
need to establish some definite trading rules to guide his own behavior and
learn how to adhere to those rules. If he had been operating out of a definite set
of trading rules he would have never let the loss accumulate sufficiently that his
pain would take him out of the trade. If, however, he refuses to acknowledge
and accept his current state of development by blaming the market for his losses
or trying to convince himself that somehow he wasn't responsible for what he
ended up with, then he would be indulging himself in illusion. He would be
denying who he is and, in effect, cutting himself off from the information he
needs to become who he wants to be.
We have to be willing to confront the truth about ourselves so that we can
confront the truth outside of ourselves. The less illusion we indulge ourselves in,
the more our perceptions of the outside environment will reflect the actual
conditions, because we won't be blocking so much available information. By
available information I mean information we are capable of perceiving. The less
we block, the more we learn. The more we learn, the easier it is to anticipate how
the outside environment will react or respond under any given set of conditions.
Otherwise, we will not allow ourselves to perceive in the environment what we
refuse to know about ourselves.
None of us likes to acknowledge what we perceive to be our weaknesses. Yet it
is exactly what we need to do to grow beyond them. Otherwise, we keep building
our lives on this base of illusion that requires so much energy, alcohol, or drugs to
maintain that it eventually has to crumble, leading to these very painful forced
awarenesses. Confronting the truth in the environment or the truth about
ourselves is no more painful than are the forced awarenesses that result from
these illusions. It's just more immediate. However, when we do confront what is
inside of us, it is the first step in the process of breaking a cycle of dissatisfaction to
turn it into an expansive cycle of success. What better form of goal achievement
129

could there be than to confront conditions as they exist, identify what we need to
learn to operate most effectively, and then go about the task of learning it, making
our adjustments along the way?
ALL TRADERS GIVE THEMSELVES EXACTLY
WHAT THEY DESERVE
Traders put on trades and then take them off when they choose. That decisionmaking process is the result of the sum total of all the mental components
interacting with one another. If we were to inventory all these components,
measure the energy they hold, and then balance the components that contribute
to a positive sense of self-valuation against the components that contribute to a
negative sense of self-valuation, what would be left is a net amount that we value
ourselves. This net amount will correspond directly with how much money we
give ourselves out of what is available in any given trade, in any day, month, or
year, or by the same token how much of our money we give away.
I know that this can be a very difficult concept to accept. However, other than
taking into account what we haven't learned yet in terms of insights and skills,
how could it be any other way? We make up all our own rules when we trade. No
one forces us in or out of the markets, unless a position is liquidated by a
brokerage firm for lack of margin. In any given trade, there are a number of
possibilities to take profits or cut losses. What we decide to do in each instance
with respect to each possibility will be the result of our perceptions and all the
internal components affecting those perceptions. What we actually end up doing
will be the result of what we decide and our ability to execute our decisions,
which again will be determined by a number of mental factors, all of which
contribute to our sense of self-valuation.
Trading is an exercise in accumulating money. Once we have learned how to
trade (perceive opportunity and execute our trades), who else or what else could
be responsible for what we end up with? In fact, if traders were to chart their
equity, it would reflect their internal conflicts and what they think of themselves
on a day-to-day, month-to-month, or year-to-year basis. These charts would
look very much like the typical bar or point and figure charts of the
markets themselves, with support and resistance levels, consolidation
zones, rallies, selloffs, and retracements. All these patterns would reflect
the trader's state of mind, just as the markets themselves reflect the
collective state of mind of all its participants.
Charts like these also can have the same predictive value as in the
markets, if one learns what to look for. Some of the more sophisticated
brokerage firms that manage large funds keep these kinds of charts on the
CTAs that they employ to trade their money under management. They
will switch the amount of equity available for each CTA to manage based
on each individual's chart formations. In other words, once you build up
some history it isn't too difficult to determine when someone is about to
take a big hit because of the psychological forces building inside of him,
130

just as the collective forces of the market build before a big move.
As individual traders if we want to give ourselves more and more money
out of the markets, we have to learn how to value ourselves more and more
so that we believe we deserve what we want or deserve what we get.
Trading can result in the fast accumulation of windfall profits. To keep
those profits, we have to have inner support. Most of the time, that support
doesn't exist, and that accounts for all the rags to riches to rags stories that
can be told in the trading world. Of course the first step in the process of
valuing ourselves more is to accept our true starting point; that is, we have
to take complete responsibility for what we end up with as being a reflection of what we need learn about the markets, about ourselves, or both.
Ultimately, everything that we do contributes to or detracts from our sense
of self-valuation. That is why it can fluctuate from day to day or moment
to moment. The best way that I know of to add to our sense of valuation is
to commit ourselves to the process of growth.

131

CHAPTER 13

Managing
Mental Energy

What do I mean by "managing mental energy," you ask? There are many
ways that we already manage mental energy but probably wouldn't think of
it in such a way. For example, isn't it possible to take what starts out to be a
slight emotional wound (like some minor insult) and intensify the emotional
energy behind that wound to the point where we could end up in a state of
emotional frenzy? How do we accomplish this? By our willingness to think
about whatever caused us to feel insulted. Our thoughts can add energy to or
detract energy from the wound, depending on what kind of thoughts we
choose to think. If we think destructive thoughts, we will be adding
negatively charged energy to intensify the wound. And it goes without
saying that we can carry this to whatever extreme we choose and,
furthermore, stop whenever we choose or whenever we are willing to.
However, stopping does become more difficult in direct proportion to the
amount of energy involved. Aren't we, in effect, managing or manipulating
mental energy when we purposefully make ourselves more angry than
when we started out by channeling negative thoughts through an
experience?
By the same token, if we think positive thoughts, we will detract emotional
energy from the wound. I am sure anyone reading this book has noticed that
when a person wants to stay angry, he will refuse to listen to anything that might
defuse his anger. When we refuse to listen to "the voice of reason" so to speak, we
are making a choice not to manage mental energy. The only reason why an angry
person has to shut out "the voice of reason" is because he knows the information
has the potential to change the way he feels. He knows that if he changes his
132

perspective—which will, in turn, change the way he feels—he will experience a
different environment on the outside. If he isn't "willing" to change—regardless of
what the benefits may be—he will refuse to use his thoughts in a way that would
allow him to experience those benefits. These examples are just a few of the
many ways in which we already manipulate our mental environment to suit our
purposes based on our willingness to do so. Certainly, if it is possible to manage
mental energy for destructive purposes, it must also be possible to manage it for
constructive purposes. The key concepts here are willingness and purpose. The
willingness is to consciously direct our thoughts toward a specific intent to
change something on the inside that isn't useful.
Thoughts are a very powerful tool to effect changes in the mental
environment. We can use them to shift, rearrange, add to, detract from, or
change the polarity of various mental components. Thoughts are a form of
energy, probably no different from electricity or light. They can act as a cause to
produce some effect in the physical environment, as when we speak our
thoughts, for example, as well as act as a cause to produce an effect in the
mental environment. When we use our thoughts directed inward, we are
basically using one form of energy as a tool to change the consistency and
makeup of another form of energy, like using our thoughts to change a belief
or release the negative energy out of a painful memory.
It is precisely because of the inherent power within thoughts that people are so
protective of themselves with the kinds of information (others people's thoughts
expressed physically) they will expose themselves to. Everyone instinctively
knows that if we allow ourselves to think about something, the thoughts have
the power to change the way things exist inside of us. And once things change on
the inside, we know we will perceive and experience a different outside. If
we don't want to disturb the current relationship between inner and outer,
we will consciously do whatever is necessary to make sure that we don't
expose ourselves to anything that might threaten that relationship or think
about anything in a way that would change the relationship. Change is the
result of, first, a willingness to think.
Personally, I believe that if we weren't meant to keep on growing mentally
(adding to who we are by transcending what we have already learned) and
furthermore if we weren't meant to direct that growth at a conscious level,
then we would not have been given the ability to think, reason, and create.
Implied within our ability to think, reason, and create is the inherent
capability to learn our way out of the painful situations and dissatisfying life
cycles in which we find ourselves. Painful life cycles begin with and are
perpetuated by painful memories. So in essence what I am stating is that
inherent within our ability to think and reason is the capability to heal our
emotional wounds so that we can perceive what is available from the
environment beyond our fears. Healing emotional wounds is something
that we have to learn how to do by learning how to manage mental energy.
Learning how to forget our painful memories by making them subconscious
does not in any way reduce their significance on our perception of
133

environmental information, or their potential to cause us to behave in
certain ways.
This is the gift of creativity that we were all born with. It is the capability
to think beyond what our current beliefs, memories, and association would
dictate as being true about the environment. The capability to reason beyond
our current set of limitations (beliefs, painful memories, and erroneous
associations) or use our imaginations creatively is the one compensating force
that allows us to grow, improve, and evolve beyond the painful and destructive
life cycles that we get caught in, both as individuals and as a culture.
However, there is something here that you may need to be mindful of: a
capability to do something is not necessarily an ability to do something.
Before a capability becomes an ability, it has to be cultivated into a skill. For
example, we can use our imaginations to visualize and then project into the
environment the fulfillment of some need or goal in some future moment.
But that doesn't mean we are using our imaginations creatively. We may
just be using our imaginations to project what is already in our memories
or what we already believe. The same is true for our thoughts. Most of the
time, they will originate out of our current set of beliefs and memories, so
that what we will be thinking will correspond with the status quo. To
create a more satisfying future for ourselves, we need to be able to imagine
this future and project it out into the environment as some future moment.
There is a direct correlation between what we project and what is already
inside of us, unless of course, we are imagining something beyond what we
already know.
The only real limitations that exist with respect to thought are those
rules that were either taught to us or the ones we made up for ourselves. We
are not in any way restricted to just thinking about what we already believe is
true or what we have already experienced. We are free to roam anywhere in
our thoughts to explore any number of possibilities and choose to act on one
of them, regardless of whether it is inside or outside of the current set of rules
from which we operate, even to the point of using our thoughts to change
any rules that we may have that says we can't. If we weren't meant to direct
our own changes by thinking about how we might learn how to lead happier
and more satisfying lives, then thinking, reasoning, and creativity wouldn't
exist.
To experience the same kind of painful conditions over and over again,
in an environment that is in constant motion, implies that we don't perceive
any other choices as being available that would result in more satisfying
outcomes. What we perceive is directly connected to what we already know.
To perceive other choices, other than the ones our beliefs, memories, and
associations lock us into, we have to know something we haven't learned yet.
So, learning our way out of a situation that is perpetually dissatisfying
requires that we be open to thinking beyond what we already know. The
environment will always offer us an opportunity for some degree of love,
harmony, happiness, and success or some degree of despair,
134

disappointment, anger, hate, and betrayal. What we end up with from each
of these moments has to be a reflection of what is inside of us because the
environment does not interpret the information it has to offer in any given
moment. That process happens exclusively in each one of us. Remember the
free money example in Chapter 10? The reality of pleasure existed right along
with the reality of indifference or fear. The man was there to give money to
anyone who wanted. How each person interpreted the data determined what
reality they experienced.
Creativity is synonymous with growth and change. Doesn't the word
"create" imply bringing into existence something that did not previously
exist? If it already existed, then it would have already been created. To use
our imaginations creatively, we must to be willing to think outside of what
we already know to be true or possible. For those of you who are not that
familiar with various forms of creative thinking, you would be surprised
how just the willingness to question the usefulness of something inside of
us will bring forth an avalanche of inspiring alternatives. Otherwise, our
memories and beliefs will cause us to think of the future in ways that
directly correspond with our past, thus having the effect of locking us into
the same recurring experiences. The names and places may change but the
situations and circumstances and conditions always remain the same
because we aren't changing our mental framework to perceive anything
different.
"Necessity is the mother of invention!" In other words, the need to create
some new machine, device, or process to save time, save money, or make
money isn't any different from the need to "create a new you" to experience
success and a more satisfying life. The need will act as a force behind our
thoughts to think beyond our current barriers so that we can expand. The
barriers that act as a resisting force preventing us from expanding consist
of many of our beliefs and all our painful memories. So we need a force to
counteract and penetrate those barriers. That force is our thoughts and our
willingness to use them in creative ways.
AH our lives would become a lot easier to live and potentially more
satisfying if we operated out of the belief that we are in a state of imperfect
knowledge, evolving toward something that we haven't become yet.
Everything is evolving into something that it isn't yet. It may not seem like
it at times, but each moment of each day, we change into someone who
was not the person we were a moment ago. At the physical level new cells
are born and old cells die. At the mental level each moment that passes we
experience something. Each experience adds to the inner environment in
the form of a memory or belief. Each memory and belief builds a selfconcept that acts as a force on how we interact with the environment. Then
as we interact with the environment, we change it in some way, creating a
new environment for us to discover and experience. Everything that exists is
evolving, because everything that exists is in motion, and motion creates
change. Even the grandest mountain will eventually wear away into small
135
