
For individual traders dealing online, however, the direct cross pairs offer more than ample
liquidity and narrower spreads than can be realized by trading through the dollar pairs.
Additionally, most online platforms do not net out positions based on overall dollar
exposure, so you’d end up using roughly twice the amount of margin to enter a position

through the dollar pairs to create the same position you’d have if you’d gone through the
direct cross market. The advances in electronic trading technology even make relatively
obscure crosses like NZD/JPY and GBP/CHF easily accessible to individual online traders.

Why trade the crosses?
Cross pairs represent entirely new sets of routinely fluctuating currency pairs that offer another
universe of trading opportunities beyond the primary USD pairs. Developments in the currency
market are not always a simple bet on what’s happening to the U.S. dollar. Crosses are the other
half of the story, and their significance appears to be increasing dramatically as a result of
electronic trading. Years ago, if you wanted a price in a cross pair, a human would have to push
the buttons on a calculator to come up with the cross quote. Today’s streaming price technology
means that cross rates are as fluid as the dollar pairs, making them as accessible and tradable as
USD/JPY or EUR/USD.
In particular, cross trading offers the following advantages:
You can pinpoint trade opportunities based on news or fundamental trends. If the
outlook and data for the UK is steadily deteriorating, you may be looking to sell GBP. But
against what? If the USD is also weakening, buying USD and selling GBP may not yield
any results. Selling GBP against another currency with better immediate prospects (such
as selling GBP/CAD or GBP/NOK) may yield a more appreciable return.
You can take advantage of interest-rate differentials. Selling low-yielding currencies
against higher-yielding currencies is known as a carry trade (see Chapter 10). Carry
trades seek to profit from both interest-rate differentials and spot price appreciation, and
can form the basis of significant trends.
You can exploit technical trading opportunities. The majors may be range bound or
showing no actionable technical signals, but a cross rate may be set to stage a directional
price breakout. Survey charts of cross rates to spot additional technical trading setups.
You can expand the horizon of trading opportunities. Instead of looking at only four to
seven dollar pairs, cross rates offer another dozen currency pairs that you can look to for
trading opportunities.
You can go with the flow. Speculative flows are ever-present in the currency market, but
they don’t always involve the dollar pairs. Today’s speculative flow may be focused on
the JPY crosses or selling CAD across the board on the back of surprisingly weak CAD
data. The more attuned you are to cross-currency pairs, the more likely you are to identify
and capitalize on the speculative move du jour.

Stretching the legs

A lot of interbank cross-trading volume does not go through the direct cross market, because
institutional traders have a vested interest in hiding their operations from the rest of the market. In
many cases, too, standing liquidity is simply not available in less-liquid crosses (GBP/JPY or
NZD/JPY, for example). So they have to go through the legs, as the dollar pairs are called with
respect to cross trading, to get the trade done. They also have an interest in maximizing the prices
at which they’re dealing — to sell as high as possible and to buy as low as possible.
One of the ways they’re able to do that is to alternate their trading in the dollar legs. For instance,
if you have to sell a large amount of EUR/JPY, you can alternate selling EUR/USD, which may
tend to drive down EUR/USD but also push USD/JPY higher (because U.S. dollars overall are
being bought). You now (you hope) have a higher rate at which to sell the USD/JPY leg of the
order. But selling USD/JPY may push USD/JPY lower or cap its rise, leading EUR/USD to stop
declining and recover higher, because U.S. dollars are now being sold. Now you have a slightly
better EUR/USD rate to keep selling the EUR/USD leg of the order. By alternating the timing of
which U.S. dollar leg you’re selling, you have (you hope) executed the order at better rates than
you could have directly in the cross and likely managed to obscure your market activity in the
more active dollar pairs.

Of course, it doesn’t always work out as neat and clean as what I just described. The net
result in the market is a steady directional move in the cross rate, while the USD pairs remain
relatively stagnant or within recent ranges. Be alert for such dollar-based movement, and
consider that it may be a cross-driven move and a potential trading opportunity.

Cross-rate movements can also have a pronounced effect on how individual dollar pairs
move in an otherwise dollar-based market reaction. Let’s say some very USD-positive news
or data has just been released, and the market starts buying USD across the board. (I focus on
buying USD/JPY and selling EUR/USD in this example.) If USD/JPY happens to break a key
technical resistance level, it may accelerate higher and prompt EUR/JPY to break a similarly
significant resistance level, bringing in EUR/JPY buyers. The net effect in this case is that
EUR/USD will not fall as much or as rapidly as USD/JPY will rally, because of the
EUR/JPY cross buying. If you went short EUR/USD on the positive U.S. news, you may not
get as much joy. But the legs also tend to move in phases, and continued EUR/USD selling
may eventually break through support, sending EUR/JPY lower and capping USD/JPY in the
process.
As you can see, crosses can affect the market in virtually limitless ways, and there’s no set way
these things play out.

When the U.S. dollar is not the primary focus of the market’s attention, or if major U.S.
news is approaching (like a nonfarm payrolls [NFP] report or a Federal Open Market

Committee [FOMC] decision in a few days), sending market interest to the sidelines,
speculative interest frequently shifts to the crosses. Always consider that the market’s focus
may be cross-driven rather than centered on the USD or any other single currency. Some days
it’s a dollar market, and other days it’s a cross market. GBP may be weakening across the
board on weak UK data, but if the USD is similarly out of favor, the pound’s weakness is
likely to be most evident on the crosses.

When looking at cross-trade opportunities, you may be tempted to translate the cross idea
into a USD-based trade. You may think that AUD/JPY is forming a top, for example. If you’re
right, you may be thinking that one of two moves is likely — USD/JPY will move lower or
AUD/USD will move lower — and you may be tempted into selling one of the legs
(AUD/USD or USD/JPY) because you don’t want to get involved in a cross. But there’s
another possibility: One leg may go down precipitously while the other moves higher, still
sending the cross lower as you expected. But if you went short the wrong leg, you missed the
boat.

When you spot a trade opportunity in a cross, trade the cross. Don’t try to outguess the
market and pick which component will make the cross move. Trust that if your trade analysis
is correct, the cross will move the way you expect.

Trading the JPY crosses
The JPY crosses constitute one of the primary cross families and basically pit the JPY against the
other major currencies. EUR/JPY is the highest volumeof the JPY crosses, but the prominence of
the carry trade, where the low-yielding JPY is sold and higher-yielding currencies are bought, has
seen significant increases in AUD/JPY and NZD/JPY trading volume. Those currencies offer the
highest interest-rate differentials against the JPY.
JPY crosses have their pip values denominated in JPY, meaning profit and loss will accrue in
JPY. The margin requirement will vary greatly depending on which primary currency is involved,
with GBP/JPY requiring the greatest margin and NZD/JPY requiring the least.
In terms of JPY-cross fundamentals, risk sentiment (see Chapter 5) and overall volatility tend to
have the greatest impact, but as I caution earlier, trying to pin down which leg is going to cause the
JPY crosses to move is a risky game. When trading in the JPY crosses, you need to keep an eye on
USD/JPY in particular, due to its relatively explosive tendencies and its key place as an outlet for
overall carry trade buying or selling. Be alert for similar technical levels between USD/JPY and
the JPY crosses, as a break in either could spill over into the other.

Trading the EUR crosses
Outside of EUR/JPY, EUR cross action tends to be concentrated in EUR/GBP and
EUR/CHF, where the cross direction is largely determined by changing outlooks between the
Eurozone economy relative to the UK and Swiss economies. Reactions to Eurozone and
Swiss news or data are most likely to be felt in the EUR crosses as opposed to EUR/USD or
USD/CHF, whereas UK news/data is going to explode all over GBP/USD and EUR/GBP.
Trading in EUR/SEK and EUR/NOK offers yet another way to exploit divergent economic or
interest rate trajectories between continental Europe and the Scandinavian countries.
Sharp USD-driven moves will also affect these crosses, with the brunt of the USD move being felt
in GBP/USD and USD/CHF, frequently biasing those legs to drive their EUR cross in the short
run. That means frequently (but not always) that a sharp move higher in the USD will tend to see a
higher EUR/CHF and EUR/GBP, while a rapid USD move lower will tend to see lower
EUR/CHF and EUR/GBP.
The pip values of these EUR crosses will be denominated in either GBP or CHF, with GBP
significantly more expensive on a pip basis than CHF (as of this writing). Typical daily ranges in
the EUR crosses are relatively small on a pip basis — roughly 20 to 40 pips on average — but
they’re still substantial on a pip-value basis and roughly equivalent to daily EUR/USD ranges.

Part III

Developing a Trading Plan

In this part . . .
Sun Tzu famously observed that every battle is won or lost before it even begins. That same
rationale applies to trading. And just as an army must know its strengths and weaknesses to
succeed, you have to get to know yours, too. Here I look at various trading styles, provide tips to
develop trading discipline, and offer a practical plan for analyzing markets with an eye to spotting
trade opportunities. I also take a hard look at risks beyond just losing money, so you can be
prepared for bumps in the road.

Chapter 10

Training and Preparing for Battle
In This Chapter
Determining what trading style fits you best
Understanding the different trading styles
Developing and maintaining market discipline
Planning your trades and trading the plan
Before you get involved in actively trading the forex market, it’s important to take a step back and
think about how you want to approach the market. There is more to this than meets the eye, and I
think it’s one of the most important determinants of overall trading success.
Looking at the title of this chapter, you may think I’m exaggerating a bit with the reference to
training and preparing for battle, but I’m really not. The Chinese military philosopher Sun Tzu
famously observed that every battle is won or lost before it is ever fought. I can think of no better
analogy when it comes to trading in financial markets in general or forex markets in particular.
In this chapter, I take you through the main points to consider as you seek to define your own
approach to trading currencies. I review the characteristics of some of the most commonly applied
trading styles and discuss what they mean in concrete terms. I also look at what constitutes trading
discipline and some of the psychological and emotional hazards you’re likely to experience. Last,
and probably most important, I run you through the essential elements of developing and sticking to
a trading plan.

Finding the Right Trading Style for You
I’m frequently asked, “What’s the best way to trade the forex market?” For starters, that’s a loaded
question that suggests there’s a right way and a wrong way to trade currencies. It also implies that
there’s some magic formula out there, and if you can just find out what it is, you’ll be guaranteed
trading success. Unfortunately, there is no easy answer. Better put, there is no standard answer —
one that applies to everyone.
The forex market’s trading characteristics have something to offer every trading style (long-term,
medium-term, or short-term) and approach (technical, fundamental, or a blend). So in terms of
deciding what style or approach is best suited to currencies, the starting point is not the forex
market itself, but your own individual circumstances and way of thinking.

Real-world and lifestyle considerations
Before you can begin to identify a trading style and approach that works best for you, you need to
give some serious thought to what resources you have available to support your trading. As with
many of life’s endeavors, when it comes to financial-market trading, there are two main resources
that people never seem to have enough of: time and money. Deciding how much of each you can
devote to currency trading will help to establish how you pursue your trading goals.

If you’re a full-time trader, you have lots of time to devote to market analysis and actually
trading the market. But because currencies trade around the clock, you still have to be mindful
of which session you’re trading, and of the daily peaks and troughs of activity and liquidity.
(See Chapter 2 for trading-session specifics.) Just because the market is always open doesn’t
mean it’s necessarily always a good time to trade.
If you have a full-time job, your boss may not appreciate you taking time to catch up on the charts
or economic data reports while you’re at work. That means you’ll have to use your free time to do
your market research. Be realistic when you think about how much time you’ll be able to devote
on a regular basis, keeping in mind family obligations and other personal circumstances.

When it comes to money, I can’t stress enough that trading capital has to be risk capital and
that you should never risk any money that you can’t afford to lose. The standard definition of
risk capital is money that, if lost, will not materially affect your standard of living. It goes
without saying that borrowed money is not risk capital — you should never use borrowed
money for speculative trading.
When you determine how much risk capital you have available for trading, you’ll have a better
idea of what size account you can trade and what position size you can handle. Most online trading
platforms typically offer generous leverage ratios that allow you to control a larger position with
less required margin. But just because they offer high leverage doesn’t mean you have to fully
utilize it. (I look at the risk and reward components of leverage in greater detail in Chapter 13.)

Making time for market analysis
In other chapters, I talk about the amount of data and news that flows through the forex market on a
daily basis — and it can be truly overwhelming. That’s one reason the major banks that are active
in the forex market employ teams of economists, strategists, technical analysts, and traders. So
how can an individual trader possibly keep up with all the data and news?

The key is to develop an efficient daily routine of market analysis. Thanks to the Internet

and online currency brokerages, independent traders can access a variety of daily and
intraday market reports, covering both technical and fundamental perspectives. Your daily
regimen of market analysis should focus on
Overnight forex market developments: Who said what, which data came out, and how
the currency pairs reacted.
Daily updates of other major market movements over the prior 24 hours and the
stories behind them: If oil prices or U.S. Treasury yields rose or fell substantially, find
out why.
Data releases and market events (for example, the retail sales report, Fed speeches,
central bank rate announcements) expected for that day: Ideally, you’ll monitor data
and event calendars one week in advance, so you can anticipate the outcomes along with
the rest of the market.
Multiple-timeframe technical analysis of major currency pairs: There is nothing like
the visual image of price action to fill in the blanks of how data and news affected
individual currency pairs.
Current events and geopolitical themes: Stay abreast on issues of major elections,
political scandals, military conflicts, and policy initiatives in the major currency nations.
Establishing a research routine will take some time at first. You’ll have to read many different
news stories and analysts’ reports before you get a handle on which sources provide the best
overnight summaries, which fundamental analysts are most focused on the forex market, and which
technical analysts are focused on actionable trading strategies. I tend to focus on the mainstream
financial news media, such as Bloomberg.com, Reuters.com, and MarketWatch.com.

Technical versus fundamental analysis
I look at fundamental analysis and technical analysis in greater depth in Chapters 7 and 11. I
include them here as elements to consider as you develop your overall approach to the market.
Ask yourself on what basis you’ll make your trading decisions — fundamental analysis or
technical analysis?

Followers of each discipline have always debated which approach works better. Rather
than take sides, I suggest following an approach that blends the two disciplines. In my
experience, macroeconomic factors, such as interest rates, relative growth rates, and market
sentiment, determine the big-picture direction of currency rates. But currencies rarely move
in a straight line, which means there are plenty of short-term price fluctuations to take
advantage of — and some of them can be substantial.

Technical analysis can provide the guideposts along the route of the bigger price move,
allowing traders to more accurately predict the direction and scope of future price changes.
Most important, technical analysis is the key to constructing a well-defined trading strategy.
For example, your fundamental analysis, data expectations, or plain old gut instinct may lead
you to conclude that EUR/USD is going lower. But where exactly do you get short? Where do
you take profit, and where do you cut your losses? I like to use technical analysis to refine
trade entry and exit points, and to decide whether and where to add to positions or reduce
them.
Sometimes forex markets seem to be more driven by fundamental factors, such as current
economic data or comments from a central bank official. In those times, fundamentals provide the
catalysts for technical breakouts and reversals. At other times, technical developments seem to be
leading the charge — a break of trend-line support or recent daily lows may trigger stop-loss
selling by market longs and bring in model systems that are selling based on the break of support.
Subsequent economic reports may run counter to the directional breakout, but data be damned —
the technical support is gone, and the market is selling.

Fundamental data and events are only one piece of the puzzle. Be aware that forex markets
frequently ignore individual reports and do their own thing based on some larger theme or
adjustment. That’s why I always stress that the market reaction to data is more important than
the data itself.
Approaching the market with a blend of fundamental and technical analysis will improve your
chances of both spotting trade opportunities and managing your trades more effectively. You’ll
also be better prepared to handle markets that are alternately reacting to fundamental and technical
developments or some combination of the two.

Different Strokes for Different Folks
After you’ve given some thought to the time and resources you’re able to devote to currency
trading and which approach you favor (technical, fundamental, or a blend), the next step is to settle
on a trading style that best fits those choices.
There are as many different trading styles and market approaches in FX as there are individuals in
the market. But most of them can be grouped into three main categories that boil down to varying
degrees of exposure to market risk. The two main elements of market risk are time and relative
price movements. The longer you hold a position, the more risk you’re exposed to. The more of a
price change you’re anticipating, the more risk you’re exposed to.
In the next few sections I detail the main trading styles and what they really mean for individual

traders. My aim here is not to advocate for any particular trading style. (Styles frequently overlap,
and you can adopt different styles for different trade opportunities or different market conditions.)
Instead, my goal is to give you an idea of the various approaches used by forex market
professionals so you can understand the basis of each style. I think this information will help you
settle on a style that best fits your personality and individual circumstances. Equally important,
you’ll be able to recognize whether your style is drifting and generally maintain a more
disciplined approach to the market.

Short-term, high-frequency day trading
Short-term trading in currencies is unlike short-term trading in most other markets. A short-term
trade in stocks or commodities usually means holding a position for a day to several days at least.
But because of the liquidity and narrow bid/offer spreads in currencies, prices are constantly
fluctuating in small increments. The steady and fluid price action in currencies allows for
extremely short-term trading by speculators intent on capturing just a few pips on each trade.
Short-term trading in forex typically involves holding a position for only a few seconds or minutes
and rarely longer than an hour. But the time element is not the defining feature of short-term
currency trading. Instead, the pip fluctuations are what’s important. Traders who follow a shortterm trading style are seeking to profit by repeatedly opening and closing positions after gaining
just a few pips, typically 5 to 10 pips but also as little as 1 or 2 pips.

Jobbing the market pip by pip
In the interbank market, extremely short-term, in-and-out trading is referred to as jobbing the
market; online currency traders call it scalping. (I use the terms interchangeably.) Traders who
follow this style have to be among the fastest and most disciplined of traders because they’re out
to capture only a few pips on each trade. In terms of speed, rapid reaction and instantaneous
decision-making are essential to successfully jobbing the market.
