way is being told that we can't have something because it's too expensive.
How many times does the typical child hear, "Who do you think you are anyway? Money doesn't grow
on trees, you know." In other words, it is probably a negatively charged belief. So the experience of
having money handed to him with no strings attached and without any negative comments would likely
create a state of mind of pure elation. In fact, most people would be so happy that they'd feel compelled
to share that happiness and this new discovery with everyone they knew. I can imagine him going back
to his office or going home, and the moment he encounters someone he knows, the first words out of
his mouth will be “You won’t believe what happened to me today," and even though he desperately
wants those he meets to believe his story, they probably won't. Why? Because their belief that free
money doesn't exist will cause them to interpret his story in a way that negates its validity.
To take this example a little further, imagine what would happen to this person's state of mind if it
occurred to him that he could have asked for more money. He is in a state of pure elation. However, the
moment the thought either pops into his mind or someone he relates his story to offers the idea that he
could have asked for a lot more money, his state of mind will immediately shift to a negatively charged
state of regret or despair. Why? He tapped into a negatively charged belief about what it means to miss
out on something or not get enough. As a result, instead of being happy over what he got, he will
lament what he could have had but didn't get.
BELIEFS VS. THE TRUTH
In all three of these examples (including the hypothetical one), everybody experienced their own
unique version of the situation. If asked, each person would describe what he or she experienced from
their perspective, as if it were the only true and valid version of the reality of the situation. The
contradiction between these three versions of the truth suggests to me a larger philosophical issue that
needs to be resolved. If beliefs limit our awareness of the information being generated by the physical
environment, so that what we perceive is consistent with whatever we believe, then how do we know
what the truth is? To answer this question, we have to consider four ideas:
1. The environment can express itself in an infinite combination of ways. When you combine all the
forces of nature interacting with everything created by humans, then add to that the forces generated by
all the possible ways people can express themselves, the result is a number of possible versions of
reality that would surelv overwhelm even the most onen-minded nerson.
2. Until we have acquired the ability to perceive eveiy possible way in which the environment can
express itself, our beliefs will always represent a limited version of what is possible from the
environment's perspective, making our beliefs a statement about reality, but not necessarily a definitive
statement of reality.
3. If you find yourself taking exception to the second statement, then consider that if our beliefs were a
true, 100-percent accurate reflection of physical reality, then our expectations would always be

fulfilled. If our expectations were always fulfilled, we would be in a perpetual state of satisfaction.
How could we feel other than happy, joyful, elated, and with a complete sense of well-being if physical
reality was consistently showing up exactly as we expected it to?
4. If you can accept the third statement as being valid, then the corollary is also true. If we are not
experiencing satisfaction, then we must be operating out of a belief or beliefs that don't vork very well
relative to the environmental conditions. we Taking these four ideas into consideration, I can now
answer the question, "What is the truth?" The answer is, whatever works. If beliefs impose limitations
on what we perceive as possible, and the environment can express itself in an infinite combination of
ways, then beliefs can only be true relative to what we are attempting to accomplish at any given
moment. In other words, the relative degree of truth inherent in our beliefs can be measured by how
useful they are. Each of us has internally generated forces (curiosity, needs, wants, desires, goals, and
aspirations) that compel or motivate us to interact with the physical environment. The particular set of
steps we take to fulfill the object of our curiosity, needs, wants, desires, goals, or aspirations is a
function of what we believe to be true in any given circumstance or situation. That truth, whatever it is,
will determine:
1. the possibilities we perceive in relation to what is available from the environment's perspective,
2. how we interpret what we perceive,
3. the decisions we make,
4. our expectations of the outcome,
5. the action we take, and
6. how we feel about the results of our efforts.
At any given moment, if we find ourselves in a state of satisfaction, happiness, or well-being in relation
to whatever we are attempting to accomplish, we can say that our truth (meaning whatever beliefs we
are operating from) are useful because the process, as stated above, worked. What we perceived was
not only consistent with our objective, it was also consistent with what was available from the
environment's perspective. Our interpretation of the information we perceived resulted in a decision,
expectation, and action that were in harmony with the environmental situation and circumstance. There
was no resistance or counteracting force offered by the environment (or in our own mind) that would
diminish the outcome we were trying to achieve. As a result, we find ourselves in a state of satisfaction,
happiness, and well-being.
On the other hand, if we find ourselves in a state of dissatisfaction, disappointment, frustration,
confusion, despair, regret, or hopelessness, we can say that relative to the environmental situation and
circumstances, the beliefs we are operating from don't work well or at all, and therefore are not useful.
Simply put, the truth is a function of whatever works in relation to what we are trying to accomplish at
any given moment. CHAPTER

CHAPTER 10
THE IMPACT OF BELIEFS ON TRADING
If the external environment can express itself in an infinite combination of ways, then there's really no
limit to the number and types of beliefs available to be acquired about the nature of our existence. That
is an elaborate way of saying that there's a lot out there to be learned about. Yet, to make a general
observation about the nature of humanity, I would say that we certainly don't live our lives in a manner
that is consistent with that statement. If it's true that it's possible to believe almost anything, then why
are we always arguing and fighting with each other? Why isn't it all right for all of us to express our
lives in a way that reflects what we have learned to believe? There has to be something behind our
relentless attempt to convince others of the validity of our beliefs and to deny the validity of theirs.
Consider that every conflict, from the smallest to the largest, from the least to the most significant,
whether between individuals, cultures, societies, or nations, is always the result of conflicting beliefs.
What characteristics of our beliefs make us intolerant of divergent beliefs?
In some cases, we are so intolerant that we are willing to kill each other to get our point across. My
personal theory is that beliefs are not only structured energy, but also energy that seems to be
conscious, at least to the extent of having some degree of awareness.
Otherwise, how can we account for our ability to recognize on the outside what is on the inside? How
would we know our expectations are being fulfilled? How would we know when they are not? How
would we know we are being confronted with information or circumstances that contradict what we
believe? The only explanation I have is that each individual belief has to have some quality of either
awareness or self-awareness that causes it to function as it does.
The idea of energy that has some degree of awareness may be difficult for many of you to accept. But
there are several observations we can make about our individual and collective natures that support die
possibility. First, everyone wants to be believed. It doesn't matter what the belief is; the experience of
being believed feels good. I think these positive feelings are universal, meaning that they apply to
everyone. Conversely, no one likes to be disbelieved; it doesn't feel good. If I said, "I don't believe
you," the negative feeling that would resonate throughout your body and mind is also universal. By the
same token, none of us likes to have our beliefs challenged. The challenge feels like an attack.
Everyone, regardless of the belief, seems to respond in the same way: The typical response is to argue,
defend ourselves (our beliefs), and, depending on the situation, attack back. When expressing
ourselves, we seem to like being listened to. If we sense our audience isn't paying attention, how does it
feel? Not good! Again, I think this response is universal.
Conversely, why is it so difficult to be a good listener? Because to be a good listener, we actually have
to listen, without thinking about how we are going to express ourselves the moment we can either

politely or rudely interrupt the person who's speaking. What's the compelling force behind our inability
to listen without waiting to interrupt? Don't we like being with people with similar beliefs, because it
feels comfortable and secure? Don't we avoid people with dissimilar or conflicting beliefs, because it
feels uncomfortable or even threatening? The bottom line implication is, the moment we acquire a
belief, it seems to take on a life of its own, causing us to recognize and be attracted to its likeness and
repelled by anything that is opposite or contradictory.
Considering the vast number of divergent beliefs that exist, if these feelings of attraction or comfort
and being repelled or threatened are universal, then each belief must somehow be conscious of its
existence, and this conscious, structured energy must behave in characteristic ways that are common to
all of us.
THE PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF A BELIEF
There are three basic characteristics you need to understand in order to effectively install the five
fundamental truths about trading at a functional level in your mental environment:
1. Beliefs seem to take on a life of their own and, therefore, resist any force that would alter their
present form.
2. All active beliefs demand expression.
3. Beliefs keep on working regardless of whether or not we are consciously aware of their existence in
our mental environment.
1. Beliefs resist any force that would alter their present form. We may not understand the underlying
dynamics of how beliefs maintain their structural integrity, but we can observe that they do so, even
in the face of extreme pressure or force. Throughout human history, there are many examples of
people whose belief in some issue or cause was so powerful that they chose to endure indignities,
torture, and death rather than express themselves in a way that violated their beliefs. This is certainly
a demonstration of just how powerful beliefs can be and the degree to which they can resist any
attempt to be altered or violated in the slightest way.
Beliefs seem to be composed of a type of energy or force that naturally resists any other force that
would cause them to exist in any form other than their nresent form. Does this mean that thev can't
be altered? Absolutely not! It just means that we have to understand how to work with them. Beliefs
can be altered, but not in the way that most people may think. I believe that once a belief has been
formed, it cannot be destroyed. In other words, there is nothing we can do that would cause one or
more of our beliefs to cease to exist or to evaporate as if they never existed at all. This assertion is
founded in a basic law of physics. According to Albert Einstein and others in the scientific
community, energy can neither be created nor destroyed; it can only be transformed.

If beliefs are energy—structured, conscious energy that is aware of its existence—then this same
principle of physics can be applied to beliefs, meaning, if we tiy to eradicate them, it's not going to
work. If you knew someone or something was trying to destroy you, how would you respond? You
would defend yourself, fight back, and possibly become even stronger than you were before you
knew of the threat. Each individual belief is a component of what we consider to be our identity.
Isn't it reasonable to expect that, if threatened, each individual belief would respond in a way that
was consistent with how all the parts respond collectively? The same principle holds true if we tiy to
act as if a particularly troublesome belief doesn't exist. If you woke up one morning and everyone
you knew ignored you and acted as if you didn't exist, how would you respond? It probably wouldn't
be long before you grabbed someone and got right in their face to try to force them to acknowledge
you. Again, if purposely ignored, each individual belief will act in the very same way. It will find a
way to force its presence into our conscious thought process or behavior. The easiest and most
effective way to work with our beliefs is to gently render them inactive or nonfunctional by drawing
the energy out of them. I call this process de-activation. After de-activation, the original structure of
the belief remains intact, so technically it hasn't changed. The difference is that the belief no longer
has any energy. Without energy, it doesn't have the potential to act as a force on our perception of
information or on our behavior. Here is a personal illustration:
As a young child, I was taught to believe in both Santa Claus and the Tooth Fairy. In my mental
system, both of these are perfect examples of what are now inactive, nonfunctional beliefs.
However, even though they are inactive, they still exist inside my mental system, only now they
exist as concepts with no energy. If you recall from the last chapter, I defined beliefs as a
combination of sensory experience and words that form an energized concept. The energy can be
drawn out of the concept, but the concept itself remains intact, in its original form. However,
without energy, it no ! T.gCI h-15 th? nOt?ptial to act on my perception of inforlYiation or on my
behavior. So, as I'm sitting here typing into my computer, if someone came up to me and said that
Santa Claus was at the door, how do you think I would define and interpret this information? I
would treat it as being irrelevant or a joke, of course. However, if I were five years old and my
mother told me that Santa Claus was at the front door, her words would have instantly tapped me
into a huge reservoir of positively charged energy that would have compelled me to jump up and run
to the front door as fast as I could.
Nothing would have been able to stop me. I would have overcome any obstacle in my path. At some
point, my parents told me Santa Claus didn't exist. Of course, my first reaction was disbelief. I didn't
believe them, nor did I want to believe them. Eventually, they convinced me. However, the process
of convincing me did not destroy my belief in Santa Claus or cause it not to exist any longer; it just
took all the energy out of the belief. The belief was transformed into a nonfunctional, inactive
concept about how the world works. I'm not sure where all that energy went, but I know that some
of it was transferred to a belief that Santa Claus doesn't exist.

Now I have two contradictory distinctions about the nature of the world that exist in my mental
system: one, Santa exists; two, Santa doesn't exist. The difference between them is in the amount of
energy they contain. The first has virtually no energy; the second has energy. So from a functional
perspective, there is no contradiction or conflict. I propose that, if it's possible to render one belief
inactive, then it's possible to de-activate any belief, despite the fact that all beliefs seem to resist any
force that would alter their present form. The secret to effectively changing our beliefs is in
understanding and, consequently, believing that we really aren't changing our beliefs; we are simply
transferring energy from one concept to another concept, one that we find more useful in helping us
to fulfill our desires or achieve our goals.
2. All active beliefs demand expression. Beliefs fall into two basic categories: active and inactive. The
distinction between the two is simple. Active beliefs are energized; they have enough energy to act
as a force on our perception of information and on our behavior. An inactive belief is just the
opposite. It is a belief, that for any number of reasons, no longer has energy, or has so little energy
that it's no longer able to act as a force on how we perceive information or how we express
ourselves. When I say that all active beliefs demand expression, I don't mean to imply that every
belief in our mental environment is demanding to express itself simultaneously. For example, if I
ask you to think about what's wrong with the world today, the word "wrong" would bring to your
mind ideas about the nature of the world that reflect what you believe to be troubling or disturbing.
Unless, of course, there is nothing about the state of the world you find troubling. The point is, if
there is something you do believe is wrong, you weren't necessarily thinking about those ideas
before I asked the question; but the moment I did, your beliefs about these issues instantly moved to
the forefront of your conscious thinking process. In effect, they demanded to be heard. I say that
beliefs "demand" to be expressed because once something causes us to tap into our beliefs, it seems
as if we can't stop the flood of energy that's released. This is especially true of emotionally sensitive
issues or beliefs we feel particularly passionate about. You might ask, "Why would I want to hold
back expressing my beliefs?" There could be several reasons. Consider a scenario in which you're
this person is saying something that you completely disagree with, or even find utterly absurd. Will
you express your truth or hold back? That will depend on the beliefs you have about what is proper
in such a situation. If your beliefs dictate that speaking up would be inappropriate, and those beliefs
have more energy than the ones that are being contradicted, then you'll probably hold back and not
argue openly.
You might be looking at this person (the boss) and nodding your head in agreement. But is your
mind in agreement? More to the point, is your mind silent? Absolutely not! Your position on the
issues being presented are effectively countering each point the boss is making. In other words, your
beliefs are still demanding expression, but they aren't being expressed externally (in the
environment) because other beliefs are acting as a counteracting; force. However O O ' they will
soon find a way to get out, won't they? As soon as you are out of the situation, you will probably

find a way to "unload," or even spew out your side of the argument. You will probably describe
what you had to endure to anyone you think will lend a sympathetic ear. This is an example of how
our beliefs demand to be expressed when they are in conflict with the external environment. But
what happens when one or more of our beliefs are in conflict with our intents, goals, dreams, wants,
or desires? The implications of such a conflict can have a profound effect on our trading. As we
have already learned, beliefs create distinctions in how the external environment can express itself.
Distinctions, by definition, are boundaries.
Human consciousness, on the other hand, seems to be larger than the sum total of everything we
have learned to believe. This "larger than" quality of human consciousness gives us the ability to
think in any direction we choose, either inside or outside of the boundaries imposed by our beliefs.
Thinking outside of the boundaries of our beliefs is commonly referred to as creative thinking.
When we purposely choose to question a belief (question what we know), and sincerely desire an
answer, we make our minds available to receive a "brilliant idea," "inspiration," or "solution" to the
issue at hand. Creativity, bv definition, brings forth something- that didn't we will (by definition,
automatically) receive ideas or thoughts that are outside of anything that already exists in our
rational mind as a belief or memory.
As far as I know, there is no consensus among artists, inventors, or the religious or scientific
communities as to exactly where creatively generated information comes from. However, what I do
know is that creativity seems to be limitless and without boundaries. If there are any limits on the
ways we can think, we certainly haven't found them yet. Consider the staggering pace at which
technology has developed in the last 50 years alone. Every invention or development in the
evolution of humanity was born in the minds of people who were willing to think outside the
boundaries dictated by what they had learned to believe. If all of us have the inherent ability to think
creatively (and I believe that we do), then we also have the potential to encounter what I call a
"creative experience." I define a creative experience as the experience of anything new or outside
the boundaries imposed by our beliefs. It could be a new sight—something we've never seen before,
but from the environment's perspective was always there.
Or we could experience a new sound, smell, taste, or touch. Creative experiences, like creative
thoughts, inspirations, hunches, and brilliant ideas, can occur as a surprise or can be the result of our
conscious direction. In either case, when we experience them we can be confronted with a major
psychological dilemma. A creative occurrence, whether in the form of a thought or an experience,
can cause us to be attracted to or desire something that is in direct conflict with one or more of our
beliefs. To illustrate the point, let's return to the example of the boy and dog. Recall that the boy has
had several painful experiences with dogs. The first experience was real from the environment's
perspective. The others, however, were the result of how his mind processed information (based on
the operation of the association and painavoidance mechanisms). The end result is that he
experiences fear every time he encounters a dog. Let's suppose that the boy was a toddler when he
