
Tests 4 through 6: RSI Overbought/Oversold Models. The model was tested
with entry at the open (Test 4) on a limit (Test 5), and on a stop (Test 6). The
RSI was computed as suggested by its originator, Larry Williams. The length
was stepped from 5 to 2.5 in increments of 1. Across all tests, 25 was the best
value for this parameter in-sample. The traditional thresholds were used: 30
(lower) and 70 (upper). The model performed more poorly than the Stochastic
overbought/oversold one. The percentage of winning trades was extremely low,
ranging from 26% to 37%, depending on sample and test. The average loss per
trade reached over $7,000. Net profits were better than for the Stochastic
because there were fewer trades; even though the loss per trade was greater, the
total loss was smaller. This model did not capture any market inefficiency. The
limit order was best, while the stop and open were about equal. Significantly
more markets showed positive returns, especially in Test 5 when the limit was
used: Profits occurred in-sample for Bonds, COMEX Gold, Silver, Platinum,
Feeder Cattle, Oats, and Coffee; out-of-sample, Gold, Silver, Platinum, Feeder
Cattle, and Oats still traded profitably. Also profitable out-of-sample were the
NYFE, British Pound, Heating Oil, Corn, Sugar, Orange Juice, and Lumber.
Tests of Signal Line Models
These are essentially moving average crossover models, except that an oscillator
is substituted for prices when searching for crossovers. In this case, the moving
average is called the signal line. A short entry is signalled when the oscillator
crosses from above to below the signal line; when the oscillator does the reverse,
a long entry is generated. Since oscillators show less lag than moving averages and
less noise than raw prices, perhaps more timely and reliable signals can be generated. In Tests 7 through 12, the Stochastic and MACD are considered. The Slow
%K usually exhibits strong cyclic behavior, appropriate for use with a signal line
entry. The MACD is traditionally plotted with the signal line, even if crossovers
are not a traditional entry criteria.
Tests 7 through 9: Stochastic Signal Line Models. The model was tested with
entry at the open, on a limit, and on a stop (Tests 7 through 9, respectively).
Lane’s original Slow %K Stochastic was used because, in preliminary testing,
Fast %K produced an incredible excess of trades, resulting from very high noise
levels and the indicator pegging near its extremes. The signal line consisted of a
3-bar simple moving average of Slow %K. The length of the Stochastic was
stepped from 5 to 25, in increments of 1. The best values for this parameter insample were 15, 14, and 11 (Tests 7 through 9). Overall, these models lost heavily on a per trade basis. Due to the large number of trades, the losses were
astronomical. The limit order was best, showing the least loss per trade and the
highest percent of winning trades across samples. Entry at the open was worst.

This model likes stops, perhaps because they act as trend filters: After countertrend activity is detected (triggering an entry signal), before entry can occur,
the market must demonstrate reversal by moving in the direction of the trade.
Stops also performed better in countertrend moving average models, Only two
markets had positive returns in-sample, but not out-of-sample. Out-of-sample, the
stop produced a few small profits; Coffee made more than $2,000 per trade.
Tests 10 through 12: MACD Signal Line Models. Entry at the open (Test lo), on
a limit (Test ll), and on a stop (Test 12) were examined. The classic MACD,
employing exponential moving averages, was used. The shorter moving average was
stepped from a length of 3 to a length of 15 in increments of 2; the longer moving
average was stepped from lengths of 10 through 40 in increments of 5. The moving
average serving as the signal line had a fixed traditional period of 9. This was the
best performing oscillator model thus far. In-sample, the limit order was best and
entry at open was worst. Out-of-sample, the stop was best and the limit order worst.
Out-of-sample, the stop produced the highest percentage of wins (40%) seen so far,
and the smallest loss per trade. In-sample, only Lumber was substantially profitable
with a limit. Live Hogs, Pork Bellies, Coffee, and Sugar were profitable in-sample
with a stop. Lumber, Live Hogs, Pork Bellies, and Coffee held up out-of-sample.
Many markets unprofitable in-sample, were profitable out-of-sample. The highest
number of markets traded profitably with a stop.

TESTS OF DIVERGENCE MODELS
Tests 13 through 21 examine divergences with the Stochastic oscillator, the RSI,
and the MACD. Divergence is a concept used by technical traders to describe
something easily perceived on a chart but hard to precisely define and detect algorithmically. Figure 7-l shows examples of divergence. Divergence occurs when,
e.g., the market forms a lower valley, while the oscillator forms a higher valley of
a pair of valleys, indicating a buy condition; selling is the converse. Because wave
forms may be irregular, quantifying divergence is tricky. Although our detection
algorithm is elementary and imperfect, when examining charts it appears to work
well enough to objectively evaluate the usefulness of divergence.
Only buy signals will be discussed; the sells are the exact opposite. The algorithm’s logic is as follows: Over a look-back (in the code, len3), the lowest bar in
the price series and the lowest bar produced by the oscillator are located. Several
conditions are then checked. First, the lowest bar of the price series must have
occurred at least one bar ago (there has to be a definable valley), but within the
past six bars (this valley should be close to the current bar). The lowest bar in the
price series has to occur at least four bars after the lowest bar in the look-back period for the oscillator line (the deepest valley produced by the oscillator must occur
before the deepest valley produced by the price). Another condition is that the lowest bar produced by the oscillator line is not the first bar in the look-back period

(again, there has to be a definable bottom). Finally, the oscillator must have just
turned upward (defining the second valley as the signal about to be issued). If all
conditions are met, there is ostensibly a divergence and a buy is posted. If a buy
has not been posted, a similar set of conditions looks for peaks (instead of valleys);
the conditions are adjusted and a sell is posted if the market formed a higher high,
while the oscillator formed a lower high. This logic does a reasonable job of
detecting divergences seen on charts. Other than the entry orders, the only difference between Tests 13 through 21 is the oscillator being analyzed (in relation to
prices) for the presence of divergence.
Tests 13 through 15: Stochastic Divergence Mode&. Fast %K was used with the
standard entries. Optimization involved stepping the Stochastic length from 5 to 25
in increments of 1 and the divergence look-back from 15 to 25 by 5. The best parameters were length and look-back, respectively, 20 and 15 for open, 24 and 15 for
limit, 25 and 15 for stop. This model was among the worst for all orders and in both
samples. In-sample, the limit was marginally best; out-of-sample, the stop. In-Sample, across all orders, Unleaded Gasoline, Soybeans, and Soybean Meal were profitable; Gold and Pork Bellies were moderately profitable with a limit. Unleaded
Gasoline held up out-of-sample across all orders. Soybeans were profitable out-ofsample for the open and stop. More markets were profitable out-of-sample than insample, with the stop yielding the most markets with profits. The pattern of more
profitable trading out-of-sample than in-sample is prima facie evidence that optimization played no role in the outcome; instead, in recent years, some markets have
become more tradeable using such models. This may be due to fewer trends and
increased choppiness in many markets.
Tests 16 through 18: RSI Divergence Models. Optimization stepped the RSI period
from 5 to 25 in increments of 1, and the divergence look-back from 15 to 25 by 5.
Overall, the results were poor. h-sample, the stop was lest bad, with the limit close
behind. Out-of-sample, the stop was also best, closely followed by the open. Given that
the RSI has been one of the indicators traditionally favored by traders using divergence, its poor showing in these tests is noteworthy. Heating Oil was profitable for all
orders, Unleaded Gasoline WZY significantly profitable for the open and stop, Light
Crude for the limit and stop. In-sample, Soybeans traded very profitably across orders;
Orange Juice, Corn, Soybean Oil, and Pork Bellies traded well with the stop. Out-ofsample, the oils were not consistently profitable, while Soybeans remained profitable
across orders; Orange Juice and Soybean Oil still traded profitably with the stop.
Tests 19 through 21: MACD Divergence Mode&. The length of the shorter
moving average was stepped from 3 to 15 in increments of 2; the length of the
longer moving average from 10 to 40 by 5; and the divergence look-back from 15
to 25, also by 5. Only parameter sets where the longer moving average was actaally longer than the shorter one were examined.

PART II The Study of Enwics

Finally, models that appear to work, producing positive returns in both samples! With entry at open, trades were profitable across samples. In-sample, the

average trade made $1,393; 45% of the trades were winners; and there was only
an 8.7% (uncorrected; 99.9% corrected) probability that the results were due to
chance; both longs and shorts were profitable. Despite poor statistical significance
in-sample, there was profitability out-of-sample: The model pulled $140 per trade
(after commissions and slippage), with 38% winning trades; only shorts were
profitable.
The limit performed slightly worse in-sample, but much better out-of-sample. Figure 7-2 depicts the equity curve for entry on a limit. In-sample, the average profit per trade was $1,250 with 47% winning trades (the highest so far); longs
and shorts were profitable; and the probability was 13.1% (uncorrected; 99.9%
corrected) that the results were due to chance. Out-of-sample, the model made
$985 per trade; won 44% of the time: was profitable in long and short positions;
and was only 27.7% likely due to chance.
It-sample, the stop had the greatest dollars-per-trade return, but the smallest
number of trades; only the shorts were profitable. Out-of-sample, the system lost
$589 per trade; only short positions were profitable. Regardless of the order used,
this model had relatively few trades.
The market-by-market analysis (see Tables 7-1 and 7-2) confirms the potential of these models to make money. The largest number of markets were profitable
in-sample. Across samples, all three orders yielded profits for Light Crude and
Coffee; many other markets had profitability that held up for two of the orders, but
not for the third, e.g., Heating Oil, Live Cattle, Soybeans, Soybean Meal, and
Lumber.
SUMMARY

ANALYSES

Table 7-3 provides the results broken down by the model, order, and sample. The
last two colunms on the right, and the last two rows on the bottom, are averages.
The numbers at the right are averaged over order type. The numbers at the bottom
have been averaged over all models.
The best results across samples were for the MACD divergence model. The
limit produced the best combined results in both samples: a 12.5% return (annualized) and $1,250 per trade in-sample, and a 19.5% return (annualized) and $985
per trade out-of-sample. This model is dramatically different from all others.
When considered across all order types and averaged, the overbought/oversold models using the RSI were worst (especially in terms of dollars-per-trade).
Also among the worst were the Stochastic divergence, Stochastic overboughtioversold, and RSI divergence models.
When all models were averaged and broken down by order type, the limit
order was best and the entry at open worst.

F I G U R E

7 - 2

.~-

Equity for MACD Divergence Model with Entry on a Limit

CONCLUSION
With breakouts and moving averages, a limit usually was the best overall performer,
perhaps because it minimizes transaction costs; a stop sometimes improved performance, depending on its interaction with the entry model. For some oscillator
entries, including the profitable MACD divergence, a limit was again best. Other
oscillator models preferred the stop, perhaps due to its trend filtering quality.
There was an interaction between specific oscillators and models. The divergence model, for example, worked well with the MACD, but terribly with the RSI.
Such results demonstrate that, when studying a model with an indicator component that may be varied without altering the model’s essence, it is important to test
all model-indicator combinations as certain ones may perform dramatically better.
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
n

In general, for best results, use a limit order. However, test a stop as it
sometimes works better.

Performance of
and Sample

Oscillator Models Broken Down by Model, Order,

. When testing a model that can be used with multiple indicators, try several to see whether any yield distinct improvements.
n Attempt to algorithmically implement concepts normally employed in a
highly variable and subjective manner. Sometimes this can be exceptionally difficult, requiring fuzzy logic or neural network technology, along
with other specialized methods.

C H A P T E R

8

Seasonality

I magmc that tomorrow is June 7, 1997. You need to decide whether or not to
trade. If you do trade, you will enter at the open and exit at the close. You also need
to decide how to enter the market: Should you go long or short? As part of the
decision process, you examine the behavior of the market on all June 7s that
occurred within a look-back window of some number of years (e.g., 10). You tabulate the number of June 7s on which trading occurred, the average open-to-close
change in price, and the percentage of time the market rallied or collapsed.
Perhaps, in the past 10 years, there were eight instances when the market was open
and June 7 was a trading day: of those instances. perhaps the market closed higher than it opened six times (75%) and the average change in price was 2.50 (a reasonable figure for the S&P 500). On the basis of this information, you place a
trading order to enter long tomorrow at the open and to exit at the close. Tomorrow
evening you repeat the procedure for June 8, the evening after that for June 9, and
so on. This is one form of seasonal trading. Will you make a profit trading this
way? Will your trading at least be better than chance? These are the questions that
arise when discussing seasonal trading and that this chapter attempts to answer.
WHAT

IS

SEASONALITY?

The term seasondity is used in many different ways by traders. Some construe
seasonality as events that are strictly related the four seasons, e.g., the increased
demand for heating oil in the winter or gasoline in the summer. Others have a more
liberal interpretation that includes weather patterns and election cycles.
Over the years, a number of articles in academic journals have demonstrated
that stocks show larger returns around the first of each month. There has been some

discussion of the so-called January Effect, in which stocks tend to rise in January.
Hannula (1991) used seasonal cycles in his own trading, providing as an example
a chart for EXABYTE stock with strong seasonal patterns marked. He also discussed another phenomenon, sometimes observed with seasonal patterns, in which
the highs and lows occasionally invert, a pattern that we also have witnessed and
that may be worth exploring. Other factors that influence various markets have definite dates of occurrence and so should induce seasonal effects; e.g., the dates for
filing taxes occur at the same time every year. The legendary trader, Gann, apparently made heavy use of recurrent yearly behavior in his trading. Bernstein’s (1995)
home-study course on seasonality suggests trading off significant tops and bottoms,
and when there has been consistent movement in a tradable over a number of years;
this approach, as well as Hannula’s, may tend to involve trades lasting several
weeks to several months.
In 1990, we first published the Calendar Effects Chart, a set of tables and a
chart that show date-specific behavior in the S&P 500 cash index. The chart illustrates a general up-trend from January through September, and then an up and
down decline until October 24. The market then, on average, bottoms, after which
time it steeply rises until the end of the year. On a more detailed level, rapid gains
seem to occur throughout most of January, the first half of April, and the first half
of June. A peak can be seen on October 8, and a very steep decline that leads to a
bottom on October 24. When the tables and chart for this publication were generated, extreme movements were clipped at +2 percent to prevent them from having
undue influence on the results. Consequently, the steep decline in October, and the
other patterns mentioned, cannot be attributed to events in specific years, for
instance, the crash in 1987. For some dates, there were incredibly consistent patterns; e.g., if an entry occurred on the close of April 14 and the trade was exited
one day later, over 90% of the time a small profit would have been made. Entry on
May 6, with exit one day later, resulted in a profit 100% of the time, as did entry
on July 13. The market declined 90% of the time from October 18 to 19, and 89%
of the time from October 16 to 17. Although the crash may have involved a much
greater than normal amount of movement, the presence of a decline at the time
when the crash occurred was not at all unexpected. In an attempt to capture highprobability, short-term movements, the Calendar Effects Chart could have been
used to enter trades that last one or two days. For example, such a methodology
would have caused a trader to go short at the close on October 16 and exit on
October 19, thus capturing the crash. The data contained in this publication could
also have been used to help maintain positions during periods of steep ascent or
decline.
There have been other studies indicating the presence of strong seasonal effects
in the market that can be exploited for profitable trading. An investigation we conducted (Katz and McCormick, April 1997) found that short-term seasonal behavior
could be used to trade the S&P 500: The system used fairly fast moving average

crossovers that were computed on seasonally anticipated prices. Because the anticipated prices could be computed at least one year ahead, lag in the moving average
crossover was easily compensated for with a displacement that enabled the system
to take trades at crossovers occurring several days after the fact. The trades taken by
the system typically lasted between 7 and 8 days, a fairly short-term seasonal trading model. The system was profitable: It pulled an astonishing $329,900 from the
S&P 500 between January 3.1986, and November 8, 1996. The test did not include
transaction costs, but even with $15 round-turn commissions and $75 per trade slippage, a profit of $298,310 (about a 10% reduction) resulted. The return on account
was 732%, not annualized; assuming fixed contract trading, this amounted to over
70% per year, annualized, on a constant one-contract, no-reinvestment basis. There
were 351 trades taken, of which 60% were winners. Both the longs and shorts were
profitable. The average trade pulled $939 from the market-not bad for a simple,
seasonality-based trading model, Findings like these suggest there are strong seasonal patterns in the markets producing inefficiencies that can be exploited by
traders, and that are worthy of investigation.
For our current purposes, seasonaliry is defined as cyclic or recurrent phenomena that are consistently linked to the calendar. The term is being used in a
broad sense to mean market behavior related to the time of the year or to particular
dates, including anniversaries of critical events (e.g., the October 16, 1987, crash).
In short, seasonality is being construed as calendar-related cyclic phenomena. It
should be made clear, however, that while all seasonality is cyclic, not all cycles are
seasonal.
GENERATING SEASONAL ENTRIES
There are many ways to time entries using seasonal rhythms. Two basic approaches
will be examined: momentum and crossover. To calculate momentum, a series of
price changes is computed and centered smoothing (a smoothing that induces no
delays or phase shifts, in this case, a centered triangular moving average) is applied.
Each price change (or difference) in the series of price changes is then normalized:
It is divided by the 50.day average true range. For every bar, the date is determined.
Instances of the same date are then found in the past (or perhaps future). For each
such instance, the momentum is examined. The average of the momentums becomes
the value placed in the seasonal momentum series for the current bar. The seasonal
momentum series measures the expected rate of change (or momentum) in prices at
a given time. It is based on the historical movement of prices on the specified date
in different years. The number in the seasonal momentum series for the current bar
is determined only by events about 1 year or more ago. This is why it is possible to
use the centered moving average and other techniques that look ahead in time, relative to the bar bei~ng considered. Entries are taken as follows: When the seasonal
momentum crosses above some positive threshold, a buy is posted. When the

156

momentum crosses below some negative threshold, a sell is posted. Buying or selling can happen on any of the standard three orders: at open, on limit, or on stop.
Entries may also be generated by computing the price differences, normalizing
them, applying an integration or summing procedure to the series (to obtain a kind
of pseudo-price series, based on previous instances of each date), and then applying
a moving average crossover model to the series. Because the value at any bar in the
series is determined only by bars that are about 1 year old or older, the delay in the
crossovers can be compensated for by simply looking ahead a small number of bars.
Both of the methods described above arc somewhat adaprive in nature; i.e.,
they do not require specific information about which dates a buy or sell order
should be placed. The adaptive quality of the aforementioned methods is important since different markets respond to seasonal influences in different ways, a fact
that logic, as well as our earlier research, supports.
In the current study, several rules for handling confirmations and inversions
are also tested to determine whether better results can be obtained over the basic
models. Confirmarion means additional data is available that supports the signals
produced by the model. For example, suppose a model generated a buy signal
for a given bar. If everything is behaving as it should, the market should be forming a bottom around the time of the buy. If, however, the market is forming a top,
the buy signal might be suspect, in that the market may not be adhering to its typical seasonal timing. When such apparently contradictory circumstances exist, it
would be helpful to have additional criteria to use in deciding whether to act upon
the signal, in determining if it is correct. The crossover-with-con~rmation model
implements the crossover model with an additional rule that must be satisfied
before the signal to buy or sell can be acted upon: If a buy signal is issued, the
Slow %K on the signal bar must be less than 25%, meaning the market is at or near
the bottom of its recent range. If a sell signal is issued, Slow %K must be greater
than 75%, indicating that the market is at or near the top of its range, as would be
expected if following its characteristic seasonal behavior. The conjinnation-undinversion model adds yet another element: If a buy signal is issued by the basic
model, and the market is near the top of its range (Slow %K greater than 75%),
then it is assumed that an inversion has occurred and, instead of issuing a buy signal, a sell signal is posted. If a sell signal is generated, but the market is near the
bottom of its range (Slow %K less than 25%), a buy signal is issued.
CHARACTERISTICS OF SEASONAL ENTRIES
