
PERCEIVING OPPORTUNITY
Your perception of opportunity is a function of the depth of insight into the
market's behavior. The depth of your insight into the market's behavior is
equivalent to the number of distinctions you can make and the quality of these
distinctions. Perception of opportunity is synonymous with your expectation of
what the market will do next. To be effective, you will need to learn how to make
kinds of distinctions that will provide you with an indication of a high-probability
opportunity from an objective perspective, what I call making an uncommitted
assessment of the probabilities.
To be able to make some kind of quality distinctions that will eventually
develop into a "vision" of the broader perspective, you will need to learn
64

how to expand your time frame perspective of market activity. There are
several components to this process, but the two most important are (1)
instituting a completely disciplined trading approach and (2} learning how
to release yourself from the negative emotional energy stored in the
memories of any past trading experiences.
The disciplined approach will naturally help you develop the degree of
self-trust essential to function effectively in an environment that does not
provide any external constraints to limit or control your behavior, as
society does. Without the discipline, you will be at the mercy of your own
unrestrained impulses and basically out of control. Consequently, without
the self-trust that develops from the self-discipline, you will fear the
unpredictability of your own behavior. At the same time, you will likely
project this fear into the markets as being erratic and seemingly
unpredictable, when it is your own behavior you fear the most.
It would be ludicrous to think that you could understand the market's
behavior to any degree greater than you understand your own behavior
first. To grasp the fundamental nature of your own behavior, you will need
to understand thoroughly all the effects fear has on your perception of
environmental information.
At the most fundamental level, fear will limit your awareness of market
information that could clearly indicate those possibilities that are in your
favor and those that are not. How could any deep level of insight into the
market's behavior ever develop if you are constantly worried about what the
market may do to you and cannot stay focused on the consistency and
structure of the market itself. The market can't do anything to you if you
trust yourself to act appropriately under any market condition. Learning this
is the key to gaining the level of confidence every trader needs to be
successful.
In the larger perspective, fear will reduce the likelihood of you ever
developing to the point of making the kinds of distinctions in market
behavior where you acquire a "vision" of the big picture. When you
understand how fear operates in your trading and have conquered it, you
will be able to see how fear operates in the market as a whole and then be
able to anticipate the group's reaction to certain kinds of information.
If you did not start your trading career with the proper mental
perspective or with a disciplined approach, then it is likely you have suffered
some degree of psychological damage. I define psychological damage as any
mental condition that has the potential of generating fear. The negative
energy stored in these experiences (that create and support a belief about
the threatening nature of the environment) will generate fear to the same
extent as the degree of energy stored in the memory.
By learning to release yourself from the pain, you will be reducing the fear
and automatically opening yourself up to new awarenesses about the nature
of the markets. You will be opening yourself up because fear will not be
causing you to narrow your focus of attention. Instead of being focused on
65

pain avoidance, you can be focused on what the markets are telling you.
Learning how to release yourself from fear will also free you up to think of
creative ways in which you can respond to the new relationships you are
perceiving in the market's behavior. As a result, you will be increasing
your confidence in your ability to respond appropriately to any given
market situation.

EXECUTING YOUR TRADES
Your ability to execute your trades is a function of the amount of fear you
generate or the lack of it. Fear is always the result of your beliefs about the
threatening nature of the environment. What could be threatening about
the market? Nothing, if you had the confidence and completely trusted
yourself to act appropriately under any given set of market conditions.
Essentially, what you fear is not the markets but rather your inability to do
what you need to do, when you need to do it, without hesitation.
In your relationship with the markets you had to learn what to fear.
What you learned to fear was a result of whatever you did that caused pain.
Your pain was the result of your not knowing what to do next that resulted
in an outcome you neither expected nor intended. In the market
environment you are free to act or not to act; the markets cannot do
anything to you that you don't allow, even if it is out of ignorance or a
complete sense of powerlessness.
The effects of fear on one's behavior are obvious, limiting one to the
point of complete immobility. If you can't execute your trades properly,
even when you perceive the most perfect opportunity, it is because you have
not released yourself from the pain contained in the memories of past
trading experiences and because you still don't trust yourself to act
appropriately in any given set of conditions. If you did, there would be no
fear or immobility.
ACCUMULATING PROFITS
Your ability to accumulate profits either in a single trade or cumulatively
with several trades over a period of time is a function of your degree of selfvaluation. This sense of self-valuation is, in fact, the most important
psychological component of success and will override all others in
determining your results.
Your degree of self-valuation will regulate how much money you will
give yourself (the market doesn't give you the money, you give it to yourself
based on your ability to perceive opportunity and execute a trade) out of the
maximum potential available or perceivable at any given moment or time
frame perspective. Regardless of the depth of understanding you have of
66

market behavior or what you consciously intend, you will only "give"
yourself the amount of money that corresponds to your level of selfvaluation.
This concept can be explained with a simple illustration. If you perceive
an opportunity, based on your definition or what market conditions
constitute an opportunity, and do not follow through by executing a trade,
what stopped you? In my mind, there can be only two possible reasons. You
were either immobilized by the fear of failure or you are struggling with a
belief (value) system that says you don't deserve the money. Otherwise, you
would have acted on your perception.
SELF-ACCEPTANCE
The second theme that provides a foundation for the belief system I am
offering is that personal transformation, growth, and learning new skills are
a function of self-acceptance. Your intent of learning a new skill or way of
expressing yourself is in essence an attempt to create a new dimension of
yourself. It is a goal you have projected out into the future that you will then
attempt to fulfill by growing into it.
The market will quite naturally make you face what is inside of you on a
moment-to-moment basis. What is inside of you could be confidence or fear, a
perception of opportunity or loss, restraint or uncontrollable greed, objectivity or
illusion. The market just reflects these mental conditions, it does not create them.
Therefore, to grow into a new expression of yourself (fulfill your goal of being
a more successful trader), you will need to learn how to accept the existence of any
of these negative mental conditions and the psychological components that create
them. Cultivating a belief in accepting whatever you find inside of yourself will
give you the base you need to work from to change these conditions.
To illustrate this concept of self-acceptance, I will relate to you an example of a
floor trader who came to me for assistance because he wanted to change his
trading style. When he first went down to the floor he got caught up in scalping
because it seemed like the easiest way to make money. However, he soon found
that trying to scalp for one or two ticks in the bond pit was just too physically
exhausting because he had to compete with so many traders. So he decided that he
needed to learn how to hang on to his trades for more than one or two ticks.
The first thing we did was to preplan his trades. We used some fairly simple
techniques to identify intraday support and resistance points within a 7- to 10tick range. The plan was for him to stand in the pit and wait for the price to hit
his target (buy support or sell resistance), execute the trade, wait for the market to
hit his objective, and then exit the trade. If the market traded through his entry
point in the opposite direction by more than two or three ticks, he was supposed
to execute the loss without hesitation. Based on our assessment of the reliability
of the support and resistance numbers, we believed he didn't need to risk more
than two or three ticks to know if the trade was going to work or not.
The first day that he tried to execute his plan, he did very well waiting for the
67

market to hit his entry point. However, when it came time to execute the trade, he
couldn't do it. He was supposed to buy at a support level, and he didn’t do it
because he thought it was going to keep on going lower. When the market
didn't keep on going lower and bounced two and three ticks higher than
what was his original entry point, he went ahead and bought one contract.
From there he was supposed to wait until the market rotated back up to test
the resistance which was 10 ticks higher than his originally intended entry
point, but now it was only seven ticks away.
Instead of waiting for the market to rotate to his objective, he got out of
the trade as soon as he had a two-tick profit. A short time Later when the
market rotated up to the resistance area, he did the same thing that he did in
the first trade. He didn't get in at his price because he thought the market
was going to keep on going; it didn't, and he sold three ticks lower than he
originally intended and then got out for a one-tick profit, not waiting for a
full rotation.
When we talked about what he did later on that day, he was extremely
displeased with himself. He made himself accountable, but he did not do
what he was supposed to. He didn't get in at the price he intended or out
where he intended, "leaving several ticks on the table," so to speak. This is
a very wealthy man who only had to risk two or three ticks at the most to
find out if the trade was going to work and couldn't do it. By the same
token, he was so desperate for a win that he couldn't wait for his profit
objective, stating that he couldn't hang on because he has been burned too
many times.
Obviously his backlog of negative experiences had nothing to do with the
market's behavior or the probability of any particular strategy working or
not. What was even more important, however, was his lack of acceptance
for his current level of skill development. His intense anger over his
performance clearly indicated that he could not accept where he was at or
the results it produced. That first day was not a positive experience for him,
even though he had his first winning day in a long time. His lack of selfacceptance certainly won't help him hang on to winning trades in the future;
in fact, he will be digging himself into a deeper hole that he will eventually
have to work his way out of if he wants to achieve the success he desires.
As time went by, he became increasingly more confident with his ability
to define an opportunity with a high probability of success. Almost every
trade he put on would immediately go in his favor, so he would rarely find
himself in a losing trade. But each day was also becoming ever more
exasperating because he was still only holding on for a one- or two-tick
profit and leaving several ticks on the table as the market rotated to test the
next level of support or resistance.
What was even more difficult for him to deal with was that many times
he had bought the low or sold the high of the day. Of course, he didn't know
at the time it was going to be the high or low of the day, but looking back,
he just couldn't deal with the fact that he only got one or two ticks out of it.
68

I knew the pressure was building inside of him because each day he had
more excuses related to the market for why he wasn't doing what he was
supposed to and had less and less tolerance to listen to anything I had to say
about the situation. All these excuses were just an indication that he would
not accept who he was in relationship to who he desperately wanted to
believe that he already was. He was obviously indulging himself in illusion.
To be the person he wanted to believe he already was would require that he
learn how to be patient, acknowledge who he now was so he could
concentrate on what he needs to learn and forgive himself for what he
believed to be his past mistakes and inadequacies.
However, this would be very difficult because being impatient with
other people had always got him what he wanted as long as he was dealing
with people who perceived themselves as weaker than he. So why should
he have to learn how to be patient now? Besides if he was patient with
himself, it would make it difficult to justify his impatient, intolerant stance
toward others who didn't "learn" fast enough or made "mistakes."
I didn't hear from him for a while and I just assumed that he wasn't
doing anything different. Then one day after the close he called to tell me
that he was going to start trading a 20-contract position. Otherwise nothing
else about what he was doing had changed, except that he had several
winning days in a row consisting of one- and two-tick winners.
I knew he was setting himself up for a big losing day, although I didn't
indicate this to him in our conversation. In his mental system he was
reasoning that by trading a larger contract size he would make enough
money to prove to himself and everyone else that he had finally arrived,
that he was a successful trader and that he was not a person subject to
deep-rooted fears. Not being one to stand in the way of "progress," all I
said was that I didn't think it was very prudent for him to be trading a 20contract position, since he hadn't developed the psychological or
mechanical skills to handle a position of that size. He grunted and hung up
the phone.
The next day he lost almost $3,000.00 trading 20-contract positions. He
gave back to the markets all his profits, plus more, from all his successful
efforts over the last two and a half weeks of trading. At that point he was
ready to listen to a plan on how he could learn how to be more accepting of
himself and how to hang on to his winning trades.
The following is another example of a trader who has learned selfacceptance. This trader works for a local brokerage firm, manages hedge
positions for financial institutions, and also trades for his own account. I
started working with him on a fairly regular basis about three years before
the experience I am about to relate.
He called me one day to tell me how proud he was of reversing his
position on his last trade of the day. He said he cut his losses without
hesitation and reversed his position from being short to going long. He was
delighted that he felt no conflict, resistance, or mental anguish. He
69

recognized what needed to be done and he did it. However, shortly after
he did his reversal, one of the floor traders, who worked for the same firm
filling customer orders, called him from the floor with some friendly
advice that he should get out of his long position.
Now, my client had resolved long ago that he would not place any
significance on another trader's perception of the market. He had excellent
knowledge of the markets and believed he could trust his ability
completely to define opportunity and make assessments of the potential
for the market to move. At least he thought he believed he trusted himself.
After he got the phone call, he knowingly allowed himself to be influenced
by what this floor trader had to say and exited his position. Within 10
minutes of doing so the market (bond) rallied 15 ticks, just about what my
client originally thought it had the potential to do when he put the position
on.
He left 15 ticks on the table because he let another trader influence his
perception of the market. However, he did not view this experience as a
missed opportunity. He viewed it as an example of how he hadn't, as of yet,
completely released himself from other people's opinions of the market.
He didn't miss an opportunity because given the environmental conditions
he was working under (someone calling him was an environmental
condition he had no control over other than not to place any significance on
the information); he simply was not psychologically prepared to take
advantage of the opportunity. If he had been psychologically prepared, he
would have stayed with his original plan, realizing that someone else's
perception of the market isn't going to be any more objective than his.
Furthermore, considering the skills he had already developed, their
objectivity would usually be a lot less.
As you cultivate a stronger belief in self-acceptance, you will then realize
how the market reflects back to you your level of skill development along
with the information that will indicate what you need to work on to become
ever more successful. Each moment will then become a perfect indication
of your skills and your degree of self-valuation, giving you a solid base
from which to improve and learn.
You will eventually understand at a very practical level how you are
always doing the best you can because your outcomes will be the result of
your depth of insight into the nature of the market environment and your
ability to act on whatever you perceive.
There won't be any reason not to accept these results as you increase
your understanding of how to adapt yourself to suit any particular set of
environmental conditions and realize the power inherent within this
understanding. If you were to deny this perfection of the moment (a lack of
self-acceptance), you would, in effect, be denying yourself the kind of
information you need to grow into the skills you are attempting to learn.
You can't grow or expand if you are denying the existence of
environmental information that would clearly indicate your level of
70

development. Nor can you acquire effective skills when you try to build
from a base of illusion about the nature of the environment and yourself. If
you won't acknowledge your true starting point, you cannot take the next
most appropriate step in the development of any skill you intend to learn.
The most essential component in the process of transformation is learning
how to recognize and then clear out beliefs that argue for the status quo,
beliefs that defend against the intrusion of environmental information you
refuse to consider, and learning how to read the environment in a way that
will clearly point to the most appropriate path to fulfilling yourself.

71

PART III

Building a Framework
for Understanding
Ourselves

72

At the start of this book, I said it would be a step-by-step guide in the
process of adapting yourself to the trading environment. The first step in
this process of adaptation is recognizing the need to adapt. If you can't
manipulate or force the markets to change in a way that suits your needs,
then you will need to learn how to change yourself to suit the conditions.
The market places no limits or constraints on the ways in which you choose
to express yourself, in that respect; unlike in the cultural environment, you
have all the power. The primary purpose of Part II, The Nature of the
Trading Environment from a Psychological Perspective, was to point out
some of the vast differences between the trading environment and the
social environment we were taught to function in and to demonstrate
clearly a need for a new perspective.
The next two steps in this process are to learn how to (1) identify exactly
what changes you need to make to function successfully in the trading
environment and (2) how to effect any mental changes that are necessary.
Manipulating the physical environment is as easy as moving a chair from
one place to another because that's where you want or need to sit. However,
to consciously change yourself to function more effectively in a market
environment that will not respond to your attempts to manipulate it will
require a thorough understanding of the nature and functioning of your
mental environment.
The types of changes you will need to make will fall into two broad
categories. First, you will need to learn some sophisticated mental skills to
adapt yourself more readily to the constant changes with which the market
confronts you—which will require neutralizing some commonly held
cultural beliefs about success. (These are the beliefs that have the potential
to distort market information.) Second, you will likely need to undo any
psychological injury you may have sustained from your previous trading
activity. Any psychological injury diminishes your capacity to execute your
trades properly.
There are obviously a multitude of substeps to learn how to identify what
you need to learn, what you need to change, and how to make those
changes. The six chapters in this part are organized to take you through this
process of adaptation by providing you with the insight you will need to
understand what you have to do and why.
The first thing you will need is a structural framework to make the
things that go on in your mental environment more tangible and concrete.
To give you this framework, I will describe, define, and organize the
component parts of the mental environment into a manageable context to
where you can (1) understand your behavior, (2) learn the various
techniques for manipulating your mental environment at your conscious
direction to be more consistent with the environmental conditions and your
goals, and (3) learn how to monitor your relationship with the exterior
environment.
It is essential that you learn how to monitor your relationship between
73

the interior and exterior environment because our goals, intents,
expectations, needs, and wants are all component parts of our mental
environment that we project out into the physical environment for
fulfillment in some future moment. In other words, they are all
components of the mental environment that either happen or don't happen
in the outside physical world. You need to be able to recognize immediately
(especially as a trader) when you have the potential to distort the outside
information to be consistent with the inner components. These distortions
will inevitably result in pain and psychological injury.
What I intend to demonstrate in the following chapters is even though
you cannot turn your eyes inward to actually see these mental component
parts of the mental environment, it doesn't make them any less real. Besides,
it isn't necessary to turn our eyes inward because we can just as easily learn
to define what is inside of our mental environment by what we see and
experience in the outside physical environment. By making the connection
between what we believe and what we experience, it will be a lot easier to
change what we experience by learning how to manipulate our beliefs.
We will examine the nature of beliefs and how they act as environmental
information management systems. I will demonstrate how our individual
beliefs about the nature of the market, and our expectations of what it will
do next, manage and control the type and quality of information we
perceive about it. By breaking down the dynamics of perception, you will be
able to identify the various ways in which all of us place mental limitations
on the market's behavior and how these limitations cause us to distort
market information.
We will thoroughly explore the nature of fear and how it compels all of
us to act without a perception of choice. The predominate underlying
force behind most traders' actions causing prices to move is fear—the fear
of missing out (competing for the supply) and the fear of loss. If you really
want to understand the market's behavior to anticipate what it will do next,
then you will first have to learn about and understand the underlying forces
beneath your own behavior and how you process and manage information.
When you understand how any number of typical market-related fears
operate in your life and learn to release yourself from them, you will, in
effect, be separating yourself from the "crowd." When you separate
yourself from the "crowd" and expand what you know about the forces
affecting your behavior to encompass the group, it will be much easier to
anticipate what the group will do because they will merely represent a larger
(collective) version of the way you used to be. In other words, you will know
how other traders will behave before they do because you will be able to
observe them from a detached perspective—due to your having evolved
beyond the choiceless state of operating out of fear.
As you gain in your understanding of how beliefs interact with
environmental information to control your perception and form your
experience, along with learning how to distinguish between wishful
74
