
 [January 1962:] If my performance is poor, I expect partners to withdraw.… [January 1963:] It is a certainty that we will have years when … we deserve the tomatoes.… [January 1964:] I believe our margin over the Dow cannot be maintained.… [January 1965:] We do not consider it possible on an extended basis to maintain the 16.6 percentage point advantage over the Dow.… [January 1966:] Those who believe 1965 results can be achieved with any frequency are probably attending weekly meetings of the Halley’s Comet Observers Club. We are going to have loss years and are going to have years inferior to the Dow—no doubt about it.… [July 1966:] Such results should be regarded as decidedly abnormal. 

 That is what he said. But his wings refused to melt. Over the partnership’s second five years, Buffett’s record was off the charts: 

 PARTNERSHIPS 
 DOW 

 1962: 
 +13.9% 
 –7.6% 

 1963: 
 +38.7 
 +20.6 

 1964: 
 +27.8 
 +18.7 

 1965: 
 +47.2 
 +14.2 

 1966: 
 +20.4 
 –15.6 

 And the cumulative record, over ten years: 

 PARTNERSHIP 
 DOW 

 +1,156% 
 +122 .9% 49 

 After deducting for Buffett’s share of the profits, his limited partners’ investment had risen by 704.2%—six times the gain in the Dow. For an original investor, such as the Edwin Davis family, each $100,000 had grown to $804,000. (The Davises, like others, had continued to put in more money along the way.) 
 Buffett Partnership’s total assets, as of the start of 1966, had swelled to $44 million. Buffett, in other words, was running a fair-sized enterprise (though still far smaller than the big mutual funds). And at age thirty-five, he was a very rich man. He wrote to his partners in January 1966, “Susie and I have an investment of $6,849,936, which should keep me from slipping away to the movies in the afternoon.” 50 
 He also got a first taste of the limelight. In May, readers of the Omaha World-Herald awoke to Buffett’s toothy, chipmunkish grin at the top of the second section. Buffett was pictured with an ear to the phone, unstylishly short hair, and a look of unmistakable eagerness. According to the hometown World-Herald: 

 One of the most successful investment businesses in the United States is operated in Omaha by a young man who bought his first stock at age 11. 51 

 A more probing interviewer, reporting on the changes at Berkshire Hathaway for a textile-industry trade paper, zeroed in on Buffett’s seeming contradictions: 

 While his approach is informal, he never gives the impression of being offhand. If his manner is casual, he is obviously a man with his facts well in hand.… Buffett doesn’t dodge questions … but sometimes he’s a trifle oblique. 52 

 The general financial press and the broader business public had not heard a word of him. But to investors such as the Davises, Buffett’s stature was rising to mythological proportions. This one man—this kid-was making them rich . Lee Seemann, Edwin Davis’s son-in-law, who was a salesman for International Harvester, who liked to hunt ducks and go to football games, who had big Lyndon Johnson ears and had no business dreaming of money, was getting rich . He felt he was living in a fairy tale. 53 The investors began to think of themselves as a privileged tribe—as blessed. 
 Buffett invited groups of them to the house once a year. The partners looked forward to these dinners with the oracle. Susie had the place spiffed up, and she would sidle up to each guest in turn and draw him or her out. And Buffett would recount his coups of the past year and spin little stories, stressing how he had gotten himself into a jam or a comical situation, such as how, when he had been trying to save Dempster, he had had to walk a very fine line because the yokels in Beatrice were convinced that he was out to destroy the company, or, going back to Wilson Coin Op, he had had to put on an act for the barbers to keep the pinball mafia from running him out of town. The hero of these cracker-barrel tales seemed to be a sort of middlingly talented but plucky Huck Finn, a modest sort who triumphed almost despite himself. And his guests hung on his words. Leland Olson, an investor, remembered the stories for years. “They would fascinate you. And he didn’t talk down to you,” Olson said. 
 The investors, in fact, were starting to worship Buffett. Roxanne Brandt, wife of the broker Henry, wrote in her daughter’s baby book under “Three greatest minds of the era”: Schweitzer, Einstein, and Warren Buffett. He was the unassuming genius who drank nothing but Pepsi-Cola and could beat the pants off Wall Street year after year. 
 Buffett encouraged it as only a confident and successful man may do, with modesty. The self-deprecating quips, like the humble prognostications of his own decline, merely confirmed his investors’ awe of him. The worship surely delighted him, but it also made him edgy. With each successful vault, the bar of expectations climbed. The brighter his star, the darker was the shadow of a looming burnout. Buffett had been saying all along that it could not go on forever. On Wall Street, nothing does. 

 * He was convicted and sentenced to ten years. In 1992, De Angelis resurfaced—charged with using a fraudulent letter of credit to obtain $1.1 million worth of meat. He was convicted again. 
 † Mark Twain, though a poor investor, had a similar strategy: “Put all your eggs in the one basket and— watch that basket .” 
 ‡ There was one exception. According to Kay Koetter, an insurance agent, some of Buffett’s partners were so concerned about losing their investment if Buffett dropped dead that Buffett bought a policy and named them as the beneficiary.

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

   Chapter 6 GO-GO 

 I am out of step with present conditions . 
 W ARREN B UFFETT , LETTER TO PARTNERS , O CTOBER 1967 

 Graham’s generation had retired, taking its grim Depression memories with it. Wall Street had reawakened to a younger breed, many of whom had not been alive in 1929, and who were bored with their elders’ endless recitations. More important, they had no memory of the heady years before the Crash. For them, speculation bore no curse; the bull market of the sixties was as fresh as first love. Even the stocks that they traded were new—electronics issues, big conglomerates, small growth stocks. These all required a faith, but faith there was aplenty. Stocks were going up . 
 This had hardly bothered Buffett when his fund was small. But as his capital swelled, he grew increasingly antsy. The combination of more cash to invest and fewer bargains had him trapped. He complained of being pressed for ideas and, bit by bit, of a strain. Indeed, his letters of the later sixties read like an inverted chronicle of the age. Wall Street waxed ever more euphoric, Buffett, more doubting. 
 Early in 1966, he took the fateful step of closing the partnership to new accounts. * 

 The only way to make this effective is to apply it across-the-board and I have notified Susie that if we have any more children, it is up to her to find some other partnership for them. 1 

 As Buffett was shutting off the spigot, Wall Street was being deluged. The war in Vietnam was pumping up the stock market to record heights. Young people, it is true, were marching in the streets, but their parents, seeing the war’s expansionary effects, were queuing at brokers. Mutual funds opened by the dozen, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average broke 1,000 for the first time ever. It repeated this death-defying act on three more occasions; alas, it closed beneath the magic number each time. Then, in the spring of 1966, the market went into a steep swoon. (New money is jittery money.) Increasingly, investors were focusing on the shorter term. 
 Some of Buffett’s partners called to “warn” him that the market might go lower still. Such calls, Buffett shot back, raised two questions: 

 (1) if they knew in February that the Dow was going to 865 in May, why didn’t they let me in on it then; and, (2) if they didn’t know what was going to happen during the ensuing three months back in February, how do they know in May? 

 Inevitably, the advice of such partners was to sell until the future was “clear.” For some reason, market commentators suffer a peculiar blind spot. They routinely assume that once the “uncertainty” of the immediate moment is lifted they will have a plain view of the future unto Judgment Day. The fact that they did not foresee the present uncertainty does not deter them from thinking that no new clouds will trouble the future. 

 Let me again suggest [that] the future has never been clear to me (give us a call when the next few months are obvious to you—or, for that matter, the next few hours). 2 

 Buffett avoided trying to forecast the stock market, and most assuredly avoided buying or selling stocks based on people’s opinions of it. Rather, he tried to analyze the long-term business prospects of individual companies. This owed to his bias for logical reasoning. One could “predict” the market trend, as one could predict which way a bird would fly when it left the tree. But that was guesswork—not analysis. If he ever sold stocks “just because some astrologer thinks the quotations may go lower,” he warned, they would all be in trouble. 3 
 The Dow did go lower, into the 700s, but the broader market was frothy. In two cases, just as Buffett had begun to buy what he considered to be hot prospects, competitors snatched the stocks away. (Like most pros, Buffett built a position in a stock gradually, to avoid driving up the price while he was buying.) One of them rose to a price way out of his range; the other was taken over. 4 Nothing made him madder. 
 In such a climate, Buffett’s obsession with secrecy rose to the level of paranoia. His brokers were given to understand that under no circumstance were they to speak of Buffett’s stock picks, even to people in their offices. According to Kay Koetter, an Omaha bridge crony, Buffett even got the idea that his Kiewit Plaza office was being bugged via “telescopic amplification” from the nearby Blackstone Hotel. Buffett hired a security firm to check it out, Koetter added, but found nothing. 
 The real problem was not that people were stealing his stocks, but that he couldn’t find enough that met his standards. In part, Graham’s disciples had become too numerous. Aided by the computer, they were plucking the bargains off the trees. 
 At the start of 1967, Buffett felt compelled to advise his partners that some of the newer mutual funds had better recent returns than his own. Moreover, he warned that his stream of new ideas was down to a “trickle.” Though he was working night and day to keep them coming, his tone was ominous. If his idea flow “should dry up completely, you will be informed honestly and promptly so that we may all take alternative action.” 5 
 It is noteworthy that Buffett was sending off these dire alarums in direct proportion to the giddiness on Wall Street. To money men, these were the Go-Go years. There was a frenzy for electronics stocks, each new issue of which was held to be the next Xerox. Had Wall Street suddenly developed an expertise in electronics? To ask the question was to misunderstand the age. Wall Street believed in electronics. Even a toad such as American Music Guild could become a prince by calling itself Space-Tone Electronics Inc. 
 The buzz for high-tech was followed by a merger wave, propelled by huge conglomerates such as International Telephone & Telegraph, Litton Industries, and Ling-Temco-Vought. The public of that confident time did not mistrust bureaucracy; it conferred on big organizations (as on technology) a mystique of competence. 
 Then, there was a burst of “letter stock”—unregistered shares, often of highly dubious companies, that were marked to absurd valuations. Though each of these fashions had its ebb and flow, as one bubble burst a new fad took its place, so that as the sixties ran their course Wall Street gathered an ever more intoxicating speculative momentum. 
 The archetype of the Go-Go era was the “performance fund,” an acid-rock version of the conventional mutual fund. This new species attempted to outperform the market not over the long term, but over each successive quarter, month, week, and virtually every hour. Performance funds were run by sideburned gunslingers who were bent on making money fast . They switched from stock to stock, moving to the one that was hot, like an actor running from house to house to sustain the applause. The aim, in short, was to catch the momentary swing. Gerald Tsai, manager of the Manhattan Fund, was the first prodigy of the breed; it was said that a whisper of Tsai’s involvement in a stock was sufficient to set off a small stampede. For the gunslinger wanted nothing of Howard Buffett’s sweet independence. He was a contemporary man, young in age and devoid of memory. 

 What manner of young man was he? He came from a prospering middle-income background and often from a good business school; he was under thirty, often well under; he wore boldly striped shirts and broad, flowing ties; he radiated a confidence, a knowingness, that verged on insolence, and he liberally tossed around the newest clichés, “performance,” “concept,” “innovative,” and “synergy”; he talked fast and dealt hard. 6 

 Go-Go reached an epitome with Fred Carr, who drew a blaze of publicity as head of the Enterprise Fund. In 1967, he registered a gain of 116 percent, far outstripping any single year of Buffett’s. 7 Carr invested in tiny, so-called emerging growth companies and heaps of unregistered letter stock. He was lionized in the press as “cool and decisive.” The very model of the new breed, Carr installed a phone in his bathroom in Beverly Hills and sped to work in a Jaguar. His office was decorated with op art. His strategy was simple: “We fall in love with nothing. Every morning everything is for sale—every stock in the portfolio, and my suit and my tie.” 8 
 On paper, Go-Go’s practitioners were getting rich. If the popular stocks were going up, why not simply buy them? The question nagged at Buffett continuously, and he kept a diary of his reactions, as much for his own benefit as for his partners’. “Fashion” investing, he wrote, 

 does not completely satisfy my intellect (or perhaps my prejudices), and most definitely does not fit my temperament. I will not invest my own money based upon such an approach—hence, I will most certainly not do so with your money. 9 

 According to his son Peter, Buffett identified with The Glenn Miller Story , the Hollywood epic in which the band leader searches to find his “sound.” For Buffett, the right sound was a matter not just of making money, but of superior reasoning. Being right on a stock had something of the purity of a perfect move in chess; it had an intellectual resonance. Glenn Miller or Bobby Fischer, Buffett simply refused to go outside his ken. 

 We will not go into businesses where technology which is away [ sic ] over my head is crucial to the investment decision. I know about as much about semiconductors or integrated circuits as I do of the mating habits of the chrzaszez. 10 

 It seemed that the dizzier Go-Go’s success, the greater was Buffett’s urge to apply the brakes. Indeed, he kept a newspaper clipping of the 1929 crash in plain view on his wall, just as a reminder. He had no op art, nor anything else that might have been in vogue in Beverly Hills-just the big maroon Moody’s books lined up on the radiator, and a few pictures. His office might have been that of a moderately successful dentist. The reception area had a hanging Franklinesque aphorism, “A fool and his money are soon invited everywhere,” and an 1880 photograph of Wall Street. There was no sign of activity in the Fred Carr sense. Buffett did not even have a stock ticker. (Tickers give minute-by-minute readings of stock prices. Virtually every professional investor has one, or a computerized equivalent, and checks it throughout the day.) 
 Buffett’s portfolio seemed almost as dated as his newspaper clippings. In 1966 and 1967, the partnership bought a pair of retailers, Hochschild, Kohn & Co., a Baltimore department store, and Associated Cotton Shops, a dress shop chain, for a total of about $15 million. In each case, Buffett bought not liquid shares of stock but the entire business. Among fund managers, this was unheard-of. Buffett had often bought stocks with the intent of holding them for the long term, but he was locked into Hochschild and Associated. He could not pick up the phone and sell them like Fred Carr’s necktie. Moreover, to say that inner-city retailing was out of vogue would be a serious understatement. But both companies were cheap, and Buffett thought he could make a profit as an operator. 
 When he inquired about Associated, he amazed Benjamin Rosner, the sixty-three-year-old owner, with his grasp of retailing. But he understood the business only through the keyhole of finance. When Rosner offered to show him a store, Buffett declined, explaining that he wouldn’t know what he was looking at. He merely wanted Rosner to read him the previous five years’ balance sheets over the telephone. The next day, Buffett called back with an offer. 11 When Rosner accepted, Buffett took Charlie Munger to New York to ink the deal. 
 Associated was potentially a lemon. Its stores were in deteriorating, inner-city neighborhoods, and Rosner, its architect, was planning to retire. Sensing that he would need a Sancho Panza once again, Buffett demurely asked Rosner if he could stay on for six months to help him get going. Privately, Buffett shrewdly told Munger, “That’s one problem we don’t have. This guy won’t be able to quit.” 
 The son of Austro-Hungarian immigrants, Rosner had started with a single dress shop, in Chicago, in 1931. He was an archetypal bootstrapper, having taken a $3,200 grubstake to a business with $44 million in annual sales. Like other self-improvers, he was a slave to his work and a dictator to the staff. His penny-pinching work ethic may have reminded Buffett of his grandfather, the erstwhile monarch of Buffett & Son grocery. Rosner (Buffett loved to relate) had once counted the sheets on a roll of toilet paper to avoid being cheated—definitely Buffett’s kind of guy. He flattered Rosner profusely, and though he asked him for monthly financial reports, he stayed out of Rosner’s hair (and out of his stores), which suited both of them. As Buffett had predicted, Rosner soon found that he was in not, in fact, in any great hurry to retire, and began to squeeze the proverbial lemonade from lemons. † 
 Hochschild, the Baltimore retailer, was not so easily salvaged. Not only was the main store out-of-date (one wing had access only via a staircase), it required frequent additions of capital just to maintain its market share. And downtown Baltimore was badly decaying. Cheap price or no, it did not take Buffett long to realize that he had goofed. 
 Another long-term “bargain,” textile maker Berkshire Hathaway, also was having problems. The suit business was depressed, just as the clothier Sol Parsow had warned. In midsummer 1967, Buffett soberly informed his partners that he did not see anything to suggest that it would improve. 12 
 Wall Street, meanwhile, was feeling oh so happy. It was not only profitable but—for the first time since the twenties—fun. Trading volume was soaring. Consider, when Buffett started out, in the 1950s, volume on the New York Stock Exchange had been two million shares a day; by 1967, it was ten million. The buoyant spirit was mockingly captured by Abbie Hoffman, who visited the exchange that summer and threw dollar bills from the gallery while floor clerks scurried for the loot. On the West Coast, customers at Kleiner Bell stood in front of the ticker tape cheering “Go, go, go.” The Dow roared back to the low 900s. 
 As if on cue, Congress held—what else?—hearings. In August, Paul Samuelson, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist, appeared before the very Senate Banking Committee that Ben Graham had faced a decade earlier. This time the subject was the rampant growth of mutual funds. Samuelson testified that fifty thousand mutual fund salesmen—one for every seventy investors—were combing the country. Most were plainly incompetent, but were sustained by the industry’s abusively high fees. It was common for funds to charge their investors an up-front sales load of 8.5 percent. This did not cover annual management fees; it was merely to pay for marketing and to keep the salesman in shoe leather. (Buffett, in contrast, took a share of the profits, but nothing up-front and no management fee.) According to Samuelson: 

 Only 91½ cents of my every dollar will ever work for me now to produce income and capital gains, and 9.3 percent of this amount has gone forever in the form of selling charges. 13 

 A by-product of the mutual fund boom was the rise of a class of mandarin investors. For the first time, the pros—mutual funds, pensions, and the like—had more influence in markets than the individual duffer. In Buffett’s view, the professional was more speculative, not less; the old saw that the pro kept his cool while the amateur fell victim to emotionalism was inside out. In the words of one canny observer: 

 It might have been supposed that competition between expert professionals, possessing judgment and knowledge beyond that of the average private investor, would correct the vagaries of the ignorant individual left to himself. It happens, however, that the energies and skill of the professional investor and speculator are mainly occupied otherwise. For most of these persons are, in fact, largely concerned, not with making superior long-term forecasts of the probable yield of an investment over its whole life, but with foreseeing changes in the conventional basis of valuation a short time ahead of the general public. They are concerned, not with what an investment is really worth to a man who buys it “for keeps”, but with what the market will value it at, under the influence of mass psychology, three months or a year hence. 14 
