
8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 248

• 248 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

obtaining crucial evidence for the famous raid he led on Guinan’s
300 Club. There was a well-publicized trial after the raid in which
Longcope served as a witness. Guinan was acquitted. She had
many friends in high places.
Dorothy finally filed for divorce and took up temporary residence in Reno, Nevada, with her new lover, Agent Longcope. On
Friday, September 16, 1932, she divorced the great financier on
grounds of desertion. They had been married since December 2,
1918—14 years. Dorothy retained custody of the boys.
Judge Thomas F. Moran sat on the bench for the hearing. In
order to have the divorce validated, Livermore had to take the
stand himself and affirm that he had deserted his wife on July 15,
1931. As he spoke he looked over at Dorothy, who had matured
but was still beautiful. He said what he was supposed to. Judge
Moran granted the divorce decree.
Livermore and Dorothy left the courtroom a few minutes later,
walking side by side, not speaking. She took one final look at him.
They stood there in the lobby of the courtroom, face to face, in
silence. Livermore shook his head and walked away.
Dorothy immediately walked over to Longcope, who stood in a
corner. She took his arm and walked back into the courtroom.
She smiled at Judge Moran, who smiled back at her before he
began the wedding ceremony. She later told her sons that she was
a single woman for almost 20 minutes.
It reminded Livermore of his first Reno divorce from Nettie
Jordan on December 2, 1918, and his marriage the next day to
Dorothy—history almost repeating itself.
Livermore followed the same settlement plan as he had in his
first divorce. He gave Dorothy everything she wanted: the house,
the jewels, and a $1 million trust fund for herself and each of the
boys, as well as a $1 million handpicked stock market portfolio.
Livermore always believed he could make more money for him-

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 249

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 249 •

self. All he needed was a decent stake of cash to carry on in the
market, so why not give his former wives what they wanted?
Dorothy’s first act after her marriage to Longcope was to
sell the $1 million stock portfolio Livermore had chosen. She
bought railroad bonds. She was angry, very angry. Her drinking
increased. Later, the “safe” railroad bonds would become worthless; the stocks Livermore picked for her would rise in price to
over $50 million by the 1950s. She did not care. She wanted his
memory gone. But he would never really be gone from her life.
She spoke of him at least once every day for the remainder of
her life.
Livermore left Reno and returned to New York. He sank like a
stone. He disappeared into a deep, dark depression. The same dark
cloud that had never been far from him all his life now totally
enveloped him.
Soon after the divorce, Livermore met Harriet Metz Noble of
Omaha, Nebraska. They met in New York through Alexander P.
Moore, who introduced them at a cocktail party in his New York
penthouse. Attracted to each other, they immediately began to go
out at night, particularly to the Stork Club, where Livermore was
very well known; he was a close friend of the owner, Sherman
Billingsley. The Stork Club was the place to be and to be seen in
the 1930s.
One evening, when Harriet and Livermore were there for late
drinks, in walked Georgie Jessel, a great wit and master of ceremonies. He was always full of surprises. This evening he had a tall,
startlingly beautiful black woman on his arm. She towered over
Georgie by at least a foot. The unwritten law in the Stork Club
was that blacks were not welcome. Jessel knew this. Nevertheless,
he walked up to the maître d’ and asked for a table. The maître d’
went immediately to Billingsley and asked him what to do.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 250

• 250 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Billingsley rose from the table and walked up to Jessel and
his date.
A silence fell over the room as Billingsley spoke. “Georgie, you
have a reservation? The maître d’ says no.”
Jessel put his arm around his date and said, “Yes, Sherman, I
have a reservation here at the Stork Club, and it was made by a
very important man a long time ago.”
“And who might that be, Georgie?” Billingsley asked.
“Abraham Lincoln. He made my reservation for me.”
The room exploded into laughter. Livermore rose from his table
and walked over to Jessel, who had been invited to parties at his
home in Great Neck.
“Hello Georgie,” Livermore said. “I have room at my table for
you and your tall friend, so why don’t you join us?”
“My pleasure, J.L. It’s always my pleasure to join a gentleman.”
They walked to the table, and the room settled back to normal.
The next day Billingsley called and thanked Livermore for defusing the situation of the night before.
Harriet was a wealthy woman whose family owned the Metz
Brewery in Omaha. She had been an accredited concert singer and
New York socialite. After six months of dating, she and Livermore
decided to get married.
On March 28, 1933, Livermore and the 38-year-old Harriet
were married in Geneva, Illinois. There was no honeymoon.
It was Harriet’s fifth marriage. All four of her previous husbands
had committed suicide.
The newlyweds immediately moved into a beautiful suite of
rooms occupying an entire floor of the Sherry Netherland Hotel
on Fifth Avenue across from Central Park. The apartment consisted of a beautiful living and dining area, a library and two large
bedrooms.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 251

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 251 •

On May 30, 1933, Congress passed the Securities Exchange Act.
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was formed in
1934, headed by Joseph P. Kennedy (the father of John F.
Kennedy), who wrote the SEC rules. President Roosevelt had
asked Kennedy to write the legislation, which would go on to
withstand the test of time.
Roosevelt reportedly said to Kennedy, with a smile, “Joe, since
you have probably done everything a person can do on the stock
exchange to make money, I believe I can safely assume that you’re
the man to write the new rules.” As a reward, Kennedy was later
appointed ambassador to Britain, a highly prestigious post.
Kennedy was a student of Andrew Carnegie, the great steel robber
baron, who said, “Money always sanctifies itself in the second generation.” Kennedy wanted to start in the first generation. He had
several sons to make into presidents and many sins to sanctify.
These new rules changed the market complexion; now the
issuers of stock had to work within the rules. The government’s
aim was to protect the buyers. The character of the market
changed for a while, but human nature did not change for a second. Livermore studied the new rules and wondered if he would
have to change his rules and strategies to adjust to the new rules.
Later he said with a smile, “There were no serious changes necessary with the new rules coming into effect.”
Dorothy, Livermore’s former wife, had vowed she would never
return to Evermore after the divorce. She wanted nothing more to
do with the estate. The memories tortured her. But she did return
to live there for a short time. She had several small dogs. She
refused to take them for walks on the expansive estate. She did
nothing to stop them from urinating and defecating on the priceless Persian rugs. When the rugs became too foul and the stench
was too much, she had them rolled up and thrown into the trash.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 252

• 252 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The foundation for one of the rooms in the mansion had sunk
about three inches. The room was sloped down on the water side.
One day Dorothy and the butler walked into the room and leveled
the antique furniture by sawing the appropriate legs. This included
sawing the legs of a Louis XIV desk valued at $100,000, as well as
several other pieces of that quality.
Finally, she collected up some of the furnishings, carpets, art,
and mementos and moved them into her New York apartment.
When the taxes came due, she refused to pay them. She sent a
letter to Livermore and told him to pay the taxes. He ignored her.
She was advised that the house and contents would be sold at auction if she did not pay the tax bill.
“So? Let them sell the house and everything in it. Why would I
care? They’re all bad memories for me now.”
Inside the house was one of the finest collections of antique furniture that had ever been assembled in America. Livermore had
spent millions collecting it. The property, exclusive of the furniture, was appraised at $1.35 million in 1932. Livermore had spent
over $150,000 on landscaping the property alone. The silverware
was appraised at $100,000; there was $309,000 in jade ornaments;
there was a $10,000 needlepoint screen; and there was Dorothy’s
custom Rolls-Royce, worth $22,000.
The auction hammer fell on June 22, 1933. The house and
property went for $168,000; the needlepoint screen went for $800;
and Mrs. Guggenheim of New York bought Dorothy’s jet-black
Rolls-Royce convertible, with the gold embossed letters D.L. on
the doors, for $4,750. The total amount rendered at the auction
for the property and all the furnishings was $250,000. The country was in the very depths of the Great Depression.
Early the next morning, ensconced in his office, Livermore read
of the auction in the newspaper. He took a deep breath, folded the
newspaper, and dropped it in the trash can. He sat still, lifeless, in

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 253

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 253 •

his chair, staring at the green chalkboards and the secret markings
that had always looked to him like the sheet music for a symphony
performed only for himself. Today, it was just a jumble of glyphs.
He looked out the window at New York waking up. His eyes
misted over. He took a deep breath as the door opened and Harry
Edgar Dache walked in with the first of the chalkboard markers.
They nodded at the boss. The board marker silently put on his
alpaca jacket and headphones. He climbed the steps to post the
London and Paris markets, which were hours ahead of New York.
Livermore looked away from the board and back at the newspaper
in the trash basket.
He still had his boys, his two beautiful boys.
Shortly after the house in Great Neck was auctioned, Dorothy
had her friend, confidant, and employee, Lucien, drive to the
entrance of her apartment in New York City in her 16-cylinder
light gray Cadillac convertible.
She jumped into the back seat with a picnic basket and a few
bottles of whiskey.
“Lucien, I want to go to Santa Barbara.”
“Where’s that?” Lucien asked.
“California.”
“When, madam?”
“Now will be fine, Lucien. Let’s get going.”
“Why?” he asked.
“Because it as far away from that bastard Jesse Livermore as I can
get. And I want the boys far away from him and his women!”
They were going through a nasty custody battle for the children. Livermore believed that Dorothy was drinking too heavily,
and she believed his libertine attitude toward women was not
healthy for the boys.
“I see,” Lucien said. Well aware of the couple’s battles, he put
the car in gear and started driving.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 254

• 254 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“And Lucien, I heard from a friend it is the center of fun for
those Californians who count,” she added.
Lucien drove and drove and drove until they reached Santa Barbara, with Dorothy hardly ever leaving the back seat, keeping the
top down as much as possible, enjoying her picnic lunches and
drinks in the back. When they reached Santa Barbara, she went
immediately to a real estate agent and rented the biggest furnished
house she could find. She found one in Montecito—a big,
obscene, pink stucco mansion.
There was more bad news for Livermore. He learned, through a
private detective, that Boston Billy Monaghan wanted revenge for
what he believed was an excessive sentence. He thought Livermore and the other powerful people he had robbed had lobbied
the judge to put him away forever and set an example.
Livermore had never spoken to the judge. However, he was
not sure about the other rich people who had been Monaghan’s
victims.
On September 23, 1933, in a seemingly unrelated incident,
there was a murder on board a gambling ship, the Johanna Smith,
anchored three miles off the Long Beach, California, coast. There
had been a wild argument between Buell Dawson, a young, wellknown gangster, and James Walsh, a recently released convict and
former cellmate of Boston Billy Monaghan. The argument had
been resolved when Walsh pulled a pistol and shot Dawson dead.
The police found the murder weapon in a washroom and confronted Walsh with it. There were also several witnesses to the
murder.
Walsh confessed and explained to the police that the shooting
took place as a result of a fierce argument between the two men as
to the best method of kidnapping Livermore and E. L. Doheny, a
wealthy Californian in the oil business.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 255

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 255 •

The news shook Livermore. It was one more thing that he did
not need in his life.
On October 27, 1933, a breach-of-promise civil suit was filed in
the New York Supreme Court against Livermore by Nadia Krasnova, an outstanding beauty and actress, who had been Livermore’s long-term mistress. Her suit was for $250,000.
This suit upset his new wife, Harriet, who had known nothing
of the long-term affair. She was a naturally possessive and jealous
woman. This revelation of another woman, her new husband’s
lover, led to major discord in the marriage. They battled almost
every day about the affair with Nadia. Harriet made him vow to
call her every hour on the hour, no matter where he was, no matter what he was doing. “You have broken your trust with me! I
doubt if I can ever forgive you!”
This was just one more thing that was not going right in Livermore’s life. Perhaps the bigger question was why Livermore
needed a mistress when he had a new wife. What was missing from
his life?
Plus, Livermore knew he was losing his trading skills. His attention, discipline, and energy were all deteriorating. His passion for
the market was waning, and he did not know why. Was it the
divorce from Dorothy? Was it not seeing the boys very often? Was it
his new wife driving him down? Had his success in the 1929 crash
caused him to lose interest in the market? Could he not deal with
success? Was it 1907 all over again, when he had lost his fortune?
Where were the blackness, the despair, and the emptiness coming
from? Where had they always come from? Was there nothing that
would make his soul happy? Give him peace and real contentment?
On December 19, 1933, Livermore fell into the deepest depression of his life. He left the apartment he now lived in at 1100 Park

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 256

• 256 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Avenue at 3 P.M. and did not return home. Harriet called the
police: “He normally calls me every hour, on the hour. I fear
something has happened to him.”
A confidential wire was sent over the teletype system at 2:32 on
the morning of December 20 reporting that the famous financier
was missing. The teletype was terse and gave no information
except a brief description of Livermore and his age, 56. It was later
reported to the police that Livermore had failed to keep an
appointment with a friend at the Waldorf-Astoria that afternoon.
His chauffeur, who had been waiting outside, told the police that
Livermore had told him that he would not be needed and then
hailed a cab, disappearing into the city.
The news spread immediately down the corridors of Wall
Street. City and state police were called in on the case. They investigated all the possibilities: amnesia, suicide, and kidnapping. They
were sure that if it were a kidnapping, they would receive a ransom
note any moment. The kidnapping possibility brought the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) into the picture.
Livermore’s attorney, James O’Gorman, spoke to the press.
“I’m conducting my own private investigation, and I’m betting
Mr. Livermore will be back within twenty-four hours.”
At 6:15 Wednesday night, Livermore returned to his apartment
through the private entrance on Eighty-ninth Street, 26 hours
after he had departed. Reporters were gathered at the entrance.
Livermore walked past them without speaking and went directly
up to his apartment. There were detectives inside talking to
Harriet.
He looked pale and wan, shaky. He sat down and spoke to
them. “I just saw the papers and realized that you were looking for
me.”
“Where have you been?” Harriet asked. “I’ve been frantic with
worry about you. I thought maybe you’d been kidnapped.”

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 257

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 257 •

“No, I was in a hotel.”
“What hotel?” asked Detective Captain Louis Hams.
“The Hotel Pennsylvania,” Livermore responded. He handed
the key to his wife, who handed it to the police.
“How did you get down there?” Hams asked.
“Taxi.”
“What happened?” Harriet demanded.
“I don’t know. I’ve been in a daze since I left yesterday. I awakened this afternoon dazed and confused, then I finally read the
paper that was shoved under my door. I immediately came back.”
“Was it amnesia, then?” Hams asked.
“I don’t know. I blacked out.”
Later, Captain Hams explained to the press that he had no idea
what ailment Jesse Livermore was suffering from to cause him to
disappear. “Livermore said he had no idea we were looking for
him, and when he found out he rushed right home.”
The police located the cab driver, Abe Kamarick, and questioned him. The driver told the police that when Livermore
entered the cab he immediately threw up all over the back seat. He
was sweating and his hands were shaking. He also said that Livermore paid him “real good” to clean up the awful mess.
The police investigated further at the Hotel Pennsylvania. They
found that Livermore had been staying in the suite of J. L. Lord, a
permanent guest of the hotel who kept a room year-round. The
police tried to locate Lord with no success. They dropped the case,
since they now knew Livermore was safe.
Had the police persisted in their investigation, they would have
found out that J. L. Lord was an alias that Livermore used to rent
the room. He had rented the room for years. It was in this very
hotel that Livermore had conducted his dalliances during the time
he was married to Dorothy, including his long-term liaison with
the beautiful Nadia Krasnova, the Greta Garbo look-alike.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 258

• 258 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Livermore’s spirit left him. His personality changed. Even his
friends began to notice that the Great Bear of Wall Street had lost
his claws. He was despondent, distant; his thoughts seemed blurry
and disconnected. His all-consuming interest in the market was
dying. He moved his offices to 120 Broadway and let his chalkboard markers go. He stopped seeing his core of old friends: Ed
Hutton, Walter Chrysler, Ed Kelley, Alexander P. Moore, and
William Durant.
He stopped his bridge games at the Metropolitan Club, something he had loved, and also dropped poker and backgammon.
Even his appearance seemed to change—he was still a natty
dresser, but he was now just slightly behind the fashions. He also
had a vacant stare much of the time, a long-distance stare that perplexed his friends, who felt that he was staring off into space even
when they were talking to him.
He was also having serious problems with his son Jesse Jr. He
had found out that Jesse, a handsome lad who looked older than
his years, had been having sex with some of the women in their
Great Neck set, some of Dorothy’s friends. He had started having
sex with these women when he was 14. He had also discovered the
liquor cabinet when he was 14, and he liked what liquor did
to him.
Young Jesse was having trouble at his school, Choate, and he
hated the fact that his mother had moved to Santa Barbara. “There
is no place that I can think of that is further away from that man,”
she had explained to him and her friends after she moved.
Jesse had loved living in New York and being near his father,
who doted on him, giving him whatever he wanted, whenever he
wanted it. Jesse loved his father and vice versa. There was nothing
Livermore would not do for Jesse, and it was ruining the boy.
Dorothy knew this and took special pains to make it difficult for
Livermore to see the boys. This worked very well for Livermore’s

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 259

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 259 •

new wife, Harriet, who hated the boys because they distracted his
attention from her.
Paul, Livermore’s other son, a sensitive and handsome boy, had
a different temperament from that of his wild brother Jesse, who
was full of mischief and cunning. Paul was a gentle person, calm
and placid, happy to be by himself on the great estate, or playing
with his brother Jesse on the beach in front of the Breakers. He
had a highly creative mind, was good with his hands, and could fix
or build anything, like his grandfather. Paul was aware that Jesse
got all the attention, but he was not envious. He was content
within himself.
In fact, Paul was slightly in awe of his brother and wondered
how he could walk such a tightrope between their parents, often
using their intense feelings for each other and for himself against
them, manipulating them easily.
Things in general turned sour for Livermore. His financial fortunes snowballed downhill at a rapid rate. Articles started to appear
in the press revealing judgments against him. The first article
appeared on January 10, 1934, in the New York Times, outlining a
$13,130 judgment in favor of John J. Tierney, a member of the
New York Stock Exchange. Another appeared on February 2,
1934, reporting a judgment of $90,840 in favor of brokers Benjamin Block and Company. Ben Block was a friend of Livermore’s. Livermore made no attempt to defend the suits, and they
were all lost in summary judgments.
Livermore was finally leveled on March 5, 1934. He filed for
bankruptcy in federal court. Samuel Gilman, the great trader’s
attorney, gave a statement to the New York Times: “On each of the
three previous occasions on which my client has failed, he has ultimately paid one hundred cents on the dollar to all his creditors. I
can assure you that Mr. Livermore will once again triumph over
his present difficulties.” The disputed breach-of-promise claim by
