
Qt =

Number of outstanding shares for stocks on Day t

Pb =

Closing stock prices on initial base day

Qb =

Number of outstanding shares for stocks on initial base day

Because of the weighting scheme used, stocks with a large number of shares outstanding
and high prices have a disproportionate influence on a market capitalization weighted index. In
the Table 5.3 sample data, one stock increased in value by 10% while all of the other stocks
remained the same on Days 2, 3, and 4. Look at how much more sensitive the index was to
changes when the stock had a relatively high price or number of shares outstanding. Just as the

Download at www.wowebook.com

72

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

price-weighted index is not representative of how most investors purchase stocks, neither is the
market capitalization weighted index. An investor seldom invests in stocks in proportion to their
market capitalization.

Equally Weighted (or Geometric) Average
A third method of calculating an index uses equal weighting of all included stocks. Sometimes,
the term unweighted index is used to refer to this type of average because all stocks carry equal
weight, regardless of their price or market value. This index is calculated by averaging the percentage price changes of each of the stocks included in the group. As you can see in Table 5.3, it
does not matter which stock increases by a particular percent. For each of the sample trading
days, one stock increased in value by 10% while the other three stocks remained unchanged;
each day, the equally weighted average index increased by 2.5%.
This index calculation is a dollar-weighted average; in other words, it assumes that an
investor invests equal dollar amounts in each stock. For example, an investor with $10,000 would
purchase $2,500 worth of each of the four stocks in our example. Thus, the investor would be
purchasing fewer shares of the high price per share stocks and more shares of the low price per
share stocks. This calculation most closely represents how the typical investor goes about organizing a portfolio.
Several of the Value Line averages are equal weighted averages that are calculated using an
arithmetic average of the percent changes. However, one of the Value Line averages, the Value
Line Industrials Average, and the Financial Times Ordinary Share Index are equally weighted
averages that are constructed in a slightly different manner. These two indices are computed
using a geometric average of the holding period returns. Table 5.4 demonstrates the calculation
of a geometric average for the four-stock portfolio example.
TABLE 5.4

Calculation of a Geometric Average Calculation

Day

Alpha

Beta

Gamma

Delta

Geometric Average Calculation
n

Price

HPR

Price

HPR

85

Price

Day 1

80

Day 2

88

1.1

85

1

25

Day 3

88

1

85

1

Day 4

88

1

85

1

HPR

25

Price

HPR

20

Π

i=1 HPR

ΠHPR ⁄4

Index Value

1.024

102.411

1

(Product
of HPRs)
1.1

100

1

20

1

25

1

22

1.1

1.1

1.024

104.881

27.5

1.1

22

1

1.1

1.024

107.410

Comparing this geometric average with the equally weighted average calculated for the
same stocks shows a downward bias when using a geometric average rather than an arithmetic
average. An investor who had purchased $100 of each of these four stocks on Day 1 and held
each of these stocks for all four days would have an ending wealth of $430, or 7.5% greater than
the beginning wealth level of $400. The geometric weighted index shows a change of 7.41%.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 5 An Overview of Markets

73

CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we have explored the basics of how markets work. Because our interest lies in the
area of using technical analysis, we have focused on markets in which substitutable, liquid, continuously traded assets are bought and sold. In these markets, we find informed, uninformed, and
liquidity players buying and selling securities and, thus, affecting the price of these securities. As
technical analysts, we are concerned with observing and predicting price movements as these
various market players go about their trading. Market indices are used to measure the overall
price movement in the marketplace.
As we continue through Part II, “Markets and Market Indicators,” we build upon these
basic ideas. The focus of Chapter 6, “Dow Theory,” is Dow Theory and the basic fundamental
relationships between markets and the economy. In Chapter 7, “Sentiment,” we focus on the market players; we examine the notion of sentiment: how emotions and human biases impact the
behavior of both the informed and uninformed market participants. Chapter 8, “Measuring Market Strength,” focuses on measuring the strength of the market. Going beyond the indices we use
to measure historical market performance, we examine indicators that measure the market’s ability to maintain its performance into the future. Chapter 9, “Temporal Patterns and Cycles,”
addresses temporal tendencies; historically, analysts have found seasonal and cyclical tendencies
in the marketplace that impact price movements. Finally, in Chapter 10, “Flow of Funds,” we
address the movement of money in the marketplace, known as the “flow of funds.”

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. For technical analysis to be used, the asset being traded must be substitutable. Explain
what fungibility means and why fungible assets are a prerequisite for technical analysis.
2. For technical analysis to be used, the market in which the security is trading must be sufficiently liquid. Explain what liquid means in this context and why liquidity is a prerequisite
for technical analysis.
3. Explain the differences among informed, uninformed, and liquidity market participants.
4. Classify each of the following market participants as an informed, uninformed, or liquidity
player, and explain the reasons for your classification:
a. Raymond is 18 years old and ready to begin college. His parents are selling shares of
MSFT and KO to pay the tuition bill.
b. Sandra just read a Wall Street Journal article about how successful Wal-Mart has been
at managing costs. Impressed by what she read, she calls her broker and puts in an order
to buy 100 shares of WMT.
c. Michelle, the CEO of Led Computers, purchases 5,000 shares of LED.
5. Explain what is meant by an index being price weighted. In a price-weighted average,
would you expect a $10 stock or a $50 stock to be more important? Why?

Download at www.wowebook.com

74

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

6. Explain how to compute a market-weighted average.
7. Explain how to calculate an unweighted average index.
8. The following table contains six daily closing prices for four stocks.
a. Calculate the daily percentage change in price for each stock.
b. Calculate a price-weighted average for Days 1–6.
c. Calculate a market-weighted average for Days 1–6.
d. Calculate an unweighted average index for Days 1–6.
e. Compute the daily percentage change for the price-weighted, market-weighted, and
unweighted average indices.
f. Explain the differences in the results among the three types of indices.
Company

BCD

EFG

HIJ

KLM

Volume of
Shares
Outstanding

2,000,000

3,000,000

7,000,000

9,000,000

Price

% Change Price

% Change Price

% Change Price

Day 1

60

85

53

16

Day 2

63

88

52

19

Day 3

60

91

51

15

Day 4

61

85

53

16

Day 5

58

87

50

17

Day 6

60

88

53

18

% Change

9. Choose five stocks that are included in the DJIA. Download the daily closing prices for
these five stocks for the past 30 days from the Yahoo! Finance Web site at
http://finance.yahoo.com.
a. Compute and graph a daily price-weighted index for these five stocks over the past
month. What was the return on the index over the 30-day period?
b. Find the number of shares outstanding for these five companies. Using this information,
calculate a market-weighted index for the 30-day period. Graph the index and compute
the return on this index over the past month.
c. Construct and graph an unweighted average index for this five-stock portfolio. Compute
the rate of return on this index for the 30-day period.
d. Compare and contrast the graphs that you created and the 30-day returns you calculated.
e. How do you explain the differences among the graphs and the return calculations?

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

6

DOW THEORY

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
By the end of this chapter, you should know

• A brief history of the development of Dow Theory and the major contributors to this
development

• The three Dow Theory hypotheses presented by Rhea
• The theorems of Dow Theory
• The three types of trends—primary, secondary, and minor—of Dow Theory
• The concept of confirmation in Dow Theory
• The role of volume in Dow Theory
• The criticisms of Dow Theory
Charles H. Dow was the founder of the Dow-Jones financial news service in New
York, and founder and first editor of the Wall Street Journal. He died in December,
1902, in his fifty-second year. He was an experienced newspaper reporter, with an
early training under Samuel Bowles, the great editor of the Springfield [MA] Republican. Dow was a New Englander, intelligent, self-repressed, ultra-conservative; and
he knew his business. He was almost judicially cold in the consideration of any subject, whatever the fervor of discussion. It would be less than just to say that I never
saw him angry; I never saw him excited. His perfect integrity and good sense commanded the confidence of every man in Wall Street, at a time when there were few
efficient newspaper men covering the financial section, and of these still fewer with
any deep knowledge of finance. (Hamilton, 1922)

75

Download at www.wowebook.com

76

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

Charles Dow, the father of modern technical analysis, was the first to create an index that measures the overall price movement of U.S. stocks. However, he never specifically formulated what
has become known as the “Dow Theory.” Indeed, he likely never intended his disjointed statements and observations in the Wall Street Journal to become formalized. He wrote editorials
about what he had learned from his experience as a reporter and advisor on Wall Street but never
organized these individual pieces into a coherent theory. In fact, he only wrote for five years
before his sudden death in 1902. The term “Dow Theory” was first used by Dow’s friend, A. C.
Nelson who wrote in 1902 an analysis of Dow’s Wall Street Journal editorials called The A B C
of Stock Speculation.
After Dow’s death, William Peter Hamilton succeeded him as editor of the Wall Street
Journal. For over a quarter of a century, from 1902 until his death in 1929, Hamilton continued
writing Wall Street Journal editorials using the tenets of Dow Theory. Hamilton also described
the basic elements of this theory in his book, The Stock Market Barometer, in 1922.
Alfred Cowles III (1937) performed the first formal test of the profitability of trading using
the tenets of Dow Theory in 1934. Cowles was an early theoretician of the stock market and used
statistical methods to determine if Hamilton could “beat the market.” Cowles found that a portfolio based on Hamilton’s theory lagged the return on a portfolio fully invested in a market index
that Cowles had developed. (Cowles’s index was a predecessor of the S&P 500.) Therefore,
Cowles determined that Hamilton could not outperform the market and concluded that Dow Theory of market timing results in returns that lag the market. Cowles’s study, considered a seminal
piece in the statistical testing of market-timing strategies, provided a foundation for the Random
Walk Hypothesis and the Efficient Markets Hypothesis.
In recent years, however, researchers have reexamined Cowles’s work using more sophisticated statistical techniques. In the August 1998 Journal of Finance, an article by Brown, Goetzmann, and Kumar demonstrated that adjusted for risk (Hamilton was out of the market for a
portion of his articles), Hamilton’s timing strategies yield high Sharpe ratios and positive alphas
for the period 1902 to 1929. In other words, contrary to Cowles’s original study, Brown, Goetzmann, and Kumar conclude that Hamilton could time the market very well using Dow Theory. In
addition, they found that when Hamilton’s decisions were replicated in a neural network model
of out-of-sample data from September 1930 through December 1997, Hamilton’s methods still
had validity. His methods worked especially well in sharp market declines and considerably
reduced portfolio volatility.
After Hamilton’s death, Robert Rhea further refined what had become known as Dow Theory. In 1932, Rhea wrote a book called The Dow Theory: An Explanation of Its Development and
an Attempt to Define Its Usefulness as an Aid to Speculation. In this book, Rhea described Dow
Theory in detail, using the articles by Hamilton, and formalized the tenets into a series of
hypotheses and theorems that are outlined next.
Rhea presented three hypotheses:
1. The primary trend is inviolate.
2. The averages discount everything.
3. Dow Theory is not infallible.

Download at www.wowebook.com

77

Chapter 6 Dow Theory

The first of these hypotheses dealt with the notion of manipulation. Although Rhea
believed that the secondary and the minor, day-to-day motion of the stock market averages could
possibly be manipulated, he claimed that the primary trend is inviolate. The second hypothesis,
that the averages discount everything, is because prices are the result of people acting on their
knowledge, interpretation of information, and expectations. The third hypothesis is that Dow
Theory is not infallible. Because of this, investment requires serious and impartial study.

BOX 6.1 SOME OF WILLIAM HAMILTON’S THOUGHTS ON THE STOCK MARKET AND THE
DOW THEORY
The sum and tendency of the transactions in the Stock Exchange represent the sum
of all Wall Street’s knowledge of the past, immediate and remote, applied to the discounting of the future. (Hamilton, 1922, p 40)
The market is not saying what the condition of business is today. It is saying what
that condition will be months ahead. (Hamilton, 1922, p 42)
The stock barometer [the Dow-Jones averages] is taking every conceivable thing into
account, including that most fluid, inconsistent, and incalculable element, human
nature itself. We cannot, therefore, expect the mechanical exactness of physical science. (Hamilton, 1922, p 152)
Let us keep in mind that Dow Theory is not a system devised for beating the speculative game, an infallible method of playing the market. The averages, indeed, must
be read with a single heart. They become deceptive if and when the wish is father to
the thought. We have all heard that when the neophyte meddles with the magician’s
wand, he is apt to raise the devil. (Hamilton, 1922, p 133)

These three hypotheses are very similar to those of technical analysis today. They show
how prescient Dow was and how universal and persistent his theories have been. As markets have
become more efficient, there is some question about how much manipulation can and has
occurred. Recent untruths by major corporations concerning their earnings have shown that the
desire to manipulate still exists. Dow’s tenet, however, stated that the primary direction of stock
prices could not be manipulated and, therefore, should be the primary focus of all serious
investors.
The concept that prices discount everything, including expectations, to the point that they
are predictive of events is the most revolutionary of Dow’s hypotheses. Until then, most investors
looked at individual stock prices and studied what was available about individual companies.
Dow believed that the averages of stocks foretold the shape of industry and were, thus, valuable
in understanding the health of the economy.
Dow was under no illusion that he had found the magic formula for profit, nor were Hamilton or Rhea. Nevertheless, they did believe that by careful and unbiased study of the market averages, they could interpret, in general terms, the likelihood of the markets continuing or reversing

Download at www.wowebook.com

78

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

in direction and thereby could anticipate similar turns in the economy. Their emphasis on study
and lack of emotional reaction is still important today. Ignoring this point is one of the most
widespread causes for investor failure.

DOW THEORY THEOREMS
One of the theorems of Dow Theory is that the ideal market picture consists of an uptrend, top,
downtrend, and bottom, interspersed with retracements and consolidations. Figure 6.1 shows
what this ideal market picture would look like. This market picture, of course, is never seen in its
ideal form. Consider Hamilton’s quote, “A normal market is the kind that never really happens”
(Hamilton, May 4, 1911). The purpose of the ideal market picture is to provide a generalized
model of the stock market’s price behavior over time. It is very simple and resembles a harmonic
without a constant period or amplitude.
Top

Uptrend

Downtrend
Bottom

FIGURE 6.1

The Dow Theory ideal market picture

From the modern standpoint of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH), this ideal picture
is interesting because it presumes that prices oscillate over long periods based on the accumulated emotion of investors as well as the facts of the business cycle. Were market prices to duplicate the business cycle precisely, prices would not oscillate as widely as they do nor lead the
business cycle by as much as they do. Indeed, some theorists argue that the markets actually
cause the business cycle, that confidence or lack of confidence from the markets translates into
buying and selling of products (Szala and Holter, 2004). However, for Dow Theory, the picture
of the ideal market remains the same regardless of cause.
A second theorem of Dow Theory is that economic rationale should be used to explain
stock market action. Remember that Dow created both an industrial average and a railroad average. Although we have no record of Dow’s precise reasoning for doing so, Rhea posited that
Dow believed that industrial stocks represented the trend of industry profits and prospects and
that railroad stocks represented railroads’ profits and prospects. The profits and prospects for
both of these sectors must be in accord with each other. For example, industry may be producing
goods, but if railroads are not shipping these goods, then industry must slow down. Goods produced must be shipped to the customer. Railroads must confirm that produced goods are being
sold and delivered. Today, of course, the railroad average has been changed to the transportation

Download at www.wowebook.com

79

Chapter 6 Dow Theory

average to represent airlines, truckers, and other means of shipping goods. Nevertheless, the economic rationale of goods produced and transported is still valid in the industrial sector of the
economy. Where Dow’s economic rationale differs from the present is in the service and technology sectors that have become larger in dollar volume than the industrial sector. Some analysts
use representations of these newer sectors to form an economic rationale for stock market action.
A third theorem of Dow Theory is that prices trend. A trend is defined as the general direction in which something tends to move. Because we are talking about markets, that “something”
is price.

BOX 6.2 SOME OF WILLIAM HAMILTON’S THOUGHTS ON TRENDS
…on the well-tested rule of reading the averages, a major bull swing continues so
long as the rally from a secondary reaction establishes new high points in both averages…. (Hamilton, December 30, 1921)
An indication [of price trend] remains in force until it is cancelled by another….
(Hamilton, September 23, 1929)

As we saw in Chapter 2, “The Basic Principle of Technical Analysis—The Trend,” the concept that prices trend is one of the fundamental assumptions of technical analysis. It is the reason
why technical analysts can profit. A trend is the basic pattern of all prices. A trend can be
upward, downward, or sideways. Obviously, a sideways trend is more difficult to profit from than
an upward or downward trend. Technical analysts endeavor to forecast the direction of the market trend. Because trends are the central principle in technical analysis, Chapters 12, “Trends—
The Basics,” and 14, “Moving Averages,” focus on how trends are defined, measured, and
analyzed by modern-day technical analysts. Right now, we focus on the notion of trend within
the Dow Theory.
Dow Theory posited that there are three basic trends in price motion, each defined by time:
There are three movements of the averages, all of which may be in progress at one
and the same time. The first, and most important, is the primary trend: the broad
upward or downward movements known as bull or bear markets, which may be of
several years duration. The second, and most deceptive movement, is the secondary
reaction: an important decline in a primary bull market or a rally in a primary bear
market. These reactions usually last from three weeks to as many months. The third,
and usually unimportant, movement is the daily fluctuation. (Rhea, 1932)
Figure 6.2 shows graphically how these three trends are interrelated. Let us look at each of
these three types of trends—the primary, secondary, and minor—a bit more closely.

Download at www.wowebook.com

80

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

Minor
Trends

A
10,500

Dow Jones Industrial Average
10,000

B
Secondary Downtrend (A–B)

9,500

9,000

Primary Uptrend
8,500

8,000

7,500

J

O

2003

A

J

O

2004

A

J

O

2005 A

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 6.2

Dow Theory three trend types (Weekly: May 2002–May 2005)

The Primary Trend
Correct determination of the primary movement (or trend) is the most important factor in successful speculation. There is no known method of forecasting the extent or
duration of a primary movement. (Rhea, 1932)
The primary trend is the longest of the three trend types. It represents the overall, broad, longterm movement of security prices. The duration of this long-term trend can be several years. The
primary trend may be an upward trend, which is known as a primary bull trend, or it may be a
downward trend, referred to as a primary “bear” trend. The general long-run upward trend in Figure 6.2 indicates a primary “bull” trend.
Primary bull markets are characterized by three separate phases: The first represents reviving confidence from the prior primary bear market; the second phase represents the response to
increased corporate earnings; and the third is when speculation becomes dominant and prices
rise on “hopes and expectations.”
Primary bear markets are long downward price movements, interrupted by occasional rallies, that continue until prices have discounted the worst that is apt to occur. They, too, are characterized by three separate phases: first, abandonment of hopes upon which stocks were
