the trend, and for reversal trades in trading ranges. For example, if there is a strong
bull trend and at least 20 consecutive bars have been above the moving average,
and the market drifts sideways to the rising moving average, look to buy the close
of the first small bear trend bar with a close that is only a tick or two below the
moving average. Also, look to buy above its high. You are expecting the sideways
to down correction to end and reverse back into the direction of the trend.
If there is a clearly defined trading range with multiple reversals and there is a
two-legged, two bull trend bar spike to a slightly new high in the middle of the day,
this is often a good signal to go short at the market, especially if you can scale in
higher and especially if it is a part of another pattern, like if it is at the top of a small
wedge or if it is a test of a bear trend line. Also, if there is a two-legged sell-off in
the trading range that forms a bear trend bar that closes below an earlier swing low
in the trading range in the bottom half of the range, this can also be a signal to buy
at the market, especially if you can add on lower or if it is part of another pattern,
like the bottom of a wedge bull flag.

ALL BARS IN A CHANNEL
When there is a strong bull channel, bulls will place limit orders to buy at or below
the low of the prior bar, and bears will place limit orders to short at or above the
high of every bar and above every swing high. Bulls will also place buy stop orders
above the highs of pullback bars, and the bears will place sell stop orders below
the lows of bars at the top of the channel. The opposite is true in a bear channel.
There are many types of small bars and many different situations in which they
occur, and all represent a lack of enthusiasm from both the bulls and the bears.
Each has to be evaluated in context. A small bar is a much better setup if it has a
body in the direction of your trade (a small reversal bar), indicating that your side
owns the bar. If the small bar has no body, it is usually better to wait for a second
entry since the probability of a successful trade is much less and the chance of a
whipsaw is too great.
An inside bar does not have to be totally inside (high below the prior bar’s high,
low above the prior bar’s low). One or both of its extremes can be identical to that
of the prior bar. In general, it forms a more reliable signal when it is a small bar and
when its close is in the direction of the trade you want to take (it is always better
to have bull signal bars when you are looking to buy and bear signal bars when you
are looking to sell).
When an inside bar occurs after a big trend bar that breaks out of a trading
range, it could be simply a pause by the trend traders, but it could also be a loss
of conviction that will lead to a reversal (failed breakout). A reversal is more likely

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

108

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

when the small bar is an inside bar and it is a trend bar in the opposite direction
of the large breakout bar. A with-trend inside bar increases the chances that the
breakout move will continue, especially if the market had been trending in that
direction earlier in the day (for example, if this might be the start of the second leg
that you were expecting).
Small inside bars after breakout trend bars are somewhat emotional for traders
because they will consider entering in either direction on a stop and will have to
process a lot of information quickly. For example, if there is a bull breakout during
a down day, the trader will often place an order to buy at one tick above the high of
the inside bar and a second order to sell at one tick below its low. Once one order
is filled, the other order becomes the protective stop. If the order was filled on a
breakout failure (i.e., on the sell order), the trader should consider doubling the
size of the buy stop order, in case the failed breakout becomes a breakout pullback
(opposite failures means that both the bulls and the bears were trapped, and this
usually sets up a reliable trade). However, if the trader was first filled on the buy
(with trend) order, he usually should not reverse on the protective stop, but might
if the day had been a bear trend day. Once there has been a second or third bar
without a failure, a failure that then occurs has a higher chance of simply setting up
a breakout pullback entry in the direction of the new trend rather than a tradable
failure. In general, good traders make quick, subjective decisions based on many
subtle factors and if the process feels too confusing or emotional, it is better to not
place an order, especially complicated orders like a pair of breakout orders or an
order to reverse. Traders should not invest too much emotion in a confusing trade
because they will likely be less ready to take a clear trade that may soon follow.
An inside bar after a swing move might mark the end of the swing, especially
if its close is against the trend and other factors are in play, like a trend line or
trend channel line overshoot, an ABC two-legged correction (a high or low 2), or
a new swing high in a trading range. Also, any small bar, whether or not it is an
inside bar, near an extreme of any large bar (trend bar, doji, or outside bar) can set
up a reversal, especially if the small bar is a small reversal bar. In general, traders
should be looking to buy low and sell high. In a trading range (a trading range day
or a trading range in a trend day), the only small bar entries should be fades at the
extremes. For example, if a small bar is a swing high, or follows a bear trend line
test or a bull trend channel line overshoot and reversal, only look for a short entry.
If it is a swing low, only look for a buy.
In a trend (even one during a trading range day), a small bar can set up an entry
in either direction. For example, if there is a strong bull move and no prior break
of a significant bull trend line, an inside bar near the high of a large bull trend bar
or a small bar that extends above the high of the trend bar should only be viewed
as a buy setup. If it is an inside bar, especially if it is a bull trend bar, it is a great
long setup. If it is simply a small bar that extends above the high of the bull trend
bar, it might be a safe long setup if the trend is strong enough. In general, it would

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

109

be better to wait for a pullback, unless the small bar is a bear reversal bar, in which
case it could trap bears and it might make sense to buy on a stop at one tick above
its high.
An ii pattern is an inside bar that follows a larger inside bar. It is two in a row
with the second being inside the first and of the same size or smaller (an iii is even
stronger, with three in a row). After a protracted move, especially if there has been
a trend line break, a with-trend breakout from an ii pattern is often just a scalp and
has a good chance of reversing before or after the profit target is reached (a final
flag, as described in book 3). However, a countertrend breakout (or a reversal from
a final flag) often leads to a large reversal. The pattern often develops in a final flag
because it finally indicates balance between the bulls and the bears; the strength of
the weaker side has caught up to that of the stronger side, at least temporarily. As
such, if the with-trend side takes control, the odds are high that the countertrend
side will try to take it back after the with-trend breakout. The stop on an ii pattern
is beyond the opposite side of both bars (not just the second bar, which technically
is the signal bar), but sometimes you can use a smaller stop (beyond the second
of the two bars instead of beyond both bars) if the bars are relatively large. After
the entry bar closes, tighten the stop and consider reversing at one tick beyond
the entry bar. Keep looking to reverse on any failure in the next several bars since
failures are common soon after ii breakouts, especially if the pattern forms in the
middle of the day’s range.
A 5 minute ii pattern is often a 1 minute double bottom pullback in a bull trend
or a double top pullback in a bear trend (described in book 2), which are reversal
patterns and might explain why a small ii can lead to a large countertrend move.
When there is a strong bull trend, there will sometimes be two consecutive bars
with identical highs, and usually with small tails at the tops of the two bars. This is
a two-bar double top buy setup and is a double top on the 1 minute chart. Place a
stop to go long at one tick above the high of the bars because you will be buying a
failed double top and there will be protective stops there from traders who shorted
it, adding fuel to the move. Likewise, in a strong bear trend, look to short on a stop
at one tick below a two-bar double bottom sell setup.
Two-bar reversal setups go by several names, and each is an overlapping pair
of trend bars with opposite directions and bodies of about the same size. In a twobar reversal top setup, the first bar is a bull trend bar and the second is a bear trend
bar, and this combination is a sell setup if the market is not in a trading range. A
two-bar reversal bottom is a bear trend bar and then a bull trend bar and forms a
buy setup. They are each basically a two-bar reversal pattern and they correspond
to a 10 minute reversal bar (just imagine how the two 5 minute bars would look
when combined into a single 10 minute bar).
A two-bar reversal can be a continuation pattern (a one-bar flag) or a reversal
pattern, depending on the context. For example, if the market is in a strong bear
spike and then has a bear bar and then a small bull trend bar with a low that is close

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

110

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

to the low of the bar before it, this is a two-bar reversal. However, since the market
is in a steep trend, you should never look to buy above it. Instead, you should view
the bull bar as a one-bar bear flag and consider shorting below it. In contrast, if the
identical two-bar pattern formed in a bull trend at the end of a two-legged pullback
to the moving average, this is a two-bar reversal and a good setup for a buy setup.
The pullback is ending and reversing back into the bull trend.
When a trend bar in a strong trend has a shaved body (no tail at one or both
ends), it usually indicates that the market is one-sided and strong. However, a
shaved top on a 5 minute bull trend bar in a runaway bull trend is stronger than
a shaved bottom, because the extreme strength is right into the close of the bar
and it is more likely to continue the strength that occurred five minutes earlier.
Therefore, a shaved top is a good setup for a long. If the bar has a one-tick tail at
its high or a shaved bottom, it is still strong, but in general that alone would not be
reason enough to buy above its high. Also, the bar has to be analyzed in context.
If the bar is in a trading range, it would be foolish to buy above its high, because
trading ranges tend to test the extremes repeatedly and you should not be buying
near the high when the odds of the bar being a test are greater than the odds of the
bar being a successful breakout. Similarly, a bear trend bar with a shaved bottom
in a runaway bear trend is a setup to short at one tick below its low.
When the market is quiet and the volume is low, shaved tops and bottoms are
sometimes common and are not a sign of strength. When you see many shaved tops
and bottoms in an hour or so and they are in a trading range, be very selective
about trading. Each of those bars is a trap, fooling traders into believing that there
is strength when there is none.
Not all small bars are good fade setups. There is one particular situation where
they should not be used as signal bars, and that is when the bar is a small doji
(small relative to the recent bars), especially if it has no body, it is near the moving
average, and it occurs approximately between 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. PST. These
have a very high failure rate and always require more price action before placing
a trade.
Although most large trend bars that are with trend are strong, if a bar is unusually large, it often represents a climactic exhaustion (a buy climax). For example,
in a bull trend, it often means that the last buyers bought and they bought in a panic
because they just had to get in at any price, or if they were short, they just had to buy
back their losing shorts at any price. If there are no more buyers, the market will
go down. Any standard reversal setup can serve as a signal bar, but a second entry
with a strong reversal bar is always the safest setup when trading countertrend.
Big trend bars on breakouts often fail on the next bar, trapping traders into the
wrong side of the market. This is especially common on quiet trading range days,
when the market is always surging to the top and bottom of the range and fooling
naı̈ve traders into expecting a successful breakout.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

Figure 6.1

FIGURE 6.1

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

111

Small Signal Bars

A small bar can be a with-trend or countertrend setup. In a trend, a small bar on a
pullback is only a with-trend setup. As shown in Figure 6.1, bars 7, 9, 12, 14, 17, and
21 were small bars in pullbacks and the only trade they offered was a short on a stop
at one tick below their lows. Even though they were mostly doji bars, they were
with trend and therefore reasonable shorts. Most signal bars in a strong trend look
weak, and that is one of the reasons why the trend just keeps working lower. Bears
are eager to short and bulls want to exit with a smaller loss, and both keep waiting
for a strong sell setup. This would make them confident that the market is not going
to rally and that they need to get out immediately. The perfect setup never comes,
and the bears are trapped out and the bulls are trapped in. This creates a constant
sense of tension and urgency that keeps driving the market down. Both keep selling
in small pieces all day long, just in case their perfect setup never comes . . . and it
usually doesn’t. The setups never look strong, so it is easy for traders to assume
that the trend is weak and that there will soon be a good rally that will allow them
to sell at a better price. They see the market staying below the moving average, but
it never falls fast enough to make them panic, so they keep hoping for a bigger rally
to sell. The weak signal bars are an important ingredient in strong trends.
A small bar can also set up a countertrend trade against a trend if it occurs
at a swing low and there are other reasons for trading countertrend, like a prior
trend line break. Bar 16 was a small bear bar that set up a long after a break above

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

112

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

Figure 6.1

the bear trend line and the high 4 bottom of the bear channel from bars 7 to 13.
There was a two-legged pullback from the bar 14 test of the moving average, and
the market was likely to have a second leg up.
The only time that a trader should sell a small bar at a low is in a bear trend,
and preferably during a strong bear spike. Bar 29 was not particularly small, but
it was an inside bar, which functions like a small bar, and it was a bear trend bar,
making it a safe short at the low of the day.
Bar 13 was the middle bar of a three-bar reversal up, and bar 17 was the middle of a four-bar reversal down. All multiple bar reversals are just variations of
two-bar reversals. There were several other reversals on the chart, as there are on
all charts.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The day began with a large gap down in Figure 6.1, so traders had to be looking for a
possible trend from the open up or down and they needed to watch closely for a setup.
Bar 3 was a bull reversal bar and a good buy setup for a failed breakout and reversal up,
but the entry bar had a bear body, which is never good if a trader is looking for a bull
trend. This failed breakout failed and became a breakout pullback short setup, and it led
to a resumption of the bear breakout. Longs exited on the reversal down below bar 4 and
many reversed to short. The next bar was also a doji bar and now the market was in a
tight trading range on a large gap down day. This was a great breakout mode pattern for
a big trend up or down. Bar 5 went one tick above that doji and likely trapped premature
bulls who did not wait for a breakout above the bar 4 top of the opening range. The best
trade of the day was the short below bar 5 or on the next bar as it broke below the low
of the tight trading range, or on its close when it was clear that the market was always
in short. The spike down to bar 6 had three large bear trend bars and was likely to be
followed by a measured move down, probably in a bear channel. The trend went much
further than that.
Bar 13 was a small bull inside bar at a new swing low and a reversal up from a
low 2 ﬁnal ﬂag short, and the second leg down of a second leg down, making it a high
4 long setup. It was also the third or fourth push down (depending on how you want to
count the pushes) in a bear channel in a spike and channel bear. The spike was made
of three bear trend bars that started at bar 5. Channels often end on the third push
and are usually followed by a two-legged move sideways to up, as happened here. The
correction often reaches the top of the channel, but here the bear trend was so strong
that the correction could only go sideways and not up. That usually means that lower
prices will follow.
Bar 16 was a high 2 buy setup in a developing trading range after a relatively strong
move up to bar 14 that was strong enough to break the bear trend line. This strength
made a second leg up likely.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 6.1

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

113

Bar 14 was close to being a 20 gap bar short setup since the prior 20 bars all had
highs below the moving average. Close is close enough, and a test of the bear low was
likely. The rally to bar 14 was also the ﬁrst breakout of a tight channel and was therefore
likely to be followed by at least a test down.
Bar 17 was an actual 20 gap bar short setup. The market traded below it and then
above it and then it sold oﬀ to a new low of the day. Bar 17 was a doji moving average
gap bar short setup but with the move up from bar 16 being a strong bull spike, most
traders would have waited for a second signal before shorting. The entry was below the
outside up bar that followed bar 17. The entry bar was a strong bear trend bar and it
became the ﬁrst bar in a strong bear spike.
There are many micro double top and bottom reversal patterns on all charts, and
these are discussed in book 3 in the chapter on reversals. Bars 20 and 21 formed an
example of a micro double top reversal pattern.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

114

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

FIGURE 6.2

Figure 6.2

A Reversal Bar Can Be a Continuation Setup

When a trend is strong, the market often trades below instead of above a bull reversal bar or above instead of below a bear reversal bar. As shown in Figure 6.2, on
this 5 minute chart of Baidu, Inc. (BIDU), bar 3 was the third attempt to reverse the
market up and it was a strong bull reversal bar. However, instead of moving above
it, the market broke out below it. Perhaps there were early longs who entered on
the reversal bar before it triggered a buy signal (the next bar did not trade one tick
above its high), and these overly eager bulls were now trapped. They would exit at
one tick below the bull reversal bar, which was where smart traders went short.
The opposite happened at the bar 6 bear reversal bar, where traders who
shorted before the market traded below the low of the bar were trapped and had
to cover on the next bar as it traded above the bear reversal bar. A reversal bar
alone is not enough reason to enter, even if it is in an area where a reversal might
reasonably take place.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 6.3

FIGURE 6.3

SIGNAL BARS: OTHER TYPES

115

A Big Trend Bar Can Indicate Exhaustion

An unusually large trend bar that forms in a trend that has lasted for 10 or more bars
usually means that the market is exhausted and will correct for at least 10 bars, and
sometimes it leads to a reversal.
In Figure 6.3, bar 3 was a huge trend bar that collapsed below the low of the
open and through a trend channel line and was followed by a bull inside bar with
a shaved top, meaning that buyers were aggressively buying it right into its close.
This is a great setup for a long. The large bear trend bar was acting as a sell climax,
and the breakout above the bull inside bar was a bull breakout. This is a spike down
and then a spike up, which is a reversal, and if you looked at various higher time
frame charts, you could find one or more where this bottom was a perfect two-bar
reversal and others where this formed a single reversal bar.
Bar 4 was a bear reversal bar but the bar 5 short entry bar immediately reversed
up above the bar 4 high, running the stops on those shorts. It is important to note
that shorting below the bar 4 bear reversal bar would not have been a wise decision
because the upward momentum was too strong. There were 11 consecutive bull
trend bars, so traders should not be shorting below the first bear bar. Buying above
the bear reversal bar or above the bar 5 bull outside up bar was a reasonable trade
since there were stopped-out bears who would wait for more price action before
looking to short again. If the bears were not ready to short, the bulls could push the
market higher.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c06

116

JWBT576-Brooks

October 13, 2011

17:23

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

Figure 6.3

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The day opened with a strong bull trend bar on a gap down in Figure 6.3, but it immediately reversed down in a breakout pullback short setup. With the large tails and bodies
of the ﬁrst two bars and the small gap down on the open, the odds of more sideways
action were high and it would be better to wait and not take the short trade. However,
this was followed by a two-bar reversal signal for a failed breakout setup and a possible
low of the day. There was a four-bar bull spike but no follow-through. At some point over
the next couple of hours, traders would have taken at least partial proﬁts and may have
exited the balance on a breakeven stop during the late sell-oﬀ, if they did not reverse
to short.
Bar 3 was also the bottom of a spike and channel bear trend, and the reversal should
test the bar 2 start of the channel, which it did. The ﬁve-bar sell-oﬀ down to bar 1 was
the spike, and the channel down began at the pullback to bar 2. The sell-oﬀ down to bar
3 was climactic because it had about a dozen bars with lows and highs below those of
