
Ideally, we would prefer an approach that is 100% mechan-
ical, increasing the odds that past performance can be replicated in
the future. Mechanical means objective: if 10 people follow the
same rules and achieve the same results, those rules are said to be
objective. It does not matter whether a mechanical system is writ-
ten on paper or entered into a computer.

*This appendix was prepared by Fred G. Schutzman.

493


494

Appendix C

Here, however, we’ll assume that we are using a comput-

er and will use the terms “mechanical” and “computerized”
interchangeably. This does not imply that a computer is
mandatory for trading system development, although it cer-
tainly helps.

The mechanical approach offers us three main benefits:

We can back test ideas before trading them. A computer
allows us to test ideas on historical data rather than on hard
earned cash. By helping us see how a system would have per-
formed in the past, it allows us to make better decisions
when it really counts—in the present.

We can be more objective and less emotional. Most peo-
ple have trouble applying their objective analysis to actual
trading situations. Analysis (where we have no money at
risk) is easy, trading (where we have money at risk) is stress-
ful. Therefore, why not let the computer pull the trigger for
us? It is free of human emotion and will do exactly what we
had instructed it to do at the time when we developed our
system.

We can do more work, increasing our opportunities. A
mechanical approach takes less time to apply than a sub-
jective one, which allows us to cover more markets, trade
more systems, and analyze more time frames each day. This
is especially true for those of us who use a computer, since
it can work faster and longer than we can, without losing
its concentration.

5 STEP PLAN

1

2.
3.
4.

s

Start with a concept

Turn it into a set of objective rules
Visually check it out on the charts
Formally test it with a computer
Evaluate the results


The Essentials of Building a Trading System 495

STEP 1: START WITH A CONCEPT
(AN IDEA)

Develop your own concepts of how markets work. You can begin
by looking at as many charts as you can, trying to identify mov-
ing average crossovers, oscillator configurations, price patterns or
other pieces of objective evidence which precede major market
moves. Also attempt to recognize clues that provide advance
warning on moves that are likely to fail. 1 studied chart after chart
after chart in the hope of finding such answers. This “visual”
approach has worked for me, and I highly recommend it.

In addition to studying price charts and reading books
such as this one, I suggest you read about trading systems and
study what others have done. Although no one is going to reveal
the “Holy Grail” to you, there is a great deal of useful informa-
tion out there. Most importantly, think for yourself. I have found
that the most profitable ideas are rarely original, but frequently
our own.

Most of the successful trading systems are trend following.
Counter trend systems should not be overlooked, however,
because they bring a degree of negative correlation to the table.
This means that when one system is making money, the other is
losing money, resulting in a smoother equity curve for the two
systems combined, than for either one alone.

Principles of Good Concept Design

Good concepts usually make good sense. If a concept seems to
work, but makes little sense, you may be sliding into the realm of
coincidence, and the odds of this concept continuing to work in
the future diminishes considerably. Your concepts must fit your
personality in order to give you the discipline to follow them even
when they are losing money (i.e. during periods of drawdown).
Your concepts should be straightforward and objective, and if
trend following, should trade with the major trend, let profits run
and cut losses short. Most importantly, your concepts must make
money in the long run (i.e. they must have a positive expectation).


496 Appendix C

Designing entries is hard, but designing exits is harder and
more important. Entry logic is fairly straightforward, but exits
have to take various contingencies into account, such as how fast
to cut losses or what to do with accumulated profits. I prefer sys-
tems that do not reverse automatically—I like to exit a trade first,
before putting on another trade in the opposite direction. Work
hard to improve your exits, and your returns will improve relative
to your risk.

Another suggestion—try to optimize as little as possible.
Optimization using historical data often leads one to expect unre-
alistic returns that cannot be replicated in real trading. Try to use
few parameters and apply the same technique across a number of
different markets. This will improve your chances of long run suc-
cess, by reducing the pitfalls of over optimization.

The three main categories of trading systems are:

¢ Trend following. These systems trade in the direction of
the major trend, buying after the bottom and selling after
the top. Moving averages and Donchian’s weekly rule are
popular methodologies among money managers.

e Counter trend

~ Support/Resistance. Buy a decline into support; sell a
rally into resistance.

- Retracements. Here we buy pullbacks in a bull market
and sell rallies in a bear market. For example, buy a
50% pullback of the last advance, but only if the major
trend remains up. The danger of such systems is that
you never know how far a retracement will go and it
becomes difficult to implement an acceptable exit
technique.

- Oscillators. The idea is to buy when the oscillator is
oversold and to sell when it is overbought. If divergence
between the price series and the oscillator is also pre-
sent, a much stronger signal is given. However, it is usu-
ally best to wait for some sign of a price reversal before
buying or selling.


The Essentials of Building a Trading System 497

e Pattern recognition (visual and statistical). Examples
include the highly reliable head and shoulders formation
(visual), and seasonal price patterns (statistical).

STEP 2: TURN YOUR IDEA INTO A
SET OF OBJECTIVE RULES

This is the most difficult step in our 5 step plan, much more dif-
ficult than many of us would at first expect! To complete this step
successfully, we must express our idea in such objective terms that
100 people following our rules will all arrive at exactly the same
conclusions.

Determine what our system is supposed to do and how it
will do it. It is with this step that we produce the details needed
to accomplish the programming task. We need to take the overall
problem and break it down into more and more detail until we
finalize all the details.

STEP 3: VISUALLY CHECK IT OUT
ON THE CHARTS

Following the explicit rules we just determined in Step 2, let us
visually check the trading signals that are produced on a price
chart. This is an informal process, meant to achieve two results:
first, we want to see whether our idea has been stated properly;
and second, before writing complicated computer code, we want
some proof that the idea is a potentially profitable one.

STEP 4: FORMALLY TEST IT
WITH A COMPUTER

Now its time to convert our logic into computer code. For my
own work, I use a program called TradeStation®, Omega
Research, Inc. in Miami, FL. TradeStation is the most compre-


498 Appendix C

hensive technical analysis software package available for formu-
lating and testing trading systems. It brings together everything
from the visualization of your idea, to assistance in trading your
system in real time.

Writing code in any computer language is no easy task and
TradeStation’s EasyLanguage™ is no exception. The job with
EasyLanguage, however, is greatly simplified because of the pro-
gram’s user friendly editor and the inclusion of many built in
functions and plenty of sample code. See Figure C.1.

Once our program has been written, we then move into
the testing phase. To begin with, we must choose one or more
data series to test. For stock traders this is an easy task. Futures
traders, however, are faced with contracts that expire after a rela-
tively short period of time. I like to do my initial testing using a
continuous (spread adjusted) price series popularized by Jack
Schwager. (Schwager on Futures: Technical Analysis, Wiley, 1996.) If
those results look promising, I then move on to actual contracts.

Next, we must decide how much data to use when build-
ing our system. I use the entire data series, without saving any for
out-of-sample testing (building your system on part of the data
and then testing it on the remaining “unseen” data). Many
experts would disagree with this approach, but I believe it to be
the best with my methodology that relies on good solid concepts,
Virtually no optimization, and a testing procedure that covers a
wide range of parameter sets and markets. I start with a method-
ology that I believe to be sound and then test it to either prove or
disprove my theory. I have found that most individuals do the
reverse, they test a data series to arrive at a trading system.

I do not account for transaction costs (slippage and com-
missions) when testing systems, but instead factor them in at the
end. I believe that this keeps the evaluation process more pure
and allows my results to remain useful should certain assump-
tions change in the future.

I require my systems to work across:

¢ Different sets of parameters. If I were considering using a
5/20 moving average crossover system, then I would expect
6/18, 6/23, 4/21, and 5/19 to also perform reasonably well.
if not, I immediately become skeptical of the 5/20 results.


{

/ffileName: J}MBook.Four%Model
/Written by Fred G. Schutzman, CMT
//Logic by Ned Davis :

//see Zweig book: Martin Zweig’s Winning with New IRAs, pages 117-128
//Model was designed to be applied to a weekly chart of the Value Line Composite Index
(VLCI)
//Program uses the weekly (usually Friday) close of the VLCI to initiate trades

//ouy if the weekly close of the VLCI rises 4% or more from its lowest close (since the last
sell signal)

//sell if the weekly close of the VLCI falls 49 or more from its highest close (since the last
buy signal)
//Date last changed: February 8, 1998

ss##8888Sy stem Properties
Properties tab:

Pyramid Settings = Do not allow multiple entries in same direction
Entry Settings = default values

Max number of bars system will reference = 1

Inputs: perOffLo(4.00), { percent off lowest close }
perOffHi(4.00); { percent off highest close }

Variables: LC(0), { lowest close}
HC(0), { highest close }
trend(0); { 0 = no trades yet, +1 = up, -1 down }

{ initialize variables }

lf currentBar = 1 then begin
LC = close;
HC = close;
trend = 0;

end;

{ update trend variable and place trading orders }

if trend = 0 then begin
if ((close-LC) / LC) > = (perOffLo / 100) then trend = +1;
if (HC-close) / HC) > = (perOffHi / 100) then trend = -1;

end

else if trend = +1 and ((HC-close) / HC) > = (perOffHi / 100) then begin
sell on close;

trend = -1;
LC = close;
end

else if trend = —1 and ((close-LC) / LC) > = (perOffLo / 100) then begin
buy on close;

trend = +1;
HC = close;
end;

{ update LC & HC variables }
If close < LC then LC = close;
If close > HC then HC = close;

{ End of Code }

Figure C.1 (EasyLanguage Code): This EasyLanguage code was written
using TradeStation’s Power Editor™. It has the look—and power—of a full
blown programming language. See Figures C.2 and C.3 for the results on this
trend following system described by Martin Zweig.



500 Appendix C

e Different periods of time (e.g. 1990-95 and 1981-86). A
system that tests well in the Japanese Yen over a recent five
year period should also test reasonably well over any other
five year interval. This is another area where I appear to
hold the minority point of view.

¢ Many different markets. A system that has worked well in
crude oil should also work well in heating oil and unlead-
ed gasoline over the same period of time. If not, I will look
for an explanation and will usually discard the system. I go
even further than this, however, and test that same system
across my entire database of markets, expecting it to per-
form well in the majority of them.

Once our testing is complete, let us visually inspect the
computer generated trading signals on a price chart to ensure that
the system does what we intended it to do. TradeStation facilitates
this process by placing buy and sell arrows directly on the chart
for us! If the system does not do what it is supposed to do, we
need to make the necessary corrections to the code and test it
again. Keep in mind that very few ideas will test out profitably,
usually less than 5%. And, for one reason or another, most of
these “successful” ideas will not even be tradable.

STEP 5: EVALUATE RESULTS

Let us try to understand the concept behind our trading system.
Does it make sense or is it just a coincidence? Analyze the equity
curve. Can we live through the drawdowns? Evaluate the system
on a trade-by-trade basis. What happens if a signal is a bad one?
How quickly does the system exit from losers? How long does it
stay with the winners? Make sure we are completely comfortable
with the test results, otherwise we will not be able to trade this
system in real time.
Three key TradeStation statistics to analyze are:

¢ Profit factor. Equals Gross profit on winning trades/Gross
loss on losing trades. This statistic tells us how many dol-
lars our system made for every $1 it lost, and is a measure


The Essentials of Building a Trading System 501

of risk. Long term traders should aim for profit factors of
2.00 or higher. Short term traders can accept slightly lower
numbers.

e Avg trade (win & loss). This is our system's mathematical
expectation. It should at least be high enough to cover
transaction costs (slippage and commissions); otherwise we
will be losing money.

° Max intraday drawdown. This is the biggest drop, in dol-
lar terms, from an equity peak to an equity trough. I prefer
to do this calculation on a percentage basis. I also differen-
tiate between drawdowns from a standing start (where I am
losing money from my own pocket) versus drawdowns from
an equity peak (where I am giving back profits taken from
the markets). I am usually more lenient with the latter.

MONEY MANAGEMENT

Money management, while outside the scope of this appendix, is
an extremely important topic. It is the key to profitable trading,
every bit as important as a good trading system.

Money management techniques should be well thought
out. Accept the fact that losses are part of the game. Control your
downside and profits will take care of themselves.

In this area, practice diversification as much as possible.
Diversification will enable you to increase your returns while hold-
ing your risk constant, or decrease your risk while holding your
returns constant. Diversify among markets, systems, parameters,
and time frames.

CONCLUSION

We have discussed the basic philosophy of trading systems and
why objective is better than subjective. We covered the three main
benefits of a computerized approach and designed a 5 step plan for
building a trading system. And last, but not least, we touched upon
the importance of money management and diversification.


502 Appendix C

Trading systems can improve your performance and help
to make you a successful trader. The reasons for that are clear:

e they force you to do your homework before making a trade

e they provide a disciplined framework, making it easier for
you to follow the rules

e they enable you to increase your level of diversification

With lots of hard work and dedication, anyone can build a
successful trading system. It is not easy, but it certainly is within
reach. As with most things in life, what you get out of this effort
will be directly related to what you put into it. (See Figures C.2
and C.3.)

07/23/93 (VG-—--Y) Value Line Geometric - UNDE. 02/06/98
Value Line Geometric - UNDE-Weekly 0206/08 C=482.30 +15.11 O=e47.28 H=482.47 L=447.28 Ved JUMBook FourteModel

‘Those dots represent the level that must be equaled
OF exceeded on a closing basis to issue 2 reversal signal
4

‘System buy & sali signale (and quantity) 900.00

Total Equity (including open positions)

a 6. be y, te

Figure C.2 (Price Chart): This trading system was designed to be applied
to a weekly chart of the Value Line Composite Index (VLC), but also tested
well on a daily chart of the VLCI and on both weekly and daily charts in
other markets, votes of confidence in the underlying concept. This is the sys-
tem described in Figure C.1.


The Essentials of Building a Trading System

$ 716.01
$ 1118.15

137
67

78.08
16.69
2.82

7
21

$ 46.01
2.79
$ 45.01

Performance Summary. All Trades

Open position P/L
Grass loss

Percent profitable
Number losing trades

Largest losing trade
Average losing trade
Avg trade(win & loss)

Max consec. losers
Avg # bars in losers

Max # contracts held
Retum on account

Figure C.3 (Performance Summary): Here is a 36 year Performance
Summary of the system shown in Figures C.1 and C.2. Performance over the
last 12 years has been consistent with the overall results. The Profit factor,
Avg trade (win and loss) and Max intraday drawdown are all excellent.




Appendix D: Continuous
Futures Contracts*

With a clean database of “raw” commodity data, there are
numerous types of contracts that can be gleaned from the raw
data, such as: Nearest Contracts, Next Contracts, Gann
Contracts, and Continuous Contracts. Following, are ideas for
constructing these futures contracts derivatives. The symbols
used are for illustration purposes only. These continuous con-
tracts can be created through the Dial Data Service (56 Pine
Street, New York, NY 10005, [212] 422-1600.)

*This appendix was prepared by Greg Morris.

505


506 Appendix D

NEAREST CONTRACT

A nearest contract is primarily used by traders who just want a
large file of continuous data made up of actual trading prices.
They are content with the data going to expiration and then
rolling over automatically.

It is quite probable that no one trades the nearest contract
within 15 to 30 days of expiration. This is because the liquidity
dries up very fast in the latter days of a contract. The number of
days before expiration that an individual rolls over to the next
contract is a function of the commodity that is being traded (the
number of months till the next contract), and the individual’s
trading style. It is quite conceivable that the same individual will
rollover at different times for different commodities.

When to rollover to the next contract will more than like-
ly be based upon the current contract’s volume. When it begins to
erode, that is the time to roll forward.

Therefore, one should have available a choice as to when to
rollover his Nearest Contract. Remember, Nearest Contracts are
made up of actual data. Here are some examples: Portfolio
Manager A is content to rollover at expiration; so all he wants is
the “standard” Nearest Contract with symbol TRNEOO (Treasury
Bonds). Manager A is probably managing money and needs equi-
ty calculations which he can derive from the data. Trader B feels
that trading in the month of expiration is not liquid enough for
him; so he wants his Nearest Contract to roll over 15 days prior to
expiration—-the symbol could be TRNE15S. Analyst C would like to
evaluate different roll-over dates, so he might like to download
multiple Nearest Contracts, such as: TRNEOO, TRNEOS, TRNE12,
and TRNE21 (which roll-over 5, 12, and 21 days before expiration).

Keep in mind that all of these contracts are Nearest
Contracts and contain actual contract data. The only difference is
which actual contract the data comes from.

NEXT CONTRACT

A Next Contract is a unique offspring of the Nearest Contract. It
is exactly the same as the Nearest Contract except that it is always


Continuous Futures Contracts 507

the contract that follows the Nearest Contract. In other words, if
the Nearest Contract is using December data for T-Bonds (TR),
then the Next Contract is using data from the March T-Bond con-
tract. When the December contract expires, the Nearest rolls to
the March and the Next rolls to the June contract. This is defined
as the Next-] contract.

From this concept, another Next Contract is available,
called a Next-2. Here, the data is always coming from the contract
that is two contracts away from the Nearest Contract. Keeping
with the above example, if the Nearest is using data from the
December contract, the Next-2 Contract is using data from the
June contract. When the December contract expires, the Nearest
begins to use data from the March contract and the Next-2
Contract uses data from the September contract and so on.

Ticker symbols for the Next contracts are: TRNXT1 and
TRNXT2. Of course, the actual futures ticker will be used instead
of the TR used in this example.

GANN CONTRACT

Gann Contracts refer to the use of a specific contract month and
rolling over only to the same contract in the next year. For exam-
ple, July Wheat would be used until the July contract expires,
then the Gann Contract would start using data from the July
Wheat contract of the next year.

Examples of ticker symbols for Gann Contracts are:
WO7GN, GCO4GN, JY12GN, etc. (representing July Wheat, April
gold, December Japanese yen).

CONTINUOUS CONTRACTS

Continuous Contracts were developed to help analysts overcome
the problem of liquidity dry up and premium (or discount) gaps
in futures data. This becomes a problem whenever an analyst is
testing a trading model or system over many years of data. It
allows for a continuous stream of data with compensation being
made for rollover jumps in price trends.


508 Appendix D

CONSTANT FORWARD
CONTINUOUS CONTRACTS

A Constant Forward Continuous Contract looks a constant length
of time into the future. It uses more than one contract to do this.
A common method is to use the nearest two contracts and do a
linear extrapolation of the data. (See Figure D.1.)

F 66.40)
F 66.35)
f-88.20|
F 68.25)
F 88.20]
F 88.15]
F-ea.10)
F 88,05 |
F 88.00}
F67.95
87.90
£67.85)
87.75 F 87.80
F 87.75 |
F 87.70
F 87.65;
F 87.60|
F 87.55 |
87.50!
£87.45)
12 weeks 87.40)
£87.35)

86.25

87.91

Figure D.1 A visual representation of a continuous contract.

One possibility is to give the futures trader (as with the
Nearest Contracts) the ability to construct his own Constant
Forward Continuous Contract. Three things are needed to do this:
The commodity symbol, the number of contracts he wants used
in the calculation, and the number of weeks into the futures he
wants to look. For instance, if he wanted T-Bonds, using 3 of the

