
5 BIS, Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market

Activity in April 2010, September 2010, www.bis.org/publ/rpfx10.pdf.
6 Ibid.

Forex for Beginners

Exchange Traded Funds
Some retail traders will inevitably find it easier to trade currencies indirectly,
through Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) or Exchange Traded Notes (ETNs).
Those of you who have invested casually in the stock market are probably
familiar with ETFs. With their low expense ratios and high liquidity, they
represent attractive alternatives to mutual funds.
An ETF is almost identical to a mutual fund, with the main difference that it
must be listed on an exchange and hence is very easy to buy and sell. An
ETN is functionally identical to an ETF, but it is structurally different. ETN
investors necessarily assume the credit risk of the issuer, whereas an ETF
holder bears no such risk. For this reason, ETFs are more common with
investors than ETNs. Both types of securities trade on stock exchanges and
are regulated by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC).
Currency ETFs run the gamut from passive exchange rate funds to actively
managed strategy funds. There are already 37 such funds that trade on US
exchanges, and a few dozen more that trade in London or Toronto (Table 22).
Table 2-2. List of Currency ETFs/ETNs Traded on US Exchanges
WisdomTree Dreyfus
Commodity Currency Fund

CCX

CurrencyShares Russian
Ruble Trust

XRU

WisdomTree Dreyfus
Emerging Currency Fund

CEW

WisdomTree Dreyfus
New Zealand dollar Fund

BNZ

WisdomTree Dreyfus
Japanese yen Fund

JYF

WisdomTree Dreyfus
South African Rand Fund

SZR

WisdomTree Dreyfus
Indian Rupee Fund

ICN

WisdomTree Dreyfus
euro Fund

EU

PowerShares DB US dollar
Index Bullish Fund

UUP

Market Vectors Chinese
Renminbi/USD

CNY

Barclays Asian & Gulf
Currency Revaluation

PGD

CurrencyShares Swiss
Franc Trust

FXF

Barclays GEMS Asia 8

AYT

FactorShares 2X S&P
500 Bull/USD Bear

FSU

43

44

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?

Barclays GEMS Index

JEM

EUR/USD Exchange
Rate

ERO

CurrencyShares Australian
dollar Trust

FXA

ProShares UltraShort yen

YCS

CurrencyShares British
pound Sterling Trust

FXB

WisdomTree Dreyfus
Brazilian Real Fund

BZF

CurrencyShares Canadian
dollar Trust

FXC

ProShares Ultra yen ETF

YCL

WisdomTree Dreyfus
Chinese Yuan Fund

CYB

ProShares UltraShort
euro

EUO

CurrencyShares euro Trust

FXE

GBP/USD Exchange
Rate

GBB

CurrencyShares Japanese
yen Trust

FXY

ProShares Ultra euro

ULE

CurrencyShares Mexican
Peso Trust

FXM

Market Vectors Double
Short euro

DRR

Market Vectors Indian
Rupee/USD

INR

PowerShares DB G10
Currency Harvest Fund

DBV

Market Vectors Double
Long euro

URR

PowerShares DB US
dollar Index Bearish
Fund

UDN

iPath Optimized Currency
Carry

ICI

JPY/USD Exchange Rate
ETN

JYN

CurrencyShares Swedish
Krona Trust

FXS

Of course, there are a few downsides to ETFs. They carry expense ratios
(~1–2%)—which eat into returns—and are subject to trading commissions.
They are also never as liquid as the underlying currencies, such that spreads
are higher. Stockbrokers offer lower leverage than foreign exchange brokers,
and are not capable of paying interest on one’s open foreign exchange
positions. Finally, currency ETFs provide only indirect exposure to
currencies, and there is always a slight lag between fluctuations in the ETFs
and fluctuations in the underlying currency or currencies (Figure 2-15). Still,

Forex for Beginners
for long-term investors who wish to integrate currencies into a diversified
portfolio, ETFs are an excellent choice.

Figure 2-15. EUR/USD spot rate versus comparable ETF

Investors that want to make basic directional bets in the forex market can
choose between ETFs that track individual currencies and ETFs that track
multiple currencies. There are currently ETFs for the US dollar, euro, Swiss
franc, Australian dollar, New Zealand dollar, British pound, Canadian dollar,
Japanese yen, Mexican peso, Brazilian real, Indian rupee, Russian ruble,
Swedish krona, Chinese yuan, and South African rand, spread across six
different issuers. For the dollar and the euro, investors can choose between
multiple issuers. Some of these funds even contain built-in leverage and/or
mimic a “short” investment (though all currency trades necessarily involve a
short bet).
Currency investors that want diversified exposure can buy bundled-currency
ETFs, such as the PowerShares DB US Dollar Bullish Fund (UUP) and
Bearish Fund (UDN), which are designed, respectively, to replicate buying or
selling the dollar against six major currencies. Other options include the
Barclays Global Emerging Markets Strategy ETN (JEM), which is comprised
of 15 equally weighted currencies, and the Emerging Market Asia Fund
(AYT), which consists of 8 emerging Asian currencies.
Finally, there are actively managed funds that aim to achieve particular
strategies. For example, the Barclays iPath Optimized Currency Carry
Exchange Traded Note (ICI) is composed of long positions in high-yielding
currencies (those with high local deposit rates) funded with low-yielding
(those with cheap borrowing rates) currencies. Rather than seek to profit
from currency appreciation, these funds aim to capture the spread from

45

46

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
interest rate differentials. The PowerShares DB G10 Currency Harvest Fund
(DBV) employs a similar strategy, aided by leverage. For those with a higher
risk tolerance but aversion to hassle, both funds provide a great proxy for the
so-called carry trade.

Forwards
A forex forward agreement is an obligation to buy or sell a specific currency
(pair) on a future date for a fixed price that is set on the date of the contract.
As with the other types of instruments detailed below, a forward agreement is
a kind of derivative, so-called because its value is derived from some other
instrument, in this case the physical currency.
Forward agreements do not generally trade on exchanges and are instead
executed directly between two counterparties. That being said, forex forward
volume is immense (~$500 billion per day), and it’s relatively easy to obtain
forward rate quotes for certain currency pairs.
While retail traders are unlikely to ever be in a position to execute a forward
agreement, it’s still worth being aware of their existence. Forwards are priced
in terms of (expected) interest rate differentials between two currencies. For
example, if expected Eurozone interest rates are higher than expected US
interest rates for the period of time that the forward contract is outstanding,
then the forward price for the EUR/USD will reflect a higher exchange rate
(i.e., a more highly valued euro relative to the dollar) in the future. As
(expectations of) interest rates change over time, so do forward rates. This
structure makes it easy for banks to underwrite forward contracts, because
they can immediately hedge their exposure through the credit markets.
The downside of this pricing mechanism is that forward prices are of limited
value when it comes to forecasting exchange rate movements in the spot
market. The one exception to this rule is the Non-Deliverable Forward
(NDF). These contracts are used for currencies that are governed by strict
capital controls and whose trading is often severely restricted. While priced
in terms of exotic currencies, NDFs are settled in US dollars (or another
major currency), rather than in the underlying currency. NDFs theoretically
are based on interest rate differentials, but in practice, they may reflect
market expectations for future exchange rates. For example, trading in the
Chinese yuan—especially offshore trading—is severely restricted by the
Chinese government. Those that want to speculate on or hedge exposure to
the yuan are thus unable to execute traditional forward agreements because

Forex for Beginners
they don’t have access to enough yuan to settle the contracts. Instead, they
turn to NDFs and settle the contracts in US dollars, based on the difference
between the USD/CNY spot price and the contracted forward rate.
Since the parties to a Chinese yuan NDF contract also lack access to Chinese
credit markets and deposit accounts, Chinese yuan NDFs (and most NDFs,
for that matter) tend to reflect expectations for the future USD/CNY
exchange rate rather than expected interest rates. Furthermore, since
speculators are limited in their ability to bet directly on the yuan, they will
often turn to NDFs as a good proxy for such a bet. Reporters often quote
NDF rates in news articles (on the yuan) as an indication of market
expectations for the direction of the USD/CNY rate.

Swaps
Recall from Figure 2-14 that swaps represent the bulk of all forex
transactions. There are a handful of different kinds of swaps that fall under
the umbrella of foreign exchange trading, but they can generally be classified
as either forex swaps or currency swaps. Forex swaps involve the exchange
of two currencies on a given date at a given rate and the reverse exchange of
the same two currencies at a later date and a different rate (Figure 2-16).

Figure 2-16. Structure of USD/EUR forex swap

Mainly financial institutions, speculators, and central banks use forex swaps.
Financial institutions enter into forex swap agreements for the primary
purpose of altering the dates on their foreign currency liabilities. For
example, if a financial institution already has an existing forward agreement

47

48

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
to exchange dollars for euros, but wishes to push the maturity date back by a
month, it can execute a one-month USD/EUR forex swap. Forex brokers,
meanwhile, rely on forex swaps for accounting purposes. With the use of a
one-day tom/next forex swap, a broker can convert all of its clients’ balances
into the home currency at the end of each trading day and reconvert them
(with interest) the following day. Speculators use swaps in the same way as
forwards—to make bets on future exchange rates.
Central banks, finally, utilize forex swaps for liquidity purposes. During the
credit crisis, for example, the Federal Reserve Bank opened swap lines with a
dozen of the world’s central banks in order to ease a sudden worldwide
shortage of US dollars. In this way, foreign central banks were able to obtain
enough US dollars to fulfill domestic demand and reduce rapid devaluation
in their home currencies. When the liquidity crisis subsided, these dollars
could then be reconverted into their home currencies per the Fed’s swap
agreements. Sure enough, Fed liquidity swaps have declined from a peak of
$582 billion in the fall of 2008 to nil today.7
Currency swaps (also known as cross-currency basis swaps) are slightly
more complicated, and therefore much less common than forex swaps. Per
Figure 2-17, a currency swap agreement involves the exchange of principal
and interest payments denominated in two different currencies between two
parties.

7 Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Board of

Governors of the Federal Reserve, “Central Bank Liquidity Swaps Held by the Federal
Reserve: All Maturities,” accessed April 19, 2012, http://research.stlouisfed.org
/fred2/series/SWPT?rid=20.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 2-17. Structure of USD/EUR currency swap

The principal function of currency swaps is to enable two entities located in
two different countries to borrow in foreign currencies at home-currency
interest rates. They are of the most use to multinational companies and
institutional investors to fund foreign direct investments and portfolio
investments, respectively.
The credit default swap (CDS) is also relevant to currency traders (though it
is not technically categorized as a forex transaction). A CDS functions as an
insurance policy against the possibility of a bond default. A buyer of a CDS
must pay both an upfront premium and annual premiums to the writer, who
in turn is contractually obligated to pay compensation in the event of default
on an underlying credit instrument. The upfront insurance premium is
determined by the market, and denominated in basis points (equal to 1/100 of
1%). From this upfront premium, it is possible to deduce the market's
estimation of default probability. Per Figure 2-18, a buyer of a CDS on a
five-year Greek government bond would pay an upfront insurance premium
of 5,900 basis points ($5.9 million) on every $10 million of debt that he
wants to insure. This corresponds to a 98% probability of default. A buyer of
an equivalent CDS on five-year US Treasury bonds, in contrast, would pay
only 45 basis points ($45,000), implying a 4% chance of default.

Figure 2-18. Comparison of credit default swap rates, 2009–Present (Source: Bloomberg)

49

50

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
The CDS was originally conceived as a hedging tool, but has since evolved
into a big source of income for the financial institutions that underwrite them,
and is popular among speculators. CDS rates are particularly interesting to
forex traders for two main reasons. First, they serve as an excellent indication
of default expectations, compared to bond rates and other metrics. Second,
they are useful for gauging ebbs and flows in investor risk perceptions,
pertaining both to individual currencies and the overall market. Simply, when
CDS rates spike upward, it is both a reflection and a driver of risk aversion.

Futures
Forex futures are conceptually similar to forex forwards in that they allow
parties to lock in a future exchange rate for a particular currency pair. Unlike
forwards, however, futures contracts trade through centralized exchanges
(rather than directly between two parties) and are governed by a set of
standardized terms. Contracts can expire only at the end of a quarter (on the
third Wednesday of March, June, September, and December), notional
amounts are fixed for each currency pair, and terms are virtually the same for
every contract.
In addition, futures contracts are marked-to-market, which is to say that cash
changes hands between counterparties every day, rather than only on the date
of maturity. By way of example, consider a party that purchased a futures
contract that obligates it to buy 100,000 euros at a rate of $1.40 per euro
three months from today. Now let’s say that today’s rate is $1.35 per euro. If
tomorrow, the EUR/USD rate appreciates to $1.36 per euro, then the value of
the futures contract will change, and the buyer will receive an immediate
payment from the counterparty. In contrast, an investor who makes a bet on
the EUR/USD in the spot market would only realize an actual gain or loss
upon selling the currency.
This kind of continuous back-and-forth system of payments eliminates
credit/counterparty risk and makes futures contracts arguably safer than
forwards. In addition, since money changes hands daily, both parties are
implicitly “even” upon the maturity of the contract, and (in most cases)
physical delivery of currency (per the terms of the agreement) is
unnecessary. On the other hand, the risk that monetary losses may be
experienced prior to expiration is a risk that is intrinsic to forex futures
contracts and must be taken into account.

Forex for Beginners
Futures are especially well suited to directional bets on exchange rates
because they are priced in terms of a broad array of factors—not just in terms
of interest rate differentials, as are forex forwards. In other words, if the
current EUR/USD rate is 1.38 and the six-month futures price is 1.45, the
implication is that the markets collectively believe that the euro will
appreciate by seven cents against the US dollar over the next six months.
Forex futures are traded on a handful of exchanges, including the Tokyo
Financial Exchange, Intercontinental Exchange, and NYSE Euronext. The
vast majority of trading, however, is conducted electronically on the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange (CME), which offers futures contracts for more than 20
different currencies and 40 unique pairs, and processes more than $100
billion in contract volume every day. Traders can also make bets on volatility
and trade non-standard contract sizes using CME E-Micro Forex Futures.
Forex futures trading activity is dominated by speculators. At the same time,
futures also serve an important practical function—known as hedging—for
both investors and corporations. Hedging allows participants in the forex
market to limit their exposure to currency fluctuations. For example, a US
company that expects to receive €100 million in three months can lock in an
exchange rate for that payment today. If the actual spot rate is higher than the
contracted rate when the futures contract expires, then the company will have
saved itself money. Of course, if the dollar declines over the next three
months, the corporation must ultimately accept a less favorable exchange
rate. In this case, it would have been better for the company to convert the
€100 million into US dollars only after it had received the money. At the
very least, however, there is something to be said for the fact that the
company eliminated any uncertainty (also known as risk) by locking in an
exchange rate in advance, and one could therefore argue that the hedge
fulfilled its purpose.

Options
Forex options represent the smallest component of the forex market. After an
explosive rise over the course of the last decade, growth in volume has
slowed, and options now account for a mere 5% of overall daily forex
turnover.
An option is unique in the financial world, because it carries a choice (i.e.,
the “right”), rather than an outright obligation, to buy or sell a given financial
asset. Specifically, a forex call option gives the buyer the right to buy one

51

52

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
currency pair, at a given exchange rate, on or before a pre-determined date.
Conversely, a forex put option gives the buyer the right to sell a currency
pair, again at a given rate, on or before a pre-determined date. In exchange
for this right, the buyer must pay a premium to the seller of the option, who
in turn has the obligation to honor the terms of the option if/when the buyer
chooses to exercise his or her right.
American-style options allow the buyer to execute his or her right to buy or
sell at any time on or before the expiration date. European-style options,
however, only support execution at the date of expiry. With Asian-style
options (which are not particularly common), the payoff depends on the
average exchange rate during a given period of time. This is designed to
prevent surges in volatility around the date of expiration from significantly
influencing the profit/loss from the option. There are also dozens of other
iterations, which, alas, are beyond the scope of this book.
Forex options are also unique in that they can inherently be seen as both put
and call options, regardless of how they are denominated. While a call option
to buy shares in Microsoft can only be interpreted as just that, a call option to
buy euros for dollars can also be seen as a put option to sell dollars for euros.
Unfortunately, this complicates pricing, because certain variables (namely
interest rates) for two different assets need to be taken into account.
With most other types of forex securities, there is simply a market price. For
example, if I absolutely must exchange dollars for euros in March 2013, I
have no choice but to pay the market price for the corresponding futures
price. If the futures rate is $1.50, then $1.50 is what I must agree to pay in the
future in order to lock in a rate today.
With a forex option, in contrast, I can choose the so-called strike price. For
example, if the current EUR/USD exchange rate is $1.40, I can buy a March
2013 call option for $1.30, $1.35, $1.40, $1.45, $1.50, etc. The price of the
option (also known as the premium) will depend on the relationship between
the strike price and the spot price. When the underlying exchange rate (also
known as the spot price) exceeds the strike price for a call option, it is said
that the option is in the money. When the strike price exceeds the spot price,
the option is out of the money, and when the two are roughly the same, it can
be said that the option is at the money. The opposite is necessarily true for a
put option. Since currencies fluctuate constantly, the relationship between the
exchange rate and the strike price (and hence the price of the option) must

Forex for Beginners
also change continuously. An option that is in the money today might be out
of the money tomorrow.
These relationships should be made clear by Figure 2-19 below. One who
buys an out-of-the-money call will realize a loss (in the form of the premium
that he or she paid) until the underlying exchange rate exceeds the strike
price by a margin equal to the premium that he or she paid. Beyond this
point, the greater the appreciation of the underlying rate, the greater the value
of the option will be. Naturally, the opposite is true for the party that
underwrites the call option. As long as the actual exchange rate remains
below the strike price, the upfront premium paid by the buyer represents
profit. A massive appreciation in the underlying exchange rate, however,
would expose the buyer to significant losses. Meanwhile, the buyer of a put
option will only earn a profit if the exchange rate depreciates. The seller of
that put option can pocket the upfront premium, but will be exposed to losses
in the event of depreciation.

Figure 2-19. Profit/loss for various options

53

54

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
Participants in the options market typically use a variation of the BlackScholes model (also known as the Garman Hagen model) as a basis for
setting prices. Suffice it to say that this model is extraordinarily complex, and
is based on the following variables: spot exchange rate, strike price, time
until expiration, volatility, and interest rate differential. Alas, since volatility
isn’t known in advance, traders actually must approach the model in a
backwards fashion. In other words, the market will set a price for each option
agreement, from which the implied volatility can be induced.
Options are naturally useful for hedging purposes. For example, let’s say you
have an open USD/EUR position and you are concerned that a large
downside loss would wipe out all of your profits. By paying a small
“insurance” premium associated with an out-of-the money put, you could
effectively protect yourself from the possibility of a sudden downside
movement. A corporation might have the opposite problem, if it thinks that a
surge in overseas Christmas sales might leave it with a big chunk of euros.
Instead of executing a forward contract (which would leave it with the
obligation to make an exchange of euros for dollars), it might instead buy a
USD/EUR option. If its European sales fulfill expectations, the corporation
will be protected from an adverse move in the USD/EUR by its forex
options. If Christmas sales disappoint, it will have forfeited the option’s
premium, but at least it won’t be forced into converting currency that it never
received. As with futures contracts, the majority of forex options contracts
are never exercised, and do not result in the actual delivery of the underlying
currency.
Options are also attractive to speculators because they support complex
trading strategies at costs that are lower than those offered in the spot market.
For example, it might cost $100,000 in the spot market to bet that the US
dollar will appreciate against the euro, but it might cost only $5,000 to make
the same bet in the options market! Moreover, by combining options with
different strike prices and different expiration dates, it’s possible to construct
very particular trading strategies that target very specific price movements.
For example, you can use options to bet that the market will trade flat (i.e.,
without volatility). Instead, you could bet on volatility and simultaneously
buy/sell a put and a call option in a way that will yield profits if the exchange
rate makes a big move in either direction, but a loss if the market trades flat.
In Chapter 7, I will explore some of these forex-trading strategies in greater
detail.
