So any pair against New Zealand dollar should be sold in New Zealand trading hours. Pairs such as New Zealand dollar/euro, New Zealand dollar/Swiss
franc, New Zealand dollar/British pound, and New Zealand dollar/Canadian
dollar are all sells, provided the bond-yield scenario holds. In other markets,
present arrangements may or may not work. A reconﬁguration of pairs may
be necessary. New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar should always be a buy-on-dip
strategy, provided economic conditions hold.
What about the British pound/Swiss franc in New Zealand markets? The
answer is why trade it since it doesn’t have a connection to New Zealand or
its markets, nor does the British pound side have a connection because their
markets are not yet opened for trading nor is the Swiss. There is never an
intersection between the two markets.
When New Zealand opens for trading, it trades by itself for about two
hours while the world awaits the ASX opening in Australia. At this time, the
U.S. market closed about two hours prior. U.S. markets will set direction for
New Zealand markets.
Think about the New Zealand dollar 4:00 p.m. ﬁx and its relation to
other markets. Once New Zealand markets close, the New Zealand dollar
must be priced for other markets, but New Zealand time zones are quite
different. At 4:00 p.m. New Zealand time, New Zealand is ahead of euro
trading in Frankfurt and Swiss franc trading in Zurich by 11 hours, ahead 12
hours for London trading and the British pound. At 4:00 p.m. New Zealand

Stock and Bond Markets

235

time, it’s 4:00 a.m. in London. The New Zealand dollar hardly touches the
major European markets. Instead, the Canadian and U.S. markets in terms
of New Zealand dollar/Canadian dollar and New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar are prime trading times for the New Zealand dollar. Plus British Bankers
Association (BBA) LIBOR is released at 11:00 a.m. London, 11:00 p.m. New
Zealand, after the New Zealand market closes. The LIBOR release at 5:00
a.m. New York time is important to watch for New Zealand dollar direction.
As New Zealand markets close, the New Zealand dollar is no longer tied
to its bond market, so it will seek yields in other markets. The New Zealand
dollar/U.S. dollar will follow S&P direction on Globex until the formal opening of the New York Stock Exchange. Once New York opens, New Zealand
dollar will seek yields in rising New York markets as Treasury Bonds fall. New
Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar is a long in rising New York markets and a short
when the market falls.
Canadian markets open at the same time as New York, so New Zealand
dollar/Canadian dollar could be a viable trade option. As the Toronto Stock
Exchange (TMX) in Canada rises, go long New Zealand dollar/Canadian
dollar as Canadian bonds fall and yields rise, and go short when the Canadian
markets fall. Once New York closes, trade will again come back to New
Zealand and New Zealand dollar will again attach to its bond price.
Australia ASX

Australia’s ASX Stock Market, known formally as ASX Limited, is currently
in merger talks with Singapore’s Stock and Derivatives Exchanges (SGX),
subject to approval by Australia’s Foreign Investment Review Board. The
intent is to create the largest exchange in Asia by volume.
Trading begins at pre-market open at 7:00 a.m. Sydney time and a formal opening at 10:00 a.m. Stock orders are entered into the system during
premarket opens with best-priced orders to trade ﬁrst. The 10:09 a.m. full
opening occurs about the same time as the 10:00 a.m. Australian dollar ﬁx.
This dual-purpose opening can forecast valuable information as to direction of
Australian dollar/U.S. dollar as well as Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar.
The equity index to view for trading purposes is the S&P/ASX 200 because
it includes only the highest capitalized Australian companies. Approximately
65 percent of the index comprises ﬁnancial and material companies in the
ASX total listing of 2,192 companies. Yet 78 percent of the index accounts
for total market capitalization. The ASX closes at 4:00 p.m. Sydney time,
midnight in New York. The S&P/ASX 200 index is a market-capitalization

236

Inside the Currency Market

weighted index. The formula: total market capitalization of index stocks
divided by the divisor.
Futures markets that include interest rates, Bank Bills, cash rate, bonds,
swaps, and options begin trade from the second Sunday in March to the ﬁrst
Sunday in November at 5:14 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and 8:34 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
From the ﬁrst Sunday in November to the second Sunday in March, markets
open between 5:08 and 5:14 p.m. to 7:30 a.m. and between 8:30 and
8:34 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. The purpose for the varying times is to coordinate
daylight savings time, especially in the United States, since U.S. Sunday-night
market openings are actually Monday mornings in Sydney. At the Australian
opening, Wellington, New Zealand, trading on the NZX has been open for
three hours.
New Zealand Futures that trade on the ASX open from 5:40 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Bank Bills, cash rate, and 3- and
10-year bond futures trade. Yet the bond futures contract is not widely traded
and should be excluded from consideration as an indicator of reference and
instead replaced with the Bank Bills contract as an indicator.
From Exhibit 8.3, the ﬁve-year chart of the S&P/ASX200, one would
notice no deﬁnable pattern exists as to highs and lows from year to year. This
is what it means to tie bonds to economic performance. They’re tied directly
to stock market movements and all movements have pointed straight up over
ﬁve years.
Australia is an economy currently performing quite well. As long as
Australia’s economy performs well, no shorts will exist in Australia’s stock
market nor will they exist in Australian dollar/U.S. dollar. Yet this represents
overall trend rather than short-term performance.
If lows for the year will materialize, they will occur somewhere in the
April to August period as new budgets are passed and funded. Any drastic
lows experienced were due to shocks to the world economic system from
2007 to the present day. Australia’s economy absorbed the shocks and
rebounded. This would explain the volatile movements in Australian dollar/
New Zealand dollar to some degree, yet this pair has always traded quite
sporadically.
The ASX never experienced large point swings. Like its counterpart
in New Zealand, 100- or 200-point trading days are rare. Instead 30- or
40-point days are more representative of the ASX. But it’s a market that
trends, so Australian dollar/U.S. dollar will trend.
One measure of risk for the ASX is the new S&P Volatility Index that
began trade September 2010. This volatility index is a VIX index measured
by a weighted average of implied volatility of put and call options on the

Stock and Bond Markets

237

EXHIBIT 8.3 S&P/ASX 200 5-Year Chart

Source: Bloomberg Finance, LP.

ASX 200. No options are listed on the index, it’s a measure of XJO overall
put and call options against the S&P/ASX 200. XJO options are cash settled,
exercised in the European style and are index options over the S&P 200 that
are measured in points rather than Australian dollars. The term XJO is the
formal name of these options.
Generally a high reading implies market uncertainty; some would imply,
probably correctly, an overbought situation, while a low reading implies certainty. Others would argue it means an oversold market ready to go up. The
volatility index is an end-of-day calculation and is basically the same VIX
Index in purpose, calculation, and measurement that trades on the Chicago
Board of Trade. One difference is 30-day volatility is measured by settlement
prices of puts and calls on the ASX 200 using the RBA overnight rate and
one-, two-, and three-month Bank Bill Reference Rates (BBSW) to interpolate the risk-free rate for each maturity.

238

Inside the Currency Market

Trade Strategy

As Australia’s bonds are tied to economic performance, stocks and Australian
dollar/U.S. dollar will continue to rise. Further, as long as interest rates in
Australia continue to rise and continue to be the highest of the industrialized
world, economic performance and money ﬂow into Australia and Australia’s
markets will be good. Any dips in Australian dollar/U.S. dollar during
Australia trading hours should always be bought.
Australian dollar/Japanese yen, like its counterpart New Zealand dollar/
Japanese yen, is a sell Japanese yen against Australian dollar during good
economic conditions in Australia. Yet the Japanese would prefer a buy
Japanese yen/Australian dollar so Australian dollars can be earned against
yen. A disparity of interest rates won’t allow this under present economic
conditions. Measure Japanese yen/Australian dollar against Australian
dollar/Japanese yen, as one side will experience a top as the other side bottoms. With interest disparities, Australian dollar/Japanese yen is the preferred trade.
Yet look for compression of both yield curves as a buy and widening curves as a sell. This is measured against the Nikkei 225. A narrowing
occurs when Australian markets are down and the Nikkei is up. This is a
buy Australian dollar/Japanese yen and sell when Australia is up and the
Nikkei is down.
The rising Australian stock market and healthy economic conditions
with a wide disparity of interest rates says sell any pair against Australian
dollar during Australian trading hours. Pairs such as Australian dollar/British
pound, Australian dollar/euro, Australian dollar/Swiss franc, and Australian
dollar/Canadian dollar are all buy positions, as Australia’s bonds and the ASX
rises and yields fall. Stated differently, these pairs are all long trades as the
ASX rises along with the bond price. In other markets, these arrangements
may or may not have to be reconﬁgured.
Once the ASX closes, Australian dollar is not tied to its bond market.
Instead, it will seek its yields in other markets. The S&P 500 should be monitored in terms of Australian dollar/U.S. dollar direction until the formal
opening of New York trading. Once New York opens, Australian dollar/U.S.
dollar is a long, as a rising stock market will send yields up and bond prices
down, and a sell when the stock market falls, as yields fall when the bond
price rises.
Australian dollar/Canadian dollar is a long in rising Canadian markets
as yields will rise when the bond price falls. The monitor for this trade is the
New York markets. If New York markets are up, it lends further conﬁrmation,

Stock and Bond Markets

239

as the TMX has good chances of following rising New York markets. If both
markets are down, sell Australian dollar/Canadian dollar. Be aware of an
interest rate factor in this trade, 4.75 percent against Canada’s 1.00 percent.
A sell trade in down New York and Toronto markets is never long term due to
interest rate differentials. This pair at times is not a major mover, which can
only say not much interest lies in this pair. One reason may be limited trade
between Canada and Australia, or maybe it doesn’t serve as a funding pair.
The last reason may be this pair is a pure commodity pair and its fortunes
may be tied to other factors for its movement such as the CRB Commodity
index.
Australian dollar/British pound is a long in London trading only if the
FTSE is down along with the gilt price as yields rise. The disparity of interest
rates in this conﬁguration allows this pair to be bought for the long term and
sold as British pound/Australian dollar.
In the Australian dollar/Swiss franc arrangement, both are tied to their
respective bonds in their respective markets. Neither market connects simultaneously. After Australia closes, Zurich will eventually open. Either conﬁguration for this pair poses a problem due to an interest-rate disparity, but
it’s also not a viable trade in terms of risk/reward. For example, the only
method to go long this pair occurs when the SMI is down along with Swiss
Confederate bonds. Australian dollar will rise based on yields. But the Swiss
economy is tied to performance based on a rising bond price. What if the
arrangement was Swiss franc/Australian dollar? This pair loses based on
interest-rate disparity, 0.25 for Swiss franc and 4.50 for Australian dollar.
A long trade in U.S. or Canadian markets would be an option if this Australian
dollar/Swiss franc conﬁguration was arranged.

FTSE and British Pound

The majority of the world reports and focuses on the FTSE 100 Index
that trades on the London Stock Exchange. This index comprises the bestcapitalized companies that trade on the London Stock Exchange. But it’s the
FTSE 250 Index that serves as the better barometer and measure of health
of the economic situation in England and direction of the British pound
because those 250 companies are more U.K. represented. Point movements
will always be more broad in the FTSE 250 than the FTSE 100.
See Exhibit 8.4, a ﬁve-year chart of FTSE 100. The Financial Times
of London always credits this index as its benchmark and this view can be
accepted.

240

Inside the Currency Market

EXHIBIT 8.4 FTSE 100 Five-Year Chart

Source: Bloomberg Finance, LP.

Further, the FTSE 250 allows for a better view of possible tops and bottoms
measured year to year where the FTSE 100 is not clear in that delineation. Yet it
must be understood that at times that measure can be quite difﬁcult because the
gilt bond /stock market measure is strictly based on economic performance. Years
of great economic performance can undermine the search for a clear top and bottom. Likewise, years of economic turmoil cannot necessarily presage a rise.
If any period exists to measure a top and bottom year to year, it occurs with
an April/May top that trails off in the summer and builds again in the October/
December period as new budgets are debated and passed. See Exhibit 8.5, the
ﬁve-year chart of the FTSE 250. This was measured against a ﬁve-year chart of
the FTSE 250 from 2005 to the present. But this measure is not consistent year
over year, as economic performance completely drives this system.

Stock and Bond Markets

241

EXHIBIT 8.5 FTSE 250 Five-Year Chart

Source: Bloomberg Finance, LP.

Approximately 2,696 companies trade on the London Exchange as of
August 2010 with an average daily value of approximately $4,127,251,785
(London Stock Exchange). Compare that ﬁgure to an average daily value
in 1997 of 819,319,487 and one will notice tremendous growth. Part of
that growth is explained by the 2007 merger of Borsa Italiana, Italy’s stock
exchange, new company listings that rose over the years, and a host of new
products introduced. Ironically, stock P/E ratios are not published from company to company nor is it assumed that P/E ratios are published for the
FTSE 100 or 250, so an overbought or oversold market can’t be determined
by P/E ratios. So this market must be measured in terms of gilt bond prices
and yields.

242

Inside the Currency Market

However, following the FTSE calculation will not only determine an
index value, but P/E Ratios can be determined. For FTSE 100 and all FTSE
indices in the United Kingdom:
 ((Pi  ei)  si  fi)/D

n1

where
n  1, 2, 3 . . ., n,
n  number of securities in the index,
p  price last trade of component security or previous day index close,
e  exchange rate - exchange rate required to convert security’s home
currency into index base currency,
s  number of shares in index,
f  free-ﬂoat factor applied to each security to allow weighting,
expressed between 0 and 1 where 1 is equal to 100 percent free
ﬂoat, and
d  divisor-total issued share capital of index at base date, adjusted.
The base value has been 1000 since its 1984 launch. The index is chain linked
using the Paasche method and is calculated every 15 seconds. Index divisors
can be factored by dividing the market value by the index value. Yet a market
value is equal to the change in index points multiplied by the index divisor.
PE Ratios are factored as:
n

∑p × s × t
i

i

i

i −1

n

∑e × f
i

i

i =1

n  number of shares,
si  share in issue for ith component,
pi  price of ith component security,
ei  aggregate earnings of ith component, and
fi  free ﬂoat factor for 1th component.
The London Stock Exchange is a market that can move. In May 2007, the
FTSE 100 traded at about 12,203, saw a low of 5,543 during the November
2008 economic crisis, and rose to present-day values of approximately 10,725
(all quoted in British pounds). Plenty of opportunity exists to proﬁt with
deployment of currency pairs during London trade.
Monthly gilt summaries are released by the London Stock Exchange
Group. Summaries include gilt sales, redemptions, index-linked, and

Stock and Bond Markets

243

non-index-linked gilts. Gilts trade on either the Professional Securities or
Main Market.
The London Stock Exchange advertises itself as the largest debt market
in Europe because of the large number of corporate- and government-debt
issues offered to the trading public. Currently 89 different companies offer
various debt maturities traded on the London Exchange. This lends credence
to the Bank of England’s (BOE) focus in the Quarterly Bulletin on corporate
debt as a measure of future economic health across Europe. More debt issuance usually denotes corporate expansion.
In September 2010, gilts were offered to the retail public for the ﬁrst time.
gilt purchases and sales ﬂow through to the Electronic Order Book for Retail
Bonds on the London Exchange. This allows the public to see two-way continuous pricing in 49 different gilt maturities. Previously, gilt sales and purchases had high minimum purchase sizes and were for institutional investors
among others.
The London Stock Exchange opens for trading at 8:00 a.m. London
time, 3:00 a.m. New York time and closes at 4:30 p.m. London time, 11:30 a.m.
New York time.
The last two hours of London trade rolls into the ﬁrst two hours of New
York trading. Further, the last two hours of London trade coincides with the
ﬁrst two hours of trade on the Toronto Stock Exchange, so British pound/
Canadian dollar becomes an important trade during this time. A 10-minute
auction process begins every trading day in London at 8:00 a.m. and ends at
8:10. The auction process provides vital information as to the direction of the
formal opening.
At the London open, New Zealand and Australia are closed while Tokyo
is closing. Yet Tokyo’s JGB Futures markets remain open for the ﬁrst three
hours of London trade, and it is vitally important to gauge a British pound/
Japanese yen trade in terms of a yield curve and bond strategy. Be aware that
the close of the three-hour window is the 11:00 a.m. London, 5:00 a.m. New
York time BBA LIBOR announcement. But the 8:00 a.m. London opening is
4:00 p.m. Tokyo. So the close of JGB futures trading rolls into BBA LIBOR
and is an important time to measure the Japanese yen. This time brings volatility due to repricing of assets after the release. Plus U.K. and European
economic announcements are released about this time. This period is one of
the most volatile episodes within a 24-hour trading cycle. It’s a time to proﬁt,
or to lose if one is not careful.
One hour after the London opening, Frankfurt and Zurich open for
trading, so the euro and Swiss franc become important at this time.

244

Inside the Currency Market

Trade Strategy

The equation to trade the British pound/U.S. dollar is quite simple. As
the FTSE stock market rises, gilt bonds will rise. So in turn will the British
pound/U.S. dollar. How far up depends on bond movements. The short end
is rich with possibilities to measure how far, so this represents the start to
monitor any trade.
Conversely, as the stock market and bond price decline so will the British
pound/U.S. dollar. These equations assume trends. Yet markets may range
trade up and down during a trading session or through periods. This means
bond prices, yields, and the FTSE will ebb and ﬂow throughout a trading
day or period of time. It allows for continuous buys and sells throughout the
trading session
Ranging markets simply say bonds, yields, and stock prices fall within
the parameters of their respective prices and are not ready to break new highs
or lows. The British pound/U.S. dollar price will be contained within these
same parameters. A breakout will occur only when the bond/yield equation
breaks its range. If the British pound/U.S. dollar breaks its range without
a bond/yield breakout, British pound/U.S. dollar overshot the range targets and will fall back inside the range. So if the British pound/U.S. dollar
range was broken on the upside, it’s a sell British pound/U.S. dollar and it’s a
buy if it broke the downside target, provided bonds and yields didn’t break
their range.
Yet the FTSE, bond prices, and yields move well enough on any given
day to easily proﬁt. Reaction to market movements occurs quickly in London
and Europe, so caution is advised to stay abreast of market action if one trades
short term.
To gauge future movements, compare bond prices to yields. The FTSE
is more than an ancillary indicator due to its focus on exchange rates, so it
should be employed as a measure between bonds and yields.
The overall direction for the British pound/U.S. dollar is always up
toward weakness as good economic conditions are the goal for policymakers
and the BOE. What they seek is a rising bond price with a rising stock market. That means a British pound/U.S. dollar headed higher toward weakness.
London trading is quite different from New Zealand and Australia because
movements occur—and sometimes rather quickly.
Remember British pound/U.S. dollar is the premier pair for the BOE,
policymakers, and the general U.K. public due to its connection to the U.S.
economy and as a measure of its own economic health. It’s the pair widely
known, widely viewed, widely understood, and widely reported in the U.K.

Stock and Bond Markets

245

for its importance as the vital link. All stock markets report this pair, and
investors watch the U.S. markets with concern to gauge direction of their
own currency pairs, investments, and economic direction. Many world stock
markets stream U.S. news and the New York Stock Exchange averages are
reported directly on respective sites. The world truly watches the U.S. dollar.
Another measure of the British pound/U.S. dollar is the German bund
due to the importance of the German economy as a benchmark indicator of
economic conditions throughout Europe. The approach is to measure yield
spreads between the German bund and the gilt. The question for consideration should always be how much and who beneﬁts; which side receives the
better side of the deal in British pound or U.S. dollar terms.
Notice how the British pound/U.S. dollar is conﬁgured. Both are opposite to each other. Only one side can win on bond terms while the other side
will win in yield terms, but never at the same time. Imagine borrowing in
British pound yields at one price, then paying back the borrowed money
in bunds at a higher bund yield. It’s a losing situation. The bund yield is the
U.S. dollar side of the equation. A few examples follow.
As spreads widen in favor of the German bund, this is a sell British
pound/U.S. dollar because the cost of borrowing in British pound terms is
greater than U.S. dollar terms. The cost is prohibitive in British pound terms
because replication of British pounds can’t be earned, and that must be the
overall goal. If spreads narrow, buy British pound/U.S. dollar as the cost to
borrow decreases. In this instance, it’s the cost of conducting business across
borders that increases or decreases and yields deﬁne the terms. As spreads
widen, it says the gilt/bund price widened.
This scenario on a larger scale transpires as spreads widen in favor of
bunds, the British pound/U.S. dollar falls, gilt prices rise, and the FTSE rises
while the opposite scenario holds. As spreads narrow, buy British pound/U.S.
dollar as the FTSE and gilt prices rise. Stated differently, if the German Stock
Index (DAX) in Frankfurt is down and the FTSE is down, buy the British
pound/U.S. dollar, and sell when the DAX is up and the FTSE is up. How
about euro/British pound?
Euro/British Pound
