
 My reluctant inclination … is to take prices up on Sunday, December 29. My present thinking is 20¢ to 30¢ per pound.… If sugar futures keep falling as they have the last few days, I would be inclined to hold off on purchases until we get some reaction in the market for refined sugar. 5 

 Buffett also pestered Huggins about enhancing the See’s brand name. Ironically, Buffett’s inadequacy as an epicure enlightened him as to what the company was really “selling.” 

 Maybe grapes from a little eight-acre vineyard in France are really the best in the whole world, but I have always had a suspicion that about 99% of it is in the telling and about 1% is in the drinking. 6 

 Then Buffett would tunnel his attention onto trading stamps. Discount supermarkets had been taking business from stamp-dispensing stores, which were increasingly seen as a bad deal for shoppers. Buffett bombarded Blue Chip with ideas on how to counter this perception, but he conceded, in a revealing bit of self-analysis, that marketing was out of his range: 

 The problem I have is that I think like an accountant or an actuary. My reaction is to explain all the facts and do all the mathematics for the consumer, to show her just how much better off she is by getting our stamps. I think I could convince a group of mathematicians, actuaries, security analysts or accountants … but [not] the housewife. 7 

 Buffett also put $45 million of the “float” from Blue Chip into bank stocks, mimicking his capital reallocation at Berkshire. 8 
 But now his dangerous game was well along. He was investing on behalf of three companies, Berkshire, Blue Chip, and Diversified, that had separate groups of shareholders, and he was obliged to each to get the best deals. Into which pocket would he put the Washington Post and which the See’s Candy? Understand that Buffett was scrupulously fair about it. Even so, the conflict of interest was inherent and inescapable. The arrangement was complex beyond call, and for Buffett quite out of character. And where matters are complex, the securities cops rightfully pay attention. 
 In the midst of this merry game, a broker offered Buffett a block of Wesco Financial, a Pasadena, California, company that owned a savings and loan. Buffett knew Wesco in his sleep. He had read its annual report—as he did those of hundreds of savings and loans—every year since the mid-sixties. 9 Wesco was trading in the low teens, less than half its book value. * Buffett checked with Munger, who agreed that it was cheap, and Blue Chip snapped up 8 percent of the shares. 10 At the time—the summer of 1972—Wesco was a minor, $2 million investment. But in January 1973, Wesco announced a plan to merge with another California savings and loan, Financial Corp. of Santa Barbara. 
 Buffett and Munger instantly reached the same conclusion: Wesco was giving away the store. Under the merger terms, holders of Wesco would exchange their undervalued stock for shares in Santa Barbara—which seemed highly overvalued . Quoting Buffett: 

 I read these terms, and I didn’t believe them. And I told [Munger] the terms as announced and he couldn’t believe it as I couldn’t believe it. But it was there in black and white on the Dow Jones tape. 11 

 Munger wanted to buy more stock in Wesco, in the hope of defeating the merger, which would be subject to a vote of shareholders. Buffett, who was stoic about taking an occasional loss, did not. He said, “To hell with it; we made a mistake.” 12 But Munger persevered. For the next six weeks, Blue Chip bought every Wesco share in sight, accumulating 20 percent of the stock. 
 However, they still could not stop the merger. And now Blue Chip was in deep. As Munger said, they were like the rat in the trap who decides it no longer wants the cheese. 
 In February, Munger paid a call on Louis R. Vincenti, Wesco’s president. Using an odd choice of words, Munger said that Blue Chip had been buying stock “in the hope of creating a climate” in which Vincenti and the other Wesco directors would not feel any “moral obligation” to carry out the merger. 
 Vincenti stuck to the script. He observed that Blue Chip was free to vote no, and to solicit other shareholders to do the same. To Munger, such a populist course reeked of vulgarity. He had come as a man of honor, confident that between two such men no problem was irresolvable. He declared that he liked Wesco’s management, and that Vincenti, in particular, was Buffett’s and Munger’s sort of fellow. In fact, Munger declared several times that if Vincenti personally asked him, man to man, so to speak, Blue Chip would stop buying shares. 13 
 Vincenti thought it most odd. He did not understand Munger’s appeal to morality in the midst of a routine business transaction. Yet it went to the core of what distinguished Munger, which was an adherence to old-school ethics. He never tired of quoting Benjamin Franklin, whose aphorisms he judged more useful than most of what was taught in business school. 
 In and out of business, Munger subscribed to the gentleman’s code. He was headstrong about getting his way, but indifferent to assessing blame or credit for the results. When a doctor botched a cataract operation, ruining his eyesight, he uncomplainingly observed that it happened in a tiny percentage of such cases and took to studying ophthalmology. 14 
 In private life, Munger was enormously active. Following the Belous abortion case, he was a driving force for instituting abortion clinics in Los Angeles. 15 As a volunteer chairman of Good Samaritan Hospital, he totally revamped the hospital’s mission and menu of specialties. Yet he bullied the doctors, as he did his fellow trustees at the local Planned Parenthood. Where Buffett had a common touch, the Republican Munger reeked of noblesse oblige . He would lope into a boardroom, thinking out loud and telling stories that he found uproarious, a half-blind philosopher-king with a hugely magnifying and terrifying lens. 16 
 “Charlie is very funny, and also very pompous,” said a member of Buffett’s circle. “He believes in the aristocratic point of view, that there is a select group of accomplished, talented people in the world, and that he is one of them.” 
 Munger was wont to joke about establishing a Munger “dynasty.” When he divorced his wife, “the first duchess,” he read obituaries in the hope of finding a widow with the desired attributes for his intended offspring. He and the “second duchess” raised eight little Munger lords and ladies. 
 Unlike his Omaha partner, he led a big life, fishing in the rivers and wilds of various continents for trout, bonefish, and Atlantic salmon, holding court at the California Club, and dominating a party, especially after a glass of wine. Ira Marshall recalled a soirée in Bel-Air: Munger was talking his way through a rambling, sonorous monologue—something about a thousand-year orgasm—which Munger found quite funny, when the host asked Marshall, “Can you get Charlie to shut up ? No one can say a word.” 
 Otis Booth, a close friend, would awake in the middle of the night on a fishing trip and Munger would be sitting up poring over a book, likely quite arcane. On an expedition with Booth and Marshall to the Australian rain forest, all the while as their jeep went bounding through the jungle Munger was reading an obscure work of paleontology. Then, at night, Munger lectured the group from his reading, “telling us out of the clear blue sky how the dinosaurs evolved into birds,” Marshall recalled. 
 People, including many of Buffett’s friends, were intimidated by Munger’s weighty discourses on black holes and Einstein, not to mention his contemptuous manner. Buffett’s friend Roxanne Brandt once remarked that the only hospital she knew of in Los Angeles was Cedar Sinai Medical Center. Munger shot back, “That’s because you’re Jewish.” 
 Yet Munger was a formidable armchair psychologist and, in particular, a student of behavior. He saw the devil in such phenomena as the inability of people to change their minds, or what he termed “first-conclusion bias”: 
 “This is why organizations solicit public pledges. Hell, it’s the reason for the marriage ceremony.” 17 
 Buffett was deeply influenced by such precepts of Munger’s. Yet it was Buffett, not Munger, who had the more natural touch when it came to applying them. Indeed, Buffett was a master at overcoming a person’s “first-conclusion bias.” 
 In the Wesco matter, after Munger had failed with Vincenti, Buffett began to court the one director with the power to abort the merger. Elizabeth Peters, a San Francisco heiress, was Wesco’s largest shareholder. 18 Peters’s parents had founded the savings and loan and taken it public in the late 1950s. Her brothers being unsuited to the task, it had been left to Peters, an English major, to learn the business and protect the family interest. She found, first, that she was good at it, and second, that Wesco provided an agreeable contrast to her other pursuits, which included tending to a Napa Valley vineyard that produced a fine cabernet and reading Chaucer. 
 By the early seventies, Wesco had gone a bit flat. Peters was anxious to give it a kick, but the other directors had little interest, financial or otherwise. When Santa Barbara made its offer, Peters knew that the terms were sorry, but she reckoned that a merger might stir the pot. 
 Buffett sent Donald Koeppel, Blue Chip’s president, to talk to Peters, but she remained adamantly in support of the merger. A short time after Koeppel left, Buffett called. He pleasantly introduced himself, and suggested a tête-à-tête. 
 A couple of days later, Buffett and Peters sat down in a lounge at the San Francisco airport. Buffett told her that in his opinion, Wesco stock would in time be worth far more than what Santa Barbara was offering. This was the refrain that Peters had heard from Koeppel, but from Buffett it sounded more persuasive. For one thing, Buffett spoke to her as a fellow owner. His capital was on the line with hers. 
 When Peters insisted that something had to be done to reinvigorate Wesco, Buffett said he’d like to try it himself. He talked some about his relationship with other companies, which he described as being one of partnership. He talked some about himself. He was calmly reassuring, pushing the right buttons. 
 Peters felt that she wouldn’t mind being this guy’s partner, either. She liked Buffett—liked him a lot. 19 And he was a ray of hope. 
 Peters had just one question. “Mr. Buffett, if I buy you, what happens if you get hit by a truck at the intersection?” Who would save Wesco then? 
 Buffett replied that he had a partner whose ability he considered equal to his own. He had arranged for this fellow to be in charge of Berkshire, and of Buffett’s family interests, in the event of a “truck,” and he felt that either of them could be trusted with Wesco. 20 
 When Buffett finished, Peters had made up her mind. The merger was dead. 
 Buffett and Munger now felt an obligation to her, and decided to raise their stake in Wesco. They could have bought stock on the cheap, as, ordinarily, when a merger blows apart the stock will tank. But to chisel investors who were bailing out because of the deal’s failure—a failure for which Buffett and Munger were directly responsible—would seem less than classy. Therefore, they told their brokers to be liberal about the price. 
 Blue Chip bid for Wesco at 17—the price that had prevailed before the deal had fallen through. Though this was highly unusual, according to Munger, “We decided in some quixotic moment that it was the right way to behave.” 
 Blue Chip raised its stake to 24.9 percent. Subsequently, Wesco’s shares fell, along with the general market, and Blue Chip made several tender offers. By the middle of 1974, Blue Chip owned a majority of the stock (Peters continued as a big minority holder). There matters seemed to rest. But unbeknownst to Buffett and Munger, their trail had been picked up by the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
 The first hint of trouble came in the fall of 1974. It arose, in part, from Buffett and Munger’s intricate, but still informal, partnership. Buffett and Munger, separately, owned stock in both Blue Chip and Diversified Retailing. However, Munger was not involved in Berkshire. Thus, when Buffett spent money from his Blue Chip pocket, it was collaborative; when he reached into Berkshire—his front pocket—he was on his own. The interlocking ownership made for a confusing, conflicted mess. 21 

 As a first step toward untangling these spaghetti strands, Buffett and Munger announced a plan to merge Diversified into Berkshire. But the SEC had questions. Lots of questions. 
 Munger, at first, presumed that the SEC was delaying them because Buffett and he were such “interesting” characters. He had a quaint image of a regulator scrutinizing Blue Chip as though it were an unusual bug that had crawled across its microscope. But as the months dragged on, Munger got testy. Writing to Charles Rickershauser, his and Buffett’s lawyer at Munger’s law firm, Munger had an aggrieved air, as though dealing with a plodding functionary at the bureau of motor vehicles: 

 I hope the foregoing will satisfy everyone at the SEC and that, if not, you can arrange that I receive the promptest possible response, preferably by direct telephone calls to me, so that we can clear up any problems and get our merger consummated. 22 

 Alas, Munger had not read Kafka. Rickershauser sent a toned-down version of his letter to the SEC. In December, Munger got his prompt response—though not the one he expected. The SEC opened a formal investigation of the Prince of Omaha: In the Matter of Blue Chip Stamps, Berkshire Hathaway Inc., Warren Buffet [sic], HO-784 . Buffett was now the target of a full-scale probe. 

 Blue Chip, Berkshire, Buffet [sic], singly or in concert with others … may have engaged in acts which may have, directly or indirectly operated as a device, scheme, or artifice to defraud; or included an untrue statement of a material fact or omitted … 23 

 The inquiry focused on whether Blue Chip had “manipulated” the price of Wesco’s stock, a vague charge that can be difficult to resolve either way. Within the SEC’s enforcement division, it was considered a big case, and it quickly broadened into a general investigation of everything Buffett had touched. 
 Under subpoena, Buffett shipped three cartons of files to Washington. His stock-transfer records, his letters to Blue Chip, his every memo to the textile mill and See’s Candy and to Buffett’s bankers—all of it was sucked into the SEC vacuum. In the opinion of Verne McKenzie, Berkshire’s treasurer, “They had discovered a rich guy and decided he had to be a crook.” 
 Buffett was concerned, but calm. He had the same unflappable patience that he brought to investing, even when his reputation was on the line. Munger, in contrast, was nearly apoplectic. 
 Roderick Hills, Munger’s former law partner, was then serving as White House counsel. As the investigation gathered steam, word leaked out that Hills had been offered the job of SEC chairman. Rickershauser, Buffett’s and Munger’s lawyer, called Hills and pleaded with him to turn it down, arguing that if he took the job the SEC might feel compelled to bend over backward and judge them more harshly. “Is there anything there?” Hills asked, alluding to the investigation. Rickershauser said, “No, it’s crap.” Hills shrugged it off. Then Munger called a couple of times, berating Hills for supposedly abandoning Buffett in his hour of need. But Hills took the job. 
 Munger appeared at the SEC in March 1975, for two days of testimony. He grandly assured his interrogators, “If anything is wrong, Warren and I take full responsibility,” as though that would put an end to it. He treated it as a test of character, frequently referring to the honor of various parties. 
 The young SEC lawyers, ignoring his tone, bored in on him. They intimated that Munger perhaps had conspired to sell short the stock of Wesco’s suitor as a means of torpedoing the merger. Munger protested, “That is not our style of operation.” He sounded shocked, like a confessor who has stumbled upon a policeman instead of a priest. 
 The SEC, in fact, suspected a plot. Specifically, had Blue Chip blown up the merger in order to take over Wesco for itself? 

 Q : 
 For how long before February 26 had this approach [seeking control of Wesco] been under consideration by you and Mr. Buffett? 

 MUNGER : 
 As I stated earlier, 98 percent of our attention was devoted to the task at hand. We are believers in Carlyle’s Prescription, that the job a man is to do is the job at hand and not see what lies dimly in the distance. 24 

 Undeterred by Carlyle, the SEC lawyers went to the heart. Why, that is, had Blue Chip paid more than necessary for Wesco? 

 Q : 
 Why would you intentionally pay a higher price for something that you could get for less? 

 MUNGER : 
 We wanted to look very fair and equitable to Lou Vincenti and Betty Peters. 

 Q : 
 What about your shareholders? Didn’t you want to be fair to them? 

 MUNGER : 
 Well, we didn’t feel our obligation to shareholders required us to do anything which isn’t consistent with leaning over backwards to be fair. We have that Ben Franklin idea that—if you will—the honest policy is the best policy.… You look puzzled. 

 Q : 
 I am. It was my impression that businessmen always try to maximize profits for the corporation and shareholders that they serve. 

 MUNGER : 
 Well, maybe we’re trying to maximize profits over the long pull If we hope to have a long and congenial working relationship with Louis Vincenti maybe it’s just, in light of self-interest, to lean over backwards on deals where you might think he cared. 25 

 This was similar to the theme that Buffett had struck with Betty Peters in San Francisco. A long-term investment was more than merely a bet on a stock; it was a form of partnership. A big shareholder—a partner—gave as well as got. To Buffett, the very word “partner” had a powerful implication, suggesting a raft of unspoken responsibilities and loyalties, such as he had felt toward the investors in Buffett Partnership. 
 The modern portfolio manager saw stocks in two dimensions; they flickered across the screen, and at the push of a button they disappeared. Buffett and Munger wanted a larger role. They often talked about how managing money was not enough. As Munger recalled, “I said to Warren, ‘We don’t want to be like Russell Sage, a shrewd, miserable accumulator.’ We didn’t want to be remembered by friends and family for nothing but pieces of paper.” † 
 The SEC lawyers were incredulous. It looked to them as if Blue Chip had been propping up Wesco’s stock—i.e., “manipulating” it—presumably to sell at a higher price. But as Blue Chip hadn’t sold, the lawyers were mystified. Now, they tried with Buffett. 

 Q : 
 From a business point of view, wouldn’t it have been better to let the price go down and buy it at the cheaper price? 

 BUFFETT : 
 On that single transaction it might, but I think if you look at the overall Blue Chip picture, having the people at Wesco feeling that shareholders had been fairly treated … I think the general business reputation of Blue Chip would not have been as good. 

 Q : 
 How about your responsibility to the shareholders of Blue Chip? 

 BUFFETT : 
 I own a fair amount of stock. It has an impact on us. We’re not spending other people’s money entirely. 

 Q : 
 You think it might have looked bad if right after the merger blew up, you went into the market and the price went down? 

 BUFFETT : 
 I think someone might have been sore about it. 

 Q : 
 I’m extremely puzzled by this rationale that somehow you thought the management of Wesco would be upset or sore at you.… I’m saying why should you care, why should Blue Chip care, why should the management of Wesco care? 

 BUFFETT : 
 It’s important how the Wesco management feels about us. You can say, well, we own the controlling interest so it doesn’t make any difference. But it does make a difference. Lou Vincenti doesn’t really need to work for us. He likes working with us. And I enjoy working with him, and it’s a good relationship. If he felt that we were, you know, slobs or something, it just wouldn’t work. It isn’t based solely on the salary he’s getting. 26 

 It is implausible that a government agency would have badgered, say, J. P. Morgan, Sr., for paying too much attention to his reputation. “Why should you care?” To Morgan’s contemporaries, the question would have been unthinkable. But so much of that era had been lost. Indeed, Buffett’s dialogue with the SEC was suggestive of a colloquy across different centuries. The agency, and the buttoned-down lawyers whom it was accustomed to dealing with, defined corporate affairs as a series of transactions. Each action was discrete: today’s partner could be tomorrow’s adversary. Buffett preferred to think in terms of relationships, some of them lasting. He stubbornly stuck to his antique code like a rolltop desk for which he had a quaint fondness. Perversely, it was seen as grounds for suspicion. 
 The fact that Buffett had a doppelgänger merely heightened the SEC’s suspicions. They had found the co-conspirator; now they merely needed the crime. Naturally, they looked for it in the mysterious-seeming alliance of Buffett and Munger. 

 Q : 
 Who at Blue Chip makes the investment decisions? 

 MUNGER : 
 It would usually be Mr. Buffett. He would ordinarily consult with me and get my approval before he went ahead. 

 Q : 
 Now, after Mr. Buffett placed the order for the first purchase, did he tell you that he was going to keep purchasing the stock of Wesco Financial? 

 MUNGER : 
 That type of thing is so natural to us that frequently we don’t have to talk to one another or discuss what our future intentions are. 
