
Primary earnings
Net income (after special charges)
Fully diluted, before special charges
Fully diluted, after special charges

1970

1969

$5.20
4.32
5.01
4.19

$5.58
5.58
5.35
5.35

For the fourth quarter alone only two figures are given:
Primary earnings
Net income (after special charges)

$1.58
.70

$1.56
1.56

What do all these additional earnings mean? Which earnings are
true earnings for the year and the December quarter? If the latter
should be taken at 70 cents—the net income after special charges—
the annual rate would be $2.80 instead of $6.32, and the price 62
would be “22 times earnings,” instead of the 10 times we started
with.
Part of the question as to the “true earnings” of ALCOA can be
answered quite easily. The reduction from $5.20 to $5.01, to allow
for the effects of “dilution,” is clearly called for. ALCOA has a large
bond issue convertible into common stock; to calculate the “earning power” of the common, based on the 1970 results, it must be
assumed that the conversion privilege will be exercised if it should
prove profitable to the bondholders to do so. The amount involved
in the ALCOA picture is relatively small, and hardly deserves
detailed comment. But in other cases, making allowance for conversion rights—and the existence of stock-purchase warrants—can

312

The Intelligent Investor

reduce the apparent earnings by half, or more. We shall present
examples of a really significant dilution factor below (page 411).
(The financial services are not always consistent in their allowance
for the dilution factor in their reporting and analyses.)*
Let us turn now to the matter of “special charges.” This figure of
$18,800,000, or 88 cents per share, deducted in the fourth quarter, is
not unimportant. Is it to be ignored entirely, or fully recognized as
an earnings reduction, or partly recognized and partly ignored?
The alert investor might ask himself also how does it happen that
there was a virtual epidemic of such special charge-offs appearing
after the close of 1970, but not in previous years? Could there possibly have been some fine Italian hands† at work with the accounting—but always, of course, within the limits of the permissible?
When we look closely we may find that such losses, charged off
before they actually occur, can be charmed away, as it were, with
no unhappy effect on either past or future “primary earnings.” In
some extreme cases they might be availed of to make subsequent
earnings appear nearly twice as large as in reality—by a more or
less prestidigitous treatment of the tax credit involved.

* “Dilution” is one of many words that describe stocks in the language of
fluid dynamics. A stock with high trading volume is said to be “liquid.” When
a company goes public in an IPO, it “floats” its shares. And, in earlier days, a
company that drastically diluted its shares (with large amounts of convertible debt or multiple offerings of common stock) was said to have “watered”
its stock. This term is believed to have originated with the legendary market
manipulator Daniel Drew (1797–1879), who began as a livestock trader. He
would drive his cattle south toward Manhattan, force-feeding them salt
along the way. When they got to the Harlem River, they would guzzle huge
volumes of water to slake their thirst. Drew would then bring them to market,
where the water they had just drunk would increase their weight. That
enabled him to get a much higher price, since cattle on the hoof is sold by
the pound. Drew later watered the stock of the Erie Railroad by massively
issuing new shares without warning.
† Graham is referring to the precise craftsmanship of the immigrant Italian
stone carvers who ornamented the otherwise plain facades of buildings
throughout New York in the early 1900s. Accountants, likewise, can transform simple financial facts into intricate and even incomprehensible patterns.

Things to Consider About Per-Share Earnings

313

In dealing with ALCOA’s special charges, the first thing to
establish is how they arose. The footnotes are specific enough. The
deductions came from four sources, viz.:
1. Management’s estimate of the anticipated costs of closing
down the manufactured products division.
2. Ditto for closing down ALCOA Castings Co.’s plants.
3. Ditto for losses in phasing out ALCOA Credit Co.
4. Also, estimated costs of $5.3 million associated with completion of the contract for a “curtain wall.”
All of these items are related to future costs and losses. It is easy
to say that they are not part of the “regular operating results” of
1970—but if so, where do they belong? Are they so “extraordinary
and nonrecurring” as to belong nowhere? A widespread enterprise
such as ALCOA, doing a $1.5 billion business annually, must have
a lot of divisions, departments, affiliates, and the like. Would it not
be normal rather than extraordinary for one or more to prove
unprofitable, and to require closing down? Similarly for such
things as a contract to build a wall. Suppose that any time a company had a loss on any part of its business it had the bright idea of
charging it off as a “special item,” and thus reporting its “primary
earnings” per share so as to include only its profitable contracts
and operations? Like King Edward VII’s sundial, that marked only
the “sunny hours.”*

* The king probably took his inspiration from a once-famous essay by the
English writer William Hazlitt, who mused about a sundial near Venice that
bore the words Horas non numero nisi serenas, or “I count only the hours
that are serene.” Companies that chronically exclude bad news from their
financial results on the pretext that negative events are “extraordinary” or
“nonrecurring” are taking a page from Hazlitt, who urged his readers “to
take no note of time but by its benefits, to watch only for the smiles and neglect the frowns of fate, to compose our lives of bright and gentle moments,
turning away to the sunny side of things, and letting the rest slip from our
imaginations, unheeded or forgotten!” (William Hazlitt, “On a Sun-Dial,” ca.
1827.) Unfortunately, investors must always count the sunny and dark hours
alike.

314

The Intelligent Investor

The reader should note two ingenious aspects of the ALCOA
procedure we have been discussing. The first is that by anticipating
future losses the company escapes the necessity of allocating the
losses themselves to an identifiable year. They don’t belong in
1970, because they were not actually taken in that year. And they
won’t be shown in the year when they are actually taken, because
they have already been provided for. Neat work, but might it not
be just a little misleading?
The ALCOA footnote says nothing about the future tax saving
from these losses. (Most other statements of this sort state specifically that only the “after-tax effect” has been charged off.) If the
ALCOA figure represents future losses before the related tax credit,
then not only will future earnings be freed from the weight of these
charges (as they are actually incurred), but they will be increased by
a tax credit of some 50% thereof. It is difficult to believe that the
accounts will be handled that way. But it is a fact that certain companies which have had large losses in the past have been able to
report future earnings without charging the normal taxes against
them, in that way making a very fine profits appearance indeed—
based paradoxically enough on their past disgraces. (Tax credits
resulting from past years’ losses are now being shown separately as
“special items,” but they will enter into future statistics as part of
the final “net-income” figure. However, a reserve now set up for
future losses, if net of expected tax credit, should not create an addition of this sort to the net income of later years.)
The other ingenious feature is the use by ALCOA and many
other companies of the 1970 year-end for making these special
charge-offs. The stock market took what appeared to be a blood
bath in the first half of 1970. Everyone expected relatively poor
results for the year for most companies. Wall Street was now anticipating better results in 1971, 1972, etc. What a nice arrangement,
then, to charge as much as possible to the bad year, which had
already been written off mentally and had virtually receded into
the past, leaving the way clear for nicely fattened figures in the
next few years! Perhaps this is good accounting, good business policy, and good for management-shareholder relationships. But we
have lingering doubts.
The combination of widely (or should it be wildly?) diversified
operations with the impulse to clean house at the end of 1970 has

Things to Consider About Per-Share Earnings

315

produced some strange-looking footnotes to the annual reports.
The reader may be amused by the following explanation given by
a New York Stock Exchange company (which shall remain
unnamed) of its “special items” aggregating $2,357,000, or about a
third of the income before charge-offs: “Consists of provision for
closing Spalding United Kingdom operations; provision for reorganizational expenses of a division; costs of selling a small babypants and bib manufacturing company, disposing of part interest
in a Spanish car-leasing facility, and liquidation of a ski-boot operation.”*
Years ago the strong companies used to set up “contingency
reserves” out of the profits of good years to absorb some of the bad
effects of depression years to come. The underlying idea was to
equalize the reported earnings, more or less, and to improve the
stability factor in the company’s record. A worthy motive, it would
seem; but the accountants quite rightly objected to the practice as
misstating the true earnings. They insisted that each year’s results
be presented as they were, good or bad, and the shareholders and
analysts be allowed to do the averaging or equalizing for themselves. We seem now to be witnessing the opposite phenomenon,
with everyone charging off as much as possible against forgotten
1970, so as to start 1971 with a slate not only clean but specially
prepared to show pleasing per-share figures in the coming years.
It is time to return to our first question. What then were the true
earnings of ALCOA in 1970? The accurate answer would be: The
$5.01 per share, after “dilution,” less that part of the 82 cents of
“special charges” that may properly be attributed to occurrences in
1970. But we do not know what that portion is, and hence we cannot
properly state the true earnings for the year. The management and the
auditors should have given us their best judgment on this point,
but they did not do so. And furthermore, the management and the
auditors should have provided for deduction of the balance of
these charges from the ordinary earnings of a suitable number of

* The company to which Graham refers so coyly appears to be American
Machine & Foundry (or AMF Corp.), one of the most jumbled conglomerates
of the late 1960s. It was a predecessor of today’s AMF Bowling Worldwide,
which operates bowling alleys and manufactures bowling equipment.

316

The Intelligent Investor

future years—say, not more than five. This evidently they will not
do either, since they have already conveniently disposed of the
entire sum as a 1970 special charge.
The more seriously investors take the per-share earnings figures
as published, the more necessary it is for them to be on their guard
against accounting factors of one kind and another that may impair
the true comparability of the numbers. We have mentioned three
sorts of these factors: the use of special charges, which may never be
reflected in the per-share earnings, the reduction in the normal
income-tax deduction by reason of past losses, and the dilution factor implicit in the existence of substantial amounts of convertible
securities or warrants.1 A fourth item that has had a significant
effect on reported earnings in the past is the method of treating
depreciation—chiefly as between the “straight-line” and the
“accelerated” schedules. We refrain from details here. But as an
example current as we write, let us mention the 1970 report of
Trane Co. This firm showed an increase of nearly 20% in per-share
earnings over 1969—$3.29 versus $2.76—but half of this came from
returning to the older straight-line depreciation rates, less burdensome on earnings than the accelerated method used the year
before. (The company will continue to use the accelerated rate on
its income-tax return, thus deferring income-tax payments on the
difference.) Still another factor, important at times, is the choice
between charging off research and development costs in the year
they are incurred or amortizing them over a period of years.
Finally, let us mention the choice between the FIFO (first-in-firstout) and LIFO (last-in-first-out) methods of valuing inventories.*

* Nowadays, investors need to be aware of several other “accounting factors” that can distort reported earnings. One is “pro forma” or “as if” financial statements, which report a company’s earnings as if Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) did not apply. Another is the dilutive effect of issuing millions of stock options for executive compensation,
then buying back millions of shares to keep those options from reducing the
value of the common stock. A third is unrealistic assumptions of return on
the company’s pension funds, which can artificially inflate earnings in good
years and depress them in bad. Another is “Special Purpose Entities,” or
affiliated firms or partnerships that buy risky assets or liabilities of the com-

Things to Consider About Per-Share Earnings

317

An obvious remark here would be that investors should not pay
any attention to these accounting variables if the amounts involved
are relatively small. But Wall Street being as it is, even items quite
minor in themselves can be taken seriously. Two days before the
ALCOA report appeared in the Wall Street Journal, the paper had
quite a discussion of the corresponding statement of Dow Chemical. It closed with the observation that “many analysts” had been
troubled by the fact that Dow had included a 21-cent item in regular profits for 1969, instead of treating it as an item of “extraordinary income.” Why the fuss? Because, evidently, evaluations of
Dow Chemical involving many millions of dollars in the aggregate
seemed to depend on exactly what was the percentage gain for
1969 over 1968—in this case either 9% or 41⁄2%. This strikes us
as rather absurd; it is very unlikely that small differences involved
in one year’s results could have any bearing on future average
profits or growth, and on a conservative, realistic valuation of the
enterprise.
By contrast, consider another statement also appearing in January 1971. This concerned Northwest Industries Inc.’s report for
1970.* The company was planning to write off, as a special charge,
not less than $264 million in one fell swoop. Of this, $200 million
represents the loss to be taken on the proposed sale of the railroad
subsidiary to its employees and the balance a write-down of a
recent stock purchase. These sums would work out to a loss of
about $35 per share of common before dilution offsets, or twice its
then current market price. Here we have something really signifi-

pany and thus “remove” those financial risks from the company’s balance
sheet. Another element of distortion is the treatment of marketing or other
“soft” costs as assets of the company, rather than as normal expenses of
doing business. We will briefly examine such practices in the commentary
that accompanies this chapter.
* Northwest Industries was the holding company for, among other businesses, the Chicago and Northwestern Railway Co. and Union Underwear
(the maker of both BVD and Fruit of the Loom briefs). It was taken over in
1985 by overindebted financier William Farley, who ran the company into
the ground. Fruit of the Loom was bought in a bankruptcy proceeding by
Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway Inc. in early 2002.

318

The Intelligent Investor

cant. If the transaction goes through, and if the tax laws are not
changed, this loss provided for in 1970 will permit Northwest
Industries to realize about $400 million of future profits (within
five years) from its other diversified interests without paying
income tax thereon.* What will then be the real earnings of that
enterprise; should they be calculated with or without provision for
the nearly 50% in income taxes which it will not actually have to
pay? In our opinion, the proper mode of calculation would be first
to consider the indicated earning power on the basis of full incometax liability, and to derive some broad idea of the stock’s value
based on that estimate. To this should be added some bonus figure,
representing the value per share of the important but temporary
tax exemption the company will enjoy. (Allowance must be made,
also, for a possible large-scale dilution in this case. Actually, the
convertible preferred issues and warrants would more than double
the outstanding common shares if the privileges are exercised.)
All this may be confusing and wearisome to our readers, but it
belongs in our story. Corporate accounting is often tricky; security
analysis can be complicated; stock valuations are really dependable only in exceptional cases.† For most investors it would be
probably best to assure themselves that they are getting good value
for the prices they pay, and let it go at that.

* Graham is referring to the provision of Federal tax law that allows corporations to “carry forward” their net operating losses. As the tax code now
stands, these losses can be carried forward for up to 20 years, reducing the
company’s tax liability for the entire period (and thus raising its earnings
after tax). Therefore, investors should consider whether recent severe
losses could actually improve the company’s net earnings in the future.
† Investors should keep these words at hand and remind themselves of
them frequently: “Stock valuations are really dependable only in exceptional
cases.” While the prices of most stocks are approximately right most of the
time, the price of a stock and the value of its business are almost never identical. The market’s judgment on price is often unreliable. Unfortunately, the
margin of the market’s pricing errors is often not wide enough to justify the
expense of trading on them. The intelligent investor must carefully evaluate
the costs of trading and taxes before attempting to take advantage of any
price discrepancy—and should never count on being able to sell for the
exact price currently quoted in the market.

Things to Consider About Per-Share Earnings

319

Use of Average Earnings
In former times analysts and investors paid considerable attention to the average earnings over a fairly long period in the past—
usually from seven to ten years. This “mean figure” * was useful for
ironing out the frequent ups and downs of the business cycle, and
it was thought to give a better idea of the company’s earning
power than the results of the latest year alone. One important
advantage of such an averaging process is that it will solve the
problem of what to do about nearly all the special charges and
credits. They should be included in the average earnings. For certainly most of these losses and gains represent a part of the
company’s operating history. If we do this for ALCOA, the average
earnings for 1961–1970 (ten years) would appear as $3.62 and for
the seven years 1964–1970 as $4.62 per share. If such figures are
used in conjunction with ratings for growth and stability of earnings during the same period, they could give a really informing
picture of the company’s past performance.

Calculation of the Past Growth Rate
It is of prime importance that the growth factor in a company’s
record be taken adequately into account. Where the growth has
been large the recent earnings will be well above the seven- or tenyear average, and analysts may deem these long-term figures irrelevant. This need not be the case. The earnings can be given in
terms both of the average and the latest figure. We suggest that the
growth rate itself be calculated by comparing the average of the last
three years with corresponding figures ten years earlier. (Where
there is a problem of “special charges or credits” it may be dealt
with on some compromise basis.) Note the following calculation
for the growth of ALCOA as against that of Sears Roebuck and the
DJIA group as a whole.
Comment: These few figures could be made the subject of a long
discussion. They probably show as well as any others, derived by
elaborate mathematical treatment, the actual growth of earnings

* “Mean figure” refers to the simple, or arithmetic, average that Graham
describes in the preceding sentence.

320

The Intelligent Investor

TABLE 12-1
ALCOA

Sears Roebuck

DJIA

Average earnings 1968–1970

a

$4.95

$2.87

$55.40

Average earnings 1958–1960

2.08

1.23

31.49

141.0%

134.0%

75.0%

9.0%

8.7%

5.7%

Growth
Annual rate (compounded)
a

Three-fifths of special charges of 82 cents in 1970 deducted here.

for the long period 1958–1970. But how relevant is this figure, generally considered central in common-stock valuations, to the case
of ALCOA? Its past growth rate was excellent, actually a bit better
than that of acclaimed Sears Roebuck and much higher than that of
the DJIA composite. But the market price at the beginning of 1971
seemed to pay no attention to this fine performance. ALCOA sold
at only 111⁄2 times the recent three-year average, while Sears sold at
27 times and the DJIA itself at 15+ times. How did this come about?
Evidently Wall Street has fairly pessimistic views about the future
course of ALCOA’s earnings, in contrast with its past record. Surprisingly enough, the high price for ALCOA was made as far back
as 1959. In that year it sold at 116, or 45 times its earnings. (This
compares with a 1959 adjusted high price of 251⁄2 for Sears Roebuck,
or 20 times its then earnings.) Even though ALCOA’s profits did
show excellent growth thereafter, it is evident that in this case the
future possibilities were greatly overestimated in the market price.
It closed 1970 at exactly half of the 1959 high, while Sears tripled in
price and the DJIA moved up nearly 30%.
It should be pointed out that ALCOA’s earnings on capital
funds* had been only average or less, and this may be the decisive
factor here. High multipliers have been maintained in the stock market only if the company has maintained better than average profitability.
