
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TRADING SYSTEMS

127

■■Rating Yourself
0–6 correct: poor.
Not understanding trading systems is dangerous—trading without a system is like
sailing without a rudder. Please take the next few days to reread the relevant section
of the book, and retake this test before proceeding any further.
7–11 correct: fairly good.
You have a working grasp of the essential concepts of trading systems. This level
of knowledge may suffice elsewhere but not in dealing with trading systems. You
must know them inside out—they help you survive and prosper in the markets.
Please review your answers and look for your weak spots. Then reread the relevant
section and retake this test.
12–16 correct: excellent.
You have mastered the essentials of trading systems. Please review those questions
for which your answers differed from those given in this book. See whether the discrepancies were due to errors or to your own trading style. Successful traders are
creative and can have differences of opinion. Then proceed to the next highly important topic—selecting the markets you’ll trade.

■■Recommended Reading
Kaufman, Perry, Trading Systems and Methods (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

EIGHT

Trading Vehicles

Answer 8-1: C
Trading liquid high-volume vehicles helps reduce slippage. Volatile fast-moving instruments offer more opportunities. It pays to focus on the markets whose main
trading hours are close to your own time zone, so that you’re awake while the action
is taking place. Popularity isn’t a key factor: some of the best opportunities occur in
the markets that aren’t popular but are fine to trade, as long as they have good liquidity and volatility.
Answer 8-2: D
Bonds represent loans, while shares represent company ownership. You’d have to
buy a great number of them to become an insider. In the United States, for mandatory reporting purposes, corporate insiders are defined as a company’s officers and
directors and the owners of more than 10% of its equity securities. It’s a dangerous
misconception to expect the price of a stock to rise if the company makes money. If
a company was expected to report a $100 million profit in a quarter but announced a
$70 million profit, its shares are likely to take a hit from disappointed holders when
earnings are reported.

129

130

ANSWERS

Answer 8-3: D
Warren Buffett says that when you buy a stock you become a partner of a manicdepressive fellow he calls Mr. Market. Each day he wants to buy your shares or
sell his shares to you. Occasionally, Mr. Market becomes so depressed that he offers
you his shares on the cheap—and that’s when you should buy. At other times he
becomes so manic that he offers a crazy price for your shares—and that’s when you
should sell. This is, in a nutshell, a reminder to buy low and sell high.
Answer 8-4: A
Each ETF holds a selection of various assets, such as stocks from specific industry
groups or countries, commodities, or bonds. With a huge number of ETFs available
to traders, the choices are vast, but ETF performance lags due to administrative
expenses, always one of the key factors for long-term results. Prices of many ETFs
grossly diverge from prices of asset groups they are supposed to track.
Answer 8-5: I = B; II = D; III = A; IV = C
A call is a bet that a stock will rise, while a put is a bet that it’ll decline. Buying a $40
call when the underlying stock is trading at $38 makes that call out-of-the-money: its
entire price represents hope that the stock will rise above $40. If and when it does,
that call will be in-the-money.
Answer 8-6: C
Options lose value as they near their expiration date; they gain value as the stock
approaches the option exercise price. Options for volatile stocks tend to be more
expensive because their prices can swing more than those of less volatile stocks. How
closely a stock tracks its industry group is not a factor in its option pricing.
Answer 8-7: I = A and D; II = B and C; III = C and D
The person who buys a call can profit only if the underlying stock rises; if it falls or
even stays flat, the winner will be the trader who wrote that call. A put buyer will
profit only if the underlying stock falls; if it rises or even stays flat, the option writer
will profit. There are three possible scenarios for any stock: up, down, or sideways.
Only one out of three works for the option buyer, but two work for the option writer.
Answer 8-8: B
Begin by analyzing the underlying security, decide what level it’s unlikely to reach,
and then sell an option beyond that level. Going online to look up a stock’s Delta
will help you identify that level. You also need to decide at what level the underlying security would prove you wrong and prompt you to exit. Placing an actual stop
for an option would expose you to the running of open orders, which is a common
problem in options. Better write down your stop and place an order to exit after the
underlying security gets there. Consider banking a small percentage of your profits in
an insurance account for the day when an option you wrote jumps sharply against you.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TRADING VEHICLES

131

Answer 8-9: D
The number of long and short contracts for every option and future is always equal
by definition. A huge difference between options and futures is that if you buy an option and its price moves against you, you can abandon it and walk away, losing only
what you paid for it. There is no walking away from futures—you must either take
a loss or send in additional margin to support a deepening loss. All other differences
are minor in comparison with this one.
Answer 8-10: B
Daily price limits, contract expirations, and legal insider trading are challenging enough, but the riskiest factor in futures is that people can trade them on very
small margins, as low as 5% of contract value. When your $5,000 deposit controls
$100,000 worth of a commodity that moves 5% in your favor, you’ll double your
money. Trouble is that if it moves against you by a few percentage points, it’ll wipe
out your margin.You must be absolutely disciplined and have excellent money management skills to profit from futures.
Answer 8-11: I = C; II = D; III = A; IV = B
Demand for any commodity changes slowly, but the market can react violently when
supply becomes threatened. Spread traders bet on a resumption of normal market
relationships; when two related markets go out of sync, they buy the underpriced
one and short the overpriced one, waiting for their relationship to return to normal.
Remote delivery months are normally more expensive due to the “cost of carry,”
such as storage and insurance, but in bull markets, when demand is red-hot, futures
can become inverted, with a premium for early delivery. Hedging is the economic
foundation of the futures markets: a farmer can sell wheat futures long before harvesting his grain while an airline can buy gasoline contracts months or even years
before it needs airplane fuel.
Question 8-12: B (I and II)
The forex market is completely decentralized; institutional traders deal directly
with each other, using online platforms. Retail customers come to grief when forex
houses take the opposite sides of their orders instead of transmitting them to the
market—for you to win, the forex house must lose.Wild margins in the hands of unsophisticated traders turn into a “get-poor-quick” tool. Forex houses seldom charge
commissions, but many profit from positioning themselves against their customers.

132

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–4 correct: poor.
Whatever you trade, you need to understand the key factors about that market.
Lacking that knowledge, you’ll become an easy mark for sharp operators and end up
losing. Please take the next few days to reread the relevant section of the main book,
and retake this test before proceeding any further.
5–8 correct: fairly good.
You have a working grasp of at least some classes of trading vehicles. If all your answers about stocks or options were correct and those are the only markets you ever
trade, that might be sufficient. To obtain a deeper knowledge of all classes of trading
vehicles available to you, please reread the relevant section, and retake this test.
9–12 correct: excellent.
Your knowledge of trading vehicles is very good. Please review the questions whose
answers you missed and look up the relevant pages in the book. Then proceed to the
next highly important topic—risk management.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

NINE

Risk Management

Answer 9-1: B
Emotional trading is the enemy of success. Nobody can get high and consistently
make money. A trader can get away with emotional trading for a short while, but
unchecked greed and fear will destroy any account. Your goal must be to make the
most intelligent trades, calmly weighing potential gains and limiting risks.
Answer 9-2: C
We all like to think we’re smart—taking losses hurts our egos. Taking a loss means
giving up hope that a trade will work out—and nobody likes to live without hope.
Good traders are realists; hanging onto a losing trade is not a sound tactic.
Answer 9-3: B
A reluctance to take a loss is a sign of emotional trading. Adding to a losing trade
shows that the trader is hanging on to a fantasy of winning rather than facing the reality of a loss. For a loser, a dream is alive as long as he holds his position. In fact, if you
entered a trade on a set of indicator signals and those indicators reversed, what’s the
rationale for staying in that trade? It is not working out—get out to preserve your
capital and look for a better trade.

133

134

ANSWERS

Answer 9-4: C
A series of three losses can wipe out trader A, but trader B can survive a streak of 9
losses.Trader A is only three throws away from going bust, while trader B has enough
capital to sustain him through 9 unlucky throws. All other factors being equal, the
poorer of the two traders will go broke first.
Answer 9-5: B (II, III, I)
The first goal of money management is to ensure survival. The second is to earn a
steady rate of return, and the third is to earn high returns—but survival comes first.
That’s how professionals trade; many beginners have their priorities backwards.
Answer 9-6: D (I, II, III, and IV)
All of these money management rules have stood the test of time. Follow them—let
your competitors violate them.
Answer 9-7: A (I)
Counting money in an open trade flashes a red light—a warning that your emotions
are kicking in and you’re about to lose because they will override your intellect. If
you cannot get money off your mind, get out of a trade. The time to set profit targets
and stop levels is before the trade. The time to track your equity is after the trade
has been closed.
Answer 9-8: C
The 2% Rule dictates your maximum dollar risk per trade.Two percent of a $28,000
account is $560, which must cover not only your risk but also slippage and commissions. With a stop 98 cents away, if you buy 500 shares, you will have enough left
to pay commissions and cover any possible slippage. Trading a bigger size would be
reckless.
Answer 9-9: B (I and II)
It’s dangerous to count money in open trades because it leads to thinking about what
your paper profits will buy. That’s how people start dreaming, instead of managing
trades, and lose money. Moving a target or raising a stop is permitted.
Answer 9-10: D (I, II, III, and IV)
Serious traders place a stop the moment they enter a trade and adjust it only one
way—in the direction of that trade. When you go long, you may keep your stop in
place or raise it but never lower it. When you go short, you may keep your stop
in place or lower it but never raise it.
Answer 9-11: C (I, II, and III)
A stop-loss order limits your risk, but it doesn’t always work as expected. Prices
may gap across a stop. A stop isn’t a perfect tool, but it’s the best defensive tool that
we have.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

RISK MANAGEMENT

135

Answer 9-12: B (II and III)
Trader A is risking $400, while the 2% Rule allows him to risk no more than $360.
Trader B is risking $800, while the 2% Rule permits him to risk up to $1,000.Trader
C is risking $400, while the 2% Rule permits him to risk up to $800. Trader D is
risking $1,500, while the 2% Rule allows him to risk up to $1,200. Traders B and
C accept businessman’s risks, while traders A and D are risking real losses. The 2%
Rule sets a clear limit on your risk per trade—it’s an easy rule to follow, unless greed
raises its ugly head.
Answer 9-13: D (II and IV)
The two deadly errors in trading are not using stops and putting on trades that risk
more than your account can afford. Other mistakes are bad enough, but if you use
stops and trade a reasonable size, at least they won’t kill your account.
Answer 9-14: D
The Iron Triangle asks three simple questions: what is your maximum acceptable
dollar risk for this trade? Where will you enter this trade? Where will you place your
stop? The distance from your entry to your stop is your risk per share. Dividing
your total acceptable risk by your risk per share will give you the maximum number
of shares you may buy or sell short in this trade.
Answer 9-15: C
A series of even relatively small losses can add up to a serious drawdown. The 6%
Rule protects you by making you stop trading early in a drawdown. It creates a
cooling off period: review your system, study the markets, and return to them the
following month.
Answer 9-16: A
The 6% Rule doesn’t concern itself with profits. Its job is to manage risk and limit
drawdowns. You will count profits at the end of the month. If your equity has increased, both the 2% and the 6% Rules will give you more available risk the following month.
Answer 9-17: B
Losses traumatize traders. Returning to the market after a break you need to be
gentle to yourself. Reduce the amount of risk you accept on each trade. Set realistic
performance targets, and gradually increase your trading size.

136

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–6 correct: poor.
The red light is on—you do not understand money management. Before you make
another trade with real money, study the relevant chapters and retake this test.
7–12 correct: so-so.
There are gaps in your understanding of risk management. This topic is too important to settle for anything but the top score on this test. Please review your answers
to the questions that you missed, review the relevant chapters, and retake this test a
few days later.
13–17 correct: excellent.
You have a working command of the essential money management rules. Review
the questions where your answers differed from those in this book. Money management sets a protective wall around your account. Look for every gap in that wall
and plug it up.

■■Recommended Reading
Vince, Ralph. Portfolio Management Formulas (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 1990).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TEN

Practical Details

Answer 10-1: B
Depending on how bullish you feel, you may buy a breakout above yesterday’s high,
a pullback to value, or a penetration of the value zone to the depth at which previous
pullbacks bottomed out. It is generally not a good idea to go long above the channel.
The upper channel line marks the zone where bullishness becomes manic, and even
though it may continue, it is more likely to reverse.
Answer 10-2: B
When the trend is up, it makes sense to buy pullbacks below value. The average of
the previous three months’ penetrations was less than $3. There is no point in being
greedy and trying to nail the very bottom of a pullback—catching a $1 penetration
would be more reliable than a $3 one.
Answer 10-3: A
A well-designed channel contains the majority of market swings, making its upper
boundary a good target for rallies. A trade that captures 30% of the channel height
earns an A. In an uptrend, we should expect prices to rise by a greater amount above
the EMA than they dipped below it on a pullback. By the time the moving average
turns down, a paper profit may turn into a loss.

137

138

ANSWERS

Answer 10-4: D
With long-term position trades, one has to be leery of using such profit-taking tools
as moving averages, envelopes, and indicator divergences. If you plan to hold for several months, those sensitive tools would get you out of the trade too soon. It’s better
to set profit targets using support and resistance zones.
Answer 10-5: C
Setting stops and profit targets allows us to calculate reward/risk ratios. To the annoyance of most traders, whipsaws happen, as markets reverse in their favor right
after they got stopped out. Stops provide generally reliable means of protecting your
account, but unfortunately, don’t guarantee limiting your maximum risk because
prices can gap across stop levels.
Answer 10-6: C (I, II, and III)
Placing stops outside of the zone of market noise helps reduce whipsaws. Channels,
SafeZone, and ATRs draw the line between normal and abnormal swings, each in its
own way. Not so support and resistance: buying very close to support still exposes
us to market noise.
Answer 10-7: D (I, II, III, and IV)
Stay away from the crowd: a highly visible price extreme attracts too many stops. So
do round numbers. Place your stops slightly away from both. A stop is a risk management tool, and as a trade moves in your favor, you can relocate your stop to protect
a share of your profit. Never move your stop to give more room to a losing trade.
Answer 10-8: C
When going long, you want to buy as close to the low of the bar and as far from the
high of the bar as possible. The range of the day was $2 ($23 minus $21).You bought
$1.50 away from the high. Dividing $1.50 by $2 shows that your grade was 75%—
excellent! Any buy grade above 50% is good because it shows that you bought in the
bottom half of the bar.
Answer 10-9: A
You want to sell as close to the top of the bar and as far from the low of the bar as
possible. The range of the day was $3 ($29 minus $26). You sold $1 away from the
low. Dividing $1 by $3 shows that your grade was 33%—so-so. A good sell grade
would be above 50%, meaning you sold in the top half of the bar.
Answer 10-10: B
Of the three grades for every trade—buy, sell, and overall trade grade—the trade
grade is the most important. Since channels are drawn to contain 90 to 95% of recent prices, the height of the channel on the day you enter reflects a realistic maximum available gain. Taking one third or more of a channel earns an A grade for the
trade. In this example, you took $2 out of a $6 channel—very good!

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PRACTICAL DETAILS

139

Answer 10-11: C
A good scan can find a group of candidates on which to focus your attention, but it
doesn’t guarantee profitable trades. Begin by defining the pattern to look for, and
then cast your scanning net as wide or as narrow as you like. Start out scanning a
small group, and you can expand later.
Answer 10-12: A
You have unlimited choices in setting up scan parameters. You may program it to
exclude stocks whose volume is too low, whose prices are outside of your preferred
range, or whose trend clashes with your current market view. What you can’t do is
filter out unprofitable stocks—this is something you take your best shot at during
the final review process, when you analyze the list of candidates delivered by your
scan.

140

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–4 correct: poor.
This score is way too low for a trader. This may not matter for a theoretical analyst,
but a trader should reread the relevant chapters and retake the test before going any
further.
5–8 correct: fairly good.
There are gaps in your understanding of practical concepts. It is important to know
how to set entries, targets, and stops, and how to measure your performance in every
trade. Please review your answers to the questions that you missed, reread the relevant chapters, and retake this test a few days later.
9–12 correct: excellent.
You have a working knowledge of setting up entries, targets, and stops, and measuring your performance. Different traders use different tactics—please review the
questions for which your answers differed from those in this book to see whether
you’ve made a mistake or it was an honest difference of opinion.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

ELEVEN

Good Record-Keeping

Answer 11-1: C
Keeping good records will help you learn from your experiences, improve discipline, and reduce impulsivity. It will not prevent you from making mistakes, but it’ll
help you learn from them and stop repeating them.
Answer 11-2: B
Reviewing yesterday’s performance and adjusting stops are important, but the purpose of morning homework is to focus on factors likely to be relevant for today’s
trading. They may include the behavior of the overnight markets, review of fundamental reports scheduled for release today, and all other factors meaningful to your
decision making.
Answer 11-3: B (II and III)
There are days when your health, mood, and homework make you well-prepared for
trading. There are also days when your health bothers you, your mood is gloomy, and
you’ve done little if any homework—on those days you shouldn’t trade. A quick selftest, tailored to your personality, can give you an objective measure of your readiness
for trading. Don’t increase trade size when everything is perfect because on such
days any change can only be for the worse.

141

142

ANSWERS

Answer 11-4: D
You need to define the strategy you’ll use for a trade and set up your entry, target,
and stop. Allocating a set amount of risk to a trade will allow you to use the Iron
Triangle of risk control to decide how many shares or contracts you’ll trade. It is
better not to count profits until a trade is closed—concentrate on quality, and the
money will follow.
Answer 11-5: B (II and IV)
The structure of a trade Apgar is simple: no more than five questions, with no more
than three possible answers to each of them. A trade Apgar leads you on a quick review of whether a stock deserves a trade plan. If not, move on to the next candidate,
but if yes, then work up a detailed trade plan.
Answer 11-6: D (I, II, III, and IV)
A Tradebill is a key planning and tracking document for a trade.You need to identify
the strategy you’ll trade; set the entry, target, and stop; allocate risk; and calculate the
trade size. It also needs to include written reminders of the essential factors, such as
the dates of earnings reports.
Answer 11-7: C (I, II, and III)
It’s essential to document your stops as well as the levels at which you’ll move them
to breakeven. Such decisions are best made very early in a trade. Same with the
diary—document your entry while the memory is still fresh. It is better not to count
profits while a trade is open—concentrate on trade management and count profits
after you exit a trade.
Answer 11-8: D
Most private traders work in isolation and receive no feedback. This makes reviewing your past trades an especially valuable learning device. There is a Russian saying:
“Don’t step on the same rake twice.” When you step on a rake lying in the grass, it
stands up and hits you on the forehead. It can happen to anyone, but don’t step on
it again. Reviewing past trades helps you remember where those rakes are.
Answer 11-9: C
All of the actions listed in this question are important, but the most educational one
is returning to each trade several weeks or even months after you exited it and reviewing an updated chart. By then, trends and reversals are clear, you can see exactly
what you did right or wrong—and use those lessons going forward.
