
7.1 CURRENCY RISK
So, what precisely is currency risk? There is no point in focusing on an issue if one cannot ﬁrst
deﬁne it. Although deﬁnitions vary within the academic community, a practical description of

Managing Currency Risk I

139

currency risk would be:
The impact that unexpected exchange rate changes have on the value of the corporation
Currency risk is very important to a corporation as it can have a major impact on its cash ﬂows,
assets and liabilities, net proﬁt and ultimately its stock market value. Assuming the corporation
has accepted that currency risk needs to be managed speciﬁcally and separately, it has three
initial priorities:
1. Deﬁne what kinds of currency risk the corporation is exposed to
2. Deﬁne a corporate Treasury strategy to deal with these currency risks
3. Deﬁne what ﬁnancial instruments it allows itself to use for this purpose
Currency risk is simple in concept, but complex in reality. At its most basic, it is the possible
gain or loss resulting from an exchange rate move. It can affect the value of a corporation
directly as a result of an unhedged exposure or more indirectly.
Different types of currency risk can also offset each other. For instance, take a US citizen
who owns stock in a German auto manufacturer and exporter to the US. If the Euro falls against
the US dollar, the US dollar value of the Euro-denominated stock falls and therefore on the
face of it the individual sees the US dollar value of their holding decline. However, the German
auto exporter should in fact beneﬁt from a weaker Euro as this makes the company’s exports to
the US cheaper, allowing them the choice of either maintaining US prices to maintain margin
or cutting them further to boost market share. Sooner or later, the stock market will realize
this and mark up the stock price of the auto exporter. Thus, the stock owner may lose on the
currency translation, but gain on the higher stock price.
This is of course a very simple example and life unfortunately is rarely that simple. For
just as a weaker Euro makes exports from the Euro-zone cheaper, so it makes imports more
expensive. Thus, an exporter may not in fact feel the beneﬁt of the currency translation through
to market share because higher import prices force it to raise export prices from where they
would otherwise would be according to the exchange rate.
The ﬁrst step in successfully managing currency risk is to acknowledge that such risk actually
exists and that it has to be managed in the general interest of the corporation and the corporation’s shareholders. For some, this is of itself a difﬁcult hurdle as there is still major reluctance
within corporate management to undertake what they see as straying from their core, underlying business into the speculative world of currency markets. The truth however is that the
corporation is a participant in the currency market whether it likes it or not; if it has foreign
currency-denominated exposure, that exposure should be managed. To do anything else is
irresponsible. The general trend within the corporate world has however been in favour of
recognizing the existence of and the need to manage currency risk. That recognition does not
of itself entail speculation. Indeed, at its best, prudent currency hedging can be deﬁned as the
elimination of speculation:
The real speculation is in fact not managing currency risk
The next step, however, is slightly more complex and that is to identify the nature and extent
of the currency risk or exposure. It should be noted that the emphasis here is for the most part
on non-ﬁnancial corporations, on manufacturers and service providers rather than on banks
or other types of ﬁnancial institutions. Non-ﬁnancial corporations generally have only a small
amount of their total assets in the form of receivables and other types of transaction. Most of
their assets are made up of inventory, buildings, equipment and other forms of tangible “real”
assets. In order to measure the effect of exchange rate moves on a corporation, one ﬁrst has to

140

Currency Strategy

deﬁne the type and then the amount of risk involved, or the “value at risk” (VaR). There are three
main types of currency risk that a multinational corporation is exposed to and has to manage.

7.2 TYPES OF CURRENCY RISK
1. Transaction risk (receivables, dividends, etc.)
2. Translation risk (balance sheet)
3. Economic risk (present value of future operating cash ﬂows)
7.2.1 Transaction Risk
Transaction currency risk is essentially cash ﬂow risk and relates to any transaction, such as
receivables, payables or dividends. The most common type of transaction risk relates to export
or import contracts. When there is an exchange rate move involving the currencies of such a
contract, this represents a direct transactional currency risk to the corporation. This is the most
basic type of currency risk which a corporation faces.
7.2.2 Translation Risk
Translation risk is slightly more complex and is the result of the consolidation of parent
company and foreign subsidiary ﬁnancial statements. This consolidation means that exchange
rate impact on the balance sheet of the foreign subsidiaries is transmitted or translated to the
parent company’s balance. Translation risk is thus balance sheet currency risk. While most
large multinational corporations actively manage their transaction currency risk, many are less
aware of the potential dangers of translation risk.
The actual translation process in consolidating ﬁnancial statements is done either at the
average exchange rate of the period or at the exchange rate at the period end, depending on the
speciﬁc accounting regulations affecting the parent company. As a direct result, the consolidated results will vary as either the average or the end-of-period exchange rate varies. Thus,
all foreign currency-denominated proﬁt is exposed to translation currency risk as exchange
rates vary. In addition, the foreign currency value of foreign subsidiaries is also consolidated
on the parent company’s balance sheet, and that value will vary accordingly. Translation risk
for a foreign subsidiary is usually measured by the net assets (assets less liabilities) that are
exposed to potential exchange rate moves.
Problems can occur with regard to translation risk if a corporation has subsidiaries whose
accounting books are local currency-denominated. For consolidation purposes, these books
must of course be translated into the currency of the parent company, but at what exchange
rate? Income statements are usually translated at the average exchange rate over the period.
However, deciding at what exchange rate to translate the balance sheet is slightly more tricky.
There are generally three methods used by major multinational corporations for translating
balance sheet risk, varying in how they separate assets and liabilities between those that need
to be translated at the “current” exchange rate at the time of consolidation and those that are
translated at the historical exchange rate:

r The all current (closing rate) method
r The monetary/non-monetary method
r The temporal method

As the name might suggest, the all current (closing rate) method translates all foreign currency
exposures at the closing exchange rate of the period concerned. Under this method, translation
@Team-FLY

Managing Currency Risk I

141

risk relates to net assets or shareholder funds. This has become the most popular method
of translating balance exposure of foreign subsidiaries, both in the US and worldwide. On
the other hand, the monetary/non-monetary method translates monetary items such as assets,
liabilities and capital at the closing rate and non-monetary items at the historical rate. Finally,
the temporal method breaks balance sheet items down in terms of whether they are ﬁrstly
stated at replacement cost, realizable value, market value or expected future value, or secondly
stated at historic cost. For the ﬁrst group, these are translated at the closing exchange rate of
the period concerned, for the second, at the historical exchange rate.
The US accounting standard FAS 52 and the UK’s SSAP 20 apply to translation risk. Under
FAS 52, the translation of foreign currency revenues and costs is made at the average exchange
rate of the period. FAS 52 generally uses the all current method for translation purposes, though
it does have several important provisions, notably regarding the treatment of currency hedging
contracts. Under SSAP 20, the corporation can use either the current or average rate. Generally,
there has been a shift among multinational corporations towards using the average rather than
the closing rate because this is seen as a truer reﬂection of the translation risk faced by the
corporation during the period.
Translation risk is a crucial issue for corporations. Later in this chapter, we will look at
methods of hedging it. For now, it is important to get an idea of how it can affect the company’s
overall value.
Example
Take an example of a Euro-based manufacturer which has bought a factory in Poland. Needless
to say, the cost base in Poland is substantially below that of the parent company, one of several
major reasons why the acquisition was made in the ﬁrst place. From 1999 to 2001, the Euro
was on a major downtrend, not just against its major currency counterparts but also against
most currencies of the Central and East European area, such as the Polish zloty. Thus we get
the following simple model:
EUR–USD ↓ = EUR–PLN ↓
where:
EUR–USD = The Euro–US dollar exchange rate
EUR–PLN = The Euro–Polish zloty exchange rate
This is an over-simpliﬁcation to be sure. For one thing, the Polish zloty was pegged to a basket
of Euro (55%) and US dollar (45%) with a crawl and trading bands up until 2000, and thus
was unable to appreciate despite the ongoing decline in the value of the Euro across the board.
For another, it does not take account of EUR–PLN volatility. That said, general Euro weakness
has clearly been an important factor in the depreciation of the Euro–zloty exchange rate. Note
however that as the Euro–zloty exchange rate has depreciated for this and other reasons so the
value of the original investment in the Polish factory has increased in Euro terms. Thus:
EUR–PLN ↓ = EUR translation value of Polish subsidiary ↑
Whatever our Euro-based manufacturer may think of Euro weakness, it is entirely beneﬁcial
for the manufacturer’s translation value of the Polish factory/subsidiary when the ﬁnancial
statements are consolidated at the end of the accounting period. The translation beneﬁt to the
balance sheet will depend on the accounting method of translation. Conversely, were the Euro
ever to rally on a sustained basis, this might cause the Euro–zloty exchange rate to rally, thus in

142

Currency Strategy

turn reducing the translation value of the corporation’s Polish subsidiary. The consolidation of
ﬁnancial statements would mean that this not only has an impact on the Euro value of the Polish
subsidiary but also on the balance sheet of the parent, Euro-based manufacturer. The risk of a
sudden balance sheet deterioration of this kind is not negligible where corporations have a broad
range of foreign subsidiaries, with accompanying transactional and translational currency risk.
7.2.3 Economic Risk
The translation of foreign subsidiaries concerns the consolidated group balance sheet. However,
this does not affect the real “economic” value or exposure of the subsidiary. Economic risk
focuses on how exchange rate moves change the real economic value of the corporation,
focusing on the present value of future operating cash ﬂows and how this changes in line
with exchange rate changes. More speciﬁcally, the economic risk of a corporation reﬂects the
effect of exchange rate changes on items such as export and domestic sales, and the cost of
domestic and imported inputs. As with translation risk, calculating economic risk is complex,
but clearly necessary to be able to assess how exchange rate changes can affect the present
value of foreign subsidiaries. Economic risk is usually applied to the present value of future
operating cash ﬂows of a corporation’s foreign subsidiaries. However, it can also be applied
to the parent company’s operations and how the present value of those change in line with
exchange rate changes.
Summarizing this part, transaction risk deals with the effect of exchange rate moves on transactional exposure such as accounts receivable/payable or dividends. Translation risk focuses on
how exchange rate moves can affect foreign subsidiary valuation and therefore the valuation of
the consolidated group balance sheet. Finally, economic risk deals with the effect of exchange
rate changes to the present value of future operating cash ﬂows, focusing on the “currency of
determination” of revenues and operating expenses. Here it is important to differentiate between the currency in which cash ﬂows are denominated and the currency that may determine
the nature and size of those cash ﬂows. The two are not necessarily the same. To complicate
the issue further, there is the small matter of the parent company’s currency, which is used to
consolidate the ﬁnancial statements. If a parent company has foreign currency-denominated
debt, this is recorded in the parent company’s currency, but the value of its legal obligation
remains in the currency denomination of the debt. In sum, transaction risk is just the tip of the
iceberg!
Of necessity, the reality of currency risk is very case-speciﬁc. That said, there has been an
attempt by the academic and economic communities to apply the traditional exchange rate
models to the corporate world for the purpose of demonstrating how exchange rates impact a
corporation. More speciﬁcally, the models typically used for this purpose have been those of
PPP, the international Fisher effect and the unbiased forward rate theory, which we looked at
in Chapter 1. To recap:

r PPP (or the law of one price) suggests that price differentials of the same good in different
countries require an exchange rate adjustment to offset them.

r The international Fisher effect suggests that the expected change in the exchange rate is
equal to the interest rate differential.

r The unbiased forward rate theory suggests that the forward exchange rate is equal to the
expected exchange rate.

Managing Currency Risk I

143

Generally, these theories are grounded in the efﬁcient market hypothesis and therefore ﬂawed
at best. Over the long term, these traditional “rules” of exchange rate theory suggest that
competition and arbitrage should neutralize the effect of exchange rate changes on returns and
on the valuation of the corporation. Equally, locking into the forward rate should, according to
the unbiased forward rate theory, offer the same return as remaining exposed to currency risk,
as this theory suggests that the distribution of probability should be equal on either side of the
forward rate.
The unfortunate thing about such models, however worthy the attempt, is that they do not
and cannot deal with the practical realities of managing currency risk. What academics regard
as “temporary deviations” from where the model suggests the exchange rate should be can
be sufﬁcient and substantial enough to cause painful and intolerable deterioration to both the
P&L and the balance sheet.
To conclude this part, a corporation should deﬁne and seek to quantify the types of currency
risk to which it is exposed in order then to be able to go about creating a strategy for managing
that currency risk.

7.3 MANAGING CURRENCY RISK
Transactional currency risk can be hedged tactically or strategically by the corporate Treasury
to preserve cash ﬂow and earnings, depending on their currency view.
Translational currency risk is usually hedged opportunistically rather than systematically,
notably to try to avoid emerging market-related shocks to net assets, usually focusing on either
long-term foreign investment or debt structure.
Hedging economic risk is complex, requiring the corporation to forecast its revenue and cost
streams over a given period and then to analyse the potential impact on these of an exchange
rate deviation from the rate used in calculating revenue and cost. For the debt structure, the
currency of denomination must be chosen, the amount of debt estimated in that currency and
the average interest period determined. The effect on cash ﬂow should be netted out over
product lines and across markets. What’s left from this process is the economic risk that has
to be managed. For large multinationals, the net economic risk may in fact be quite small
because of offsetting effects. However, economic risk can be substantial for corporations that
have invested in only one or two foreign markets.
The ﬁrst two steps of this process appear to have been accomplished. Firstly, we have deﬁned
very speciﬁcally the types of currency risk that a corporation is exposed to. Secondly, we have
looked at broad strategy, the brushstrokes of managing that currency risk. Yet, while this
currency risk may be deﬁned, it must also be quantiﬁed. Quantifying an amount of currency
may be easy for transaction risk, but for translation or economic risk it is no easy task. Just as
with other types of risk management, the most popular way of doing this is to use a “VaR” model.

7.4 MEASURING CURRENCY RISK — VAR AND BEYOND
Value at risk is deﬁned as:
The maximum loss for a given exposure over a given time horizon with x% conﬁdence
VaR helps a user to deﬁne the maximum loss on an exposure for a given conﬁdence level
and has helped investors and corporations in managing their risk. VaR is on the face of it an
excellent risk management tool, which can be used to measure a variety of risk types.

144

Currency Strategy

However, it should be noted that:
VaR does not deﬁne the worst case scenario
It may give the maximum loss for an exposure with 99% conﬁdence using a 3000-iteration
Monte Carlo simulation. The question remains however, what happens to the exposure for
that 1% point of conﬁdence? The frank truth is a VaR model is incapable of answering that
question. Thus, a degree of both care and common sense is needed. The more sophisticated
corporate Treasuries frequently seek to reﬁne their VaR model to go beyond the natural conﬁdence level limit to try and deﬁne the maximum loss with 100% conﬁdence. A practical
way of trying to achieve this is to impose operational limits (such as in terms of number of
contracts, nominal amount, sensitivities or stop loss orders) in addition to VaR limits. That
relates to the aspect of care. The common sense aspect relates to never trusting your risk to a
computer model alone. If you cannot quantify it itself without use of the model, you have a
problem.

7.5 CORE PRINCIPLES FOR MANAGING CURRENCY RISK
So far we have examined currency risk, how to manage and quantify it. Before we go on
from theory into practice, it may well be useful to establish a framework, a reference for
corporate Treasury of core principles of managing currency risk. There have been several
notable efforts along these lines, most notably of course the “Core Principles of Managing
Currency Risk” set out by the Group of 31 (US multinational corporations) and Greenwich
Treasury Advisors.
Clearly, there is a danger in attempting anything even approaching best practice for corporate
Treasury as corporations vary so signiﬁcantly in terms of their exposures, requirements and
focus. Such concerns notwithstanding, the importance of the issue equally requires that the
attempt be made to create a reference from which individual corporations can perhaps take
what might be appropriate to them. Thus, what follows is my own tentative suggestion of what
any such list of core principles of managing currency risk should contain:
1. Determine the types of currency risk to which the corporation is exposed — Break
these down into transaction, translation and economic risk, making speciﬁc reference to
what currencies are related to each type of currency risk.
2. Establish a strategic currency risk management policy — Once currency risk types have
been agreed on, corporate Treasury should establish and document a strategic currency
risk management policy to deal with these types of risks. This policy should include the
corporation’s general approach to currency risk, whether it wants to hedge or trade that risk
and its core hedging objectives.
3. Create a mission statement for Treasury — It is crucial to create a set of values and principles which embody the speciﬁc approach taken by the Treasury towards managing currency
risk, agreed upon by senior management at the time of establishing and documenting the
risk management policy.
4. Detail currency hedging approach — Having established the overall currency risk management policy, the corporation should detail how that policy is to be executed in practice,
including the types of ﬁnancial instruments that could be used for hedging, the process by
which currency hedging would be executed and monitored and procedures for monitoring
and reviewing existing currency hedges.

Managing Currency Risk I

145

5. Centralizing Treasury operations as a single centre of excellence — Treasury operations
can be more effectively and efﬁciently managed if they are centralized. This makes it
easier to ensure all personnel are clear about the Treasury’s mission statement and hedging
approach. Thus, the Treasury can be run as a single centre of excellence within the corporation, ensuring the quality of individual members. Large multinational corporations should
consider creating a position of chief dealer to manage the dealing team, as the demands of a
Treasurer often exceed the ability to manage all positions and exposures on a real-time basis.
The currency dealing team must have the same level of expertise as their counterparty banks.
6. Adopt uniform standards for accounting for currency risk — In line with the centralizing of Treasury operations, uniform accounting procedures with regard to currency risk
should be adopted, creating and ensuring transparency of risk. Create benchmarks for
measuring the performance of currency hedging.
7. Have in-house modelling and forecasting capacity — Currency forecasting is as
