
70

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

We received $24.6 million versus our cost of $22.9 million; our
average holding period was close to six months. Considering the
trouble this transaction encountered, our 15% annual rate of return-excluding any value for the redwood claim-was more than
satisfactory.
But the best was yet to come. The trial judge appointed two
commissions, one to look at the timber's value, the other to consider the interest rate questions. In January 1987, the first commission said the redwoods were worth $275.7 million and the second
commission recommended a compounded, blended rate of return
working out to about 14%.
In August 1987 the judge upheld these conclusions, which
meant a net amount of about $600 million would be due Arcata.
The government then appealed. In 1988, though, before this appeal was heard, the claim was settled for $519 million. Consequently, we received an additional $29.48 per share, or about $19.3
million. We will get another $800,000 or so in 1989.
Berkshire's arbitrage activities differ from those of many arbitrageurs. First, we participate in only a few, and usually very large,
transactions each year. Most practitioners buy into a great many
deals-perhaps 50 or more per year. With that many irons in the
fire, they must spend most of their time monitoring both the progress of deals and the market movements of the related stocks.
This is not how Charlie nor I wish to spend our lives. (What's the
sense in getting rich just to stare at a ticker tape all day?)
Because we diversify so little, one particularly profitable or
unprofitable transaction will affect our yearly result from arbitrage
far more than it will the typical arbitrage operation. So far, Berkshire has not had a really bad experience. But we will-and when
it happens we'll report the gory details to you.
The other way we differ from some arbitrage operations is that
we participate only in transactions that have been publicly announced. We do not trade on rumors or try to guess takeover candidates. We just read the newspapers, think about a few of the big
propositions, and go by our own sense of probabilities.
At yearend, our only major arbitrage position was 3,342,000
shares of RJR Nabisco with a cost of $281.8 million and a market
value of $304.5 million. In January we increased our holdings to
roughly four million shares and in February we eliminated our position. About three million shares were accepted when we tendered our holdings to KKR, which acquired RJR, and the returned

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

71

shares were promptly sold in the market. Our pre-tax profit was a
better-than-expected $64 million.
Earlier, another familiar face turned up in the RJR bidding
contest: Jay Pritzker, who was part of a First Boston group that
made a tax-oriented offer. To quote Yogi Berra; "It was déjà vu all
over again."
During most of the time when we normally would have been
purchasers of RJR, our activities in the stock were restricted because of Salomon's participation in a bidding group. Customarily,
Charlie and I, though we are directors of Salomon, are walled off
from information about its merger and acquisition work. We have
asked that it be that way: The information would do us no good
and could, in fact, occasionally inhibit Berkshire's arbitrage
operations.
However, the unusually large commitment that Salomon proposed to make in the RJR deal required that all directors be fully
informed and involved. Therefore, Berkshire's purchases of RJR
were made at only two times: first, in the few days immediately
following management's announcement of buyout plans, before
Salomon became involved; and considerably later, after the RJR
board made its decision in favor of KKR. Because we could not
buy at other times, our directorships cost Berkshire significant
money.
Considering Berkshire's good results in 1988, you might expect us to pile into arbitrage during 1989. Instead, we expect to be
on the sidelines.
One pleasant reason is that our cash holdings are down-because our position in equities that we expect to hold for a very long
time is substantially up. As regular readers of this report know,
our new commitments are not based on a judgment about shortterm prospects for the stock market. Rather, they reflect an opinion about long-term business prospects for specific companies. We
do not have, never have had, and never will have an opinion about
where the stock market, interest rates, or business activity will be a
year from now.
Even if we had a lot of cash we probably would do little in
arbitrage in 1989. Some extraordinary excesses have developed in
the takeover field. As Dorothy says: "Toto, I have a feeling we're
not in Kansas any more."
We have no idea how long the excesses will last, nor do we
know what will change the attitudes of government, lender and
buyer that fuel them. But we do know that the less the prudence

72

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

with which others conduct their affairs, the greater the prudence
with which we should conduct our own affairs. We have no desire
to arbitrage transactions that reflect the unbridled - and, in our
view, often unwarranted-optimism of both buyers and lenders. In
our activities, we will heed the wisdom of Herb Stein: "If something can't go on forever, it will end."
We told you last year that we expected to do little in arbitrage
during 1989, and that's the way it turned out. Arbitrage positions
are a substitute for short-term cash equivalents, and during part of
the year we held relatively low levels of cash. In the rest of the
year we had a fairly good-sized cash position and even so chose not
to engage in arbitrage. The main reason was corporate transactions that made no economic sense to us; arbitraging such deals
comes too close to playing the greater-fool game. (As Wall
Streeter Ray DeVoe says: "Fools rush in where angels fear to
trade.") We will engage in arbitrage from time to time-sometimes on a large scale-but only when we like the odds.
C.

Debunking Standard Dogma 18

The preceding discussion about arbitrage makes a small discussion of "efficient market theory" (EMT) also seem relevant.
This doctrine became highly fashionable-indeed, almost holy
scripture-in academic circles during the 1970s. Essentially, it said
that analyzing stocks was useless because all public information
about them was appropriately reflected in their prices. In other
words, the market always knew everything. As a corollary, the
professors who taught EMT said that someone throwing darts at
the stock tables could select a stock portfolio having prospects just
as good as one selected by the brightest, most hard-working securityanalyst. Amazingly, EMTwas embraced not only by academics,
but by many investment professionals and corporate managers as
well. Observing correctly that the market was frequently efficient,
they went on to conclude incorrectly that it was always efficient.
The difference between these propositions is night and day.
In my opinion, the continuous 63-year arbitrage experience of
Graham-Newman Corp., Buffett Partnership, and Berkshire illustrates just how foolish EMT is. (There's plenty of other evidence,
also.) While at Graham-Newman, I made a study of its earnings
from arbitrage during the entire 1926-1956 lifespan of the com18

[Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1988; 1993; 1986; 1991; 1987.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

73

pany. Unleveraged returns averaged 20% per year. Starting in
1956, I applied Ben Graham's arbitrage principles, first at Buffett
Partnership and then Berkshire. Though I've not made an exact
calculation, I have done enough work to know that the 1956-1988
returns averaged well over 20%. (Of course, I operated in an environment far more favorable than Ben's; he had 1929-1932 to contend with.)
All of the conditions are present that are required for a fair
test of portfolio performance: (1) the three organizations traded
hundreds of different securities while building this 63-year record;
(2) the results are not skewed by a few fortunate experiences; (3)
we did not have to dig for obscure facts or develop keen insights
about products or managements-we simply acted on highly-publicized events; and (4) our arbitrage positions were a clearly identified universe-they have not been selected by hindsight.
Over the 63 years, the general market delivered just under a
10% annual return, including dividends. That means $1,000' would
have grown to $405,000 if all income had been reinvested. A 20%
rate of return, however, would have produced $97 million. That
strikes us a statistically-significant differential that might, conceivably, arouse one's curiosity.
Yet proponents of the theory have never seemed interested in
discordant evidence of this type. True, they don't talk quite as
much about their theory today as they used to. But no one, to my
knowledge, has ever said he was wrong, no matter how many
thousands of students he has sent forth misinstructed. EMT, moreover, continues to be an integral part of the investment curriculum
at major business schools. Apparently, a reluctance to recant, and
thereby to demystify the priesthood, is not limited to theologians.
Naturally the disservice done students and gullible investment
professionals who have swallowed EMT has been an extraordinary
service to us and other followers of Graham. In any sort of a contest-financial, mental, or physical-it's an enormous advantage to
have opponents who have been taught that it's useless to even try.
From a selfish point of view, Grahamites should probably endow
chairs to ensure the perpetual teaching of EMT.
All this said, a warning is appropriate. Arbitrage has looked
easy recently. But this is not a form of investing that guarantees
profits of 20% a year or, for that matter, profits of any kind. As
noted, the market is reasonably efficient much of the time: For
every arbitrage opportunity we seized in that 63-year period, many
more were foregone because they seemed properly-priced.

74

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

An investor cannot obtain superior profits from stocks by simply committing to a specific investment category or style. He can
earn them only by carefully evaluating facts and continuously exercising discipline. Investing in arbitrage situations, per se, is no better a strategy than selecting a portfolio by throwing darts.
[W]hen we own portions of outstanding businesses with outstanding managements, our favorite holding period is forever. We
are just the opposite of those who hurry to sell and book profits
when companies perform well but who tenaciously hang on to businesses that disappoint. Peter Lynch aptly likens such behavior to
cutting the flowers and watering the weeds.
[W]e continue to think that it is usually foolish to part with an
interest in a business that is both understandable and durably wonderful. Business interests of that kind are simply too hard to
replace.
Interestingly, corporate managers have no trouble understanding that point when they are focusing on a business they operate: A
parent company that owns a subsidiary with superb long-term economics is not likely to sell that entity regardless of price. "Why,"
the CEO would ask, "should I part with my crown jewel?" Yet that
same CEO, when it comes to running his personal investment portfolio, will offhandedly-and even impetuously-move from business to business when presented with no more than superficial
arguments by his broker for doing so. The worst of these is perhaps, "You can't go broke taking a profit." Can you imagine a
CEO using this line to urge his board to sell a star subsidiary? In
our view, what makes sense in business also makes sense in stocks:
An investor should ordinarily hold a small piece of an outstanding
business with the same tenacity that an owner would exhibit if he
owned all of that business.
Earlier I mentioned the financial results that could have been
achieved by investing $40 in The Coca-Cola Co. in 1919.19 In 1938,
more than 50 years after the introduction of Coke, and long after
[A separate paragraph from this 1993 letter provided as follows:]
Let me add a lesson from history: Coke went public in 1919 at $40 per share. By the
end of 1920 the market, coldly reevaluating Coke's future prospects, had battered the stock
down by more than 50%, to $19.50. At yearend 1993, that single share, with dividends
reinvested, was worth more than $2.1 million. As Ben Graham said: "In the short-run, the
market is a voting machine-reflecting a voter-registration test that requires only money,
not intelligence or emotional stability-but in the long-run, the market is a weighing
machine."
19

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

75

the drink was firmly established as an American icon, Fortune did
an excellent story on the company. In the second paragraph the
writer reported: "Several times every year a weighty and serious
investor looks long and with profound respect at Coca-Cola's record, but comes regretfully to the conclusion that he is looking too
late. The specters of saturation and competition rise before him."
Yes, competition there was in 1938 and in 1993 as well. But
it's worth noting that in 1938 The Coca-Cola Co. sold 207 million
cases of soft drinks (if its gallonage then is converted into the 192ounce cases used for measurement today) and in 1993 it sold about
10.7 billion cases, a 50-fold increase in physical volume from a company that in 1938 was already dominant in its very major industry.
Nor was the party over in 1938 for an investor: Though the $40
invested in 1919 in one share had (with dividends reinvested)
turned into $3,277 by the end of 1938, a fresh $40 then invested in
Coca-Cola stock would have grown to $25,000 by yearend 1993.
I can't resist one more quote from that 1938 Fortune story: "It
would be hard to name any company comparable in size to CocaCola and selling, as Coca-Cola does, an unchanged product that
can point to a ten-year record anything like Coca-Cola's." In the 55
years that have since passed, Coke's product line has broadened
somewhat, but it's remarkable how well that description still fits.
Charlie and I decided long ago that in an investment lifetime
it's too hard to make hundreds of smart decisions. That judgment
became ever more compelling as Berkshire's capital mushroomed
and the universe of investments that could significantly affect our
results shrank dramatically. Therefore, we adopted a strategy that
required our being smart-and not too smart at that-only a very
few times. Indeed, we'll now settle for one good idea a year.
(Charlie says it's my turn.)
The strategy we've adopted precludes our following standard
diversification dogma. Many pundits would therefore say the strategy must be riskier than that employed by more conventional investors. We disagree. We believe that a policy of portfolio
concentration may well decrease risk if it raises, as it should, both
the intensity with which an investor thinks about a business and the
comfort-level he must feel with its economic characteristics before
buying into it. In stating this opinion, we define risk, using dictionary terms, as "the possibility of loss or injury."
Academics, however, like to define investment "risk" differently, averring that it is the relative volatility of a stock or portfolio
of stocks-that is, their volatility as compared to that of a large

76

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

universe of stocks. Employing data bases and statistical skills,
these academics compute with precision the "beta" of a stock-its
relative volatility in the past-and then build arcane investment
and capital-allocation theories around this calculation. In their
hunger for a single statistic to measure risk, however, they forget a
fundamental principle: It is better to be approximately right than
precisely wrong.
For owners of a business-and that's the way we think of
shareholders-the academics' definition of risk is far off the mark,
so much so that it produces absurdities. For example, under betabased theory, a stock that has dropped very sharply compared to
the market-as had Washington Post when we bought it in 1973becomes "riskier" at the lower price than it was at the higher price.
Would that description have then made any sense to someone who
was offered the entire company at a vastly-reduced price?
In fact, the true investor welcomes volatility. Ben Graham explained why in Chapter 8 of The Intelligent Investor. There he introduced "Mr. Market," an obliging fellow who shows up every day
to either buy from you or sell to you, whichever you wish. The
more manic-depressive this chap is, the greater the opportunities
available to the investor. That's true because a wildly fluctuating
market means that irrationally low prices will periodically be attached to solid businesses. It is impossible to see how the availability of such prices can be thought of as increasing the hazards for an
investor who is totally free to either ignore the market or exploit its
folly.
In assessing risk, a beta purist will disdain examining what a
company produces, what its competitors are doing, or how much
borrowed money the business employs. He may even prefer not to
know the company's name. What he treasures is the price history
of its stock. In contrast, we'll happily forgo knowing the price history and instead will seek whatever information will further our
understanding of the company's business. After we buy a stock,
consequently, we would not be disturbed if markets closed for a
year or two. We don't need a daily quote on our 100% position in
See's or H.H. Brown to validate our well-being. Why, then, should
we need a quote on our 7% interest in Coke?
In our opinion, the real risk an investor must assess is whether
his aggregate after-tax receipts from an investment (including
those he receives on sale) will, over his prospective holding period,
give him at least as much purchasing power as he had to begin
with, plus a modest rate of interest on that initial stake. Though

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

77

this risk cannot be calculated with engineering precision, it can in
some cases be judged with a degree of accuracy that is useful. The
primary factors bearing upon this evaluation are:
1) The certainty with which the long-term economic characteristics of the business can be evaluated;
2) The certainty with which management can be evaluated,
both as to its ability to realize the full potential of the business and to wisely employ its cash flows;
3) The certainty with which management can be counted on
to channel the reward from the business to the shareholders rather than to itself;
4) The purchase price of the business;
5) The levels of taxation and inflation that will be experienced
and that will determine the degree by which an investor's
purchasing-power return is reduced from his gross return.
These factors will probably strike many analysts as unbearably
fuzzy since they cannot be extracted from a data base of any kind.
But the difficulty of precisely quantifying these matters does not
negate their importance nor is it insuperable. Just as Justice Stewart found it impossible to formulate a test for obscenity but nevertheless asserted, "I know it when I see it," so also can investors-in
an inexact but useful way-"see" the risks inherent in certain investments without reference to complex equations or price
histories.
Is it really so difficult to conclude that Coca-Cola and Gillette
possess far less business risk over the long term than, say, any computer company or retailer? Worldwide, Coke sells about 44 % of
all soft drinks, and Gillette has more than a 60% share (in value) of
the blade market. Leaving aside chewing gum, in which Wrigley is
dominant, I know of no other significant businesses in which the
leading company has long enjoyed such global power.
Moreover, both Coke and Gillette have actually increased
their worldwide shares of market in recent years. The might of
their brand names, the attributes of their products, and the
strength of their distribution systems give them an enormous competitive advantage, setting up a protective moat around their economic castles. The average company, in contrast, does battle daily
without any such means of protection. As Peter Lynch says, stocks
of companies selling commodity-like products should come with a
warning label: "Competition may prove hazardous to human
wealth."

78

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

The competitive strengths of a Coke or Gillette are obvious to
even the casual observer of business. Yet the beta of their stocks is
similar to that of a great many run-of-the-mill companies who possess little or no competitive advantage. Should we conclude from
this similarity that the competitive strength of Coke and Gillette
gains them nothing when business risk is being measured? Or
should we conclude that the risk in owning a piece of a companyits stock-is somehow divorced from the long-term risk inherent in
its business operations? We believe neither conclusion makes
sense and that equating beta with investment risk makes no sense.
The theoretician bred on beta has no mechanism for differentiating the risk inherent in, say, a single-product toy company selling pet rocks or hula hoops from that of another toy company
whose sole product is Monopoly or Barbie. But it's quite possible
for ordinary investors to make such distinctions if they have a reasonable understanding of consumer behavior and the factors that
create long-term competitive strength or weakness. Obviously,
every investor will make mistakes. But by confining himself to a
relatively few, easy-to-understand cases, a reasonably intelligent,
informed and diligent person can judge investment risks with a useful degree of accuracy.
In many industries, of course, Charlie and I can't determine
whether we are dealing with a "pet rock" or a "Barbie." We
couldn't solve this problem, moreover, even if we were to spend
years intensely studying those industries. Sometimes our own intellectual shortcomings would stand in the way of understanding,
and in other cases the nature of the industry would be the roadblock. For example, a business that must deal with fast-moving
technology is not going to lend itself to reliable evaluations of its
long-term economics. Did we foresee thirty years ago what would
transpire in the television-manufacturing or computer industries?
Of course not. (Nor did most of the investors and corporate managers who enthusiastically entered those industries.) Why, then,
should Charlie and I now think we can predict the future of other
rapidly-evolving businesses? We'll stick instead with the easy cases.
Why search for a needle buried in a haystack when one is sitting in
plain sight?
Of course, some investment strategies-for instance, our efforts in arbitrage over the years-require wide diversification. If
significant risk exists in a single transaction, overall risk should be
reduced by making that purchase one of many mutually-independent commitments. Thus, you may consciously purchase a risky in-
