
- 57 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Luigi opened the door to the very small closet. "Look here. You have four
shirts, four slacks, two jackets, two pairs of shoes, all in your size. Plus a
heavy wool overcoat-it gets quite cold here in Treviso." Joel stared at his
new wardrobe. The clothes were hanging perfectly, all pressed and ready to
wear. The colors were subdued, tasteful, and every shirt could be worn with
every jacket and pair of slacks. He finally shrugged and said, "Thanks."
"In the drawer over there you'll find a belt, socks, underwear, everything
you'll need. In the bathroom you'll find all the necessary toiletries."
"What can I say?"
"And here on the desk are two sets of glasses." Luigi picked up a pair of
glasses and held them to the light. The small rectangular lenses were secured
by thin black metal, very European frames. "arm ani,'' Luigi said, with a
trace of pride.
"Reading glasses?"
"Yes, and no. I suggest you wear them every moment you're outside this
room. Part of the disguise, Marco. Part of the new you."
"You should've met the old one."
"No thanks. Appearance is very important to Italians, especially those of us
from here in the north. Your attire, your glasses, your haircut, everything
must be put together properly or you will get noticed."
Joel was suddenly self-conscious, but, then, what the hell. He'd been
wearing prison garb for longer than he cared to remember. Back in the glory
days he routinely dropped 83,000 for a finely tailored suit.
Luigi was still lecturing. "No shorts, no black socks and white sneakers, no
polyester slacks, no golf shirts, and please don't start getting fat."
"How do you say 'Kiss my ass' in Italian?"
"We'll get to that later. Habits and customs are important. They're easy to
learn and quite enjoyable. For example, never order cappuccino after tenthirty in the morning. But an espresso can be ordered at any hour of the day.
Did you know that?"
"I did not."
"Only tourists order cappuccino after lunch or dinner. A disgrace. All that
milk on a full stomach." For a moment Luigi frowned as if he might just
vomit for good measure.
Joel raised his right hand and said, "I swear I'll never do it."

- 58 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Have a seat," Luigi said, waving at the small desk and its two chairs. They
sat down and tried to get comfortable. He continued: "First, the room. It's in
my name, but the staff thinks that a Canadian businessman will be staying
here for a couple of weeks."
"A couple of weeks?"
"Yes, then you'll move to another location." Luigi said this as ominously as
possible, as if squads of assassins were already in Treviso, looking for Joel
Backman. "From this moment on, you will be leaving a trail. Keep that in
mind: everything you do, everyone you meet- they're all part of your trail.
The secret of survival is to leave behind as few tracks as possible. Speak to
very few people, including the clerk at the front desk and the housekeeper.
Hotel personnel watch their guests, and they have good memories. Six
months from now someone might come to this very hotel and start asking
questions about you. He might have a photograph. He might offer bribes.
And the clerk might suddenly remember you, and the fact that you spoke
almost no Italian."
"I have a question."
"I have very few answers."
"Why here? Why a country where I cannot speak the language? Why not
England or Australia, someplace where I could blend in easier?"
"That decision was made by someone else, Marco. Not me."
"That's what I figured."
"Then why did you ask?"
"I don't know. Can I apply for a transfer?"
"Another useless question."
"A bad joke, not a bad question."
"Can we continue?"
'Tes."
"For the first few days I will take you to lunch and dinner. We'll move
around, always going to different places. Treviso is a nice city with lots of
cafes and we'll try them all. You must start thinking of the day when I will
not be here. Be careful who you meet."
"I have another question."
"Yes, Marco."
"Its about money. I really don't like being broke. Are you guys

- 59 -

John Grisham

The Broker

planning to give me an allowance or something? I'll wash your car and do
other chores."
"What is allowance?"
"Cash, okay? Money in my pocket."
"Don't worry about money. For now, I take care of the bills. You will not be
hungry."
"All right."
Luigi reached deep in the barn jacket and pulled out a cell phone. "This is
for you."
"And who, exactly, am I going to call?"
"Me, if you need something. My number is on the back."
Joel took the phone and laid it on the desk. "I'm hungry. I've been dreaming
of a long lunch with pasta and wine and dessert, and of course espresso,
certainly not cappuccino at this hour, then perhaps the required siesta. I've
been in Italy for four days now, and I've had nothing but corn chips and
sandwiches. What do you say?"
Luigi glanced at his watch. "I know just the place, but first some more
business. You speak no Italian, right?"
Joel rolled his eyes and exhaled mightily in frustration. Then he tried to
smile and said, "No, I've never had the occasion to learn Italian, or French,
or German, or anything else. I'm an American, okay, Luigi? My country is
larger than all of Europe combined. All you need is English over there."
"You're Canadian, remember?"
"Okay, whatever, but we're isolated. Just us and the Americans."
"My job is to keep you safe."
"Thank you."
"And to help us do that, you need to learn a lot of Italian as quickly as
possible."
"I understand."
"You will have a tutor, a young student by the name of Ermanno. You will
study with him in the morning and again in the afternoon. The work will be
difficult."
"For how long?"
"As long as it takes. That depends on you. If you work hard, then in three or
four months you should be on your own."
"How long did it take you to learn English?"

- 60 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"My mother is American. We spoke English at home, Italian everywhere
else."
"That's cheating. What else do you speak?"
"Spanish, French, a few more. Ermanno is an excellent teacher. The
classroom is just down the street."
"Not here, in the hotel?"
"No, no, Marco. You must think about your trail. What would the bellboy or
the housekeeper say if a young man spent four hours a day in this room with
you?"
"God forbid."
"The housekeeper would listen at the door and hear your lessons. She would
whisper to her supervisor. Within a day or two the entire staff would know
that the Canadian businessman is studying intensely. Four hours a day!"
"Gotcha. Now about lunch."
Leaving the hotel, Joel managed to smile at the clerk, a janitor, and the bell
captain without uttering a word. They walked one block to the center of
Treviso, the Piazza dei Signori, the main square lined with arcades and
cafes. It was noon and the foot traffic was heavier as the locals hurried about
for lunch. The air was getting colder, though Joel was quite comfortable
tucked inside his new wool overcoat. He tried his best to look Italian.
"Inside or outside?" Luigi asked.
"Inside," Joel said, and they ducked into the Caffe Beltrame, overlooking the
piazza. A brick oven near the front was heating the place, and the aroma of
the daily feast was steaming from the rear. Luigi and the headwaiter both
spoke at the same time, then they laughed, then a table was found by a front
window.
"We're in luck," Luigi said as they took off their coats and sat down. "The
special today is faraona con polenta."
"And what might that be?"
"Guinea fowl with polenta."
"What else?"
Luigi was studying one of the blackboards hanging from a rough-hewn
crossbeam. "Panzerotti di funghi al burro-fried mushroom pastries.
Conchiglie con cavalfiori-pasta shells with cauliflower. Spiedino di carne
misto alia griglia-grilled shish kabob of mixed meats."

- 61 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Til have it all."
"Their house wine is pretty good."
"I prefer red."
Within minutes the cafe was crowded with locals, all of whom seemed to
know each other. A jolly little man with a dirty white apron sped by the
table, slowed just long enough to make eye contact with Joel, and wrote
down nothing as Luigi spat out a long list of what they wanted to eat. A jug
of house wine arrived with a bowl of warm olive oil and a platter of sliced
focaccia, and Joel began eating. Luigi was busy explaining the complexities
of lunch and breakfast, the customs and traditions and mistakes made by
tourists trying to pass themselves off as authentic Italians.
With Luigi, everything would be a learning experience.
Though Joel sipped and savored the first glass of wine, the alcohol went
straight to his brain. A wonderful warmth and numbness embraced his body.
He was free, many years ahead of schedule, and sitting in a rustic little cafe
in an Italian town he'd never heard of, drinking a nice local wine, and
inhaling the smells of a delicious feast. He smiled at Luigi as the
explanations continued, but at some point Joel drifted into another world.
Ermanno claimed to be twenty-three years old but looked no more than
sixteen. He was tall and painfully thin, and with sandy hair and hazel eyes he
looked more German than Italian. He was also very shy and quite nervous,
and Joel did not like the first impression.
They met Ermanno at his tiny apartment, on the third floor of an ill-kept
building six blocks or so from Joel's hotel. There were three small roomskitchen, bedroom, living area-all sparsely furnished, but then Ermanno was a
student so such surroundings were not unexpected. But the place looked as
though he had just moved in and might be moving out at any minute.
They sat around a small desk in the center of the living room. There was no
television. The room was cold and dimly lit, and Joel couldn't help but feel
as if he had been placed in some underground highway where fugitives are
kept alive and moved about in secret. The warmth of a two-hour lunch was
fading quickly.
His tutor's nervousness didn't help matters.

- 62 -

John Grisham

The Broker

When Ermanno was unable to take control of the meeting, Luigi quickly
stepped in and kicked things off. He suggested that they study each morning
from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., break for two hours, then resume around 1:30
and study until they were tired. This seemed to suit Ermanno and Joel, who
thought about asking the obvious: If my new guy here is a student, how does
he have the time to teach me all day long? But he let it pass. He'd pursue it
later.
Oh, the questions he was accumulating.
Ermanno eventually relaxed and described the language course. When he
spoke slowly, his accent was not intrusive. But when he rushed things, as he
was prone to do, his English might as well have been Italian. Once Luigi
interrupted and said, "Ermanno, it's important to speak very slowly, at least
in the first few days."
"Thank you," Joel said, like a true smartass.
Ermanno's cheeks actually reddened and he offered a very timid "Sorry."
He handed over the first batch of study aids-course book number one, along
with a small tape player and two cassettes. "The tapes follow the book," he
said, very slowly. "Tonight, you should study chapter one and listen to each
tape several times. Tomorrow we'll begin there."
"It will be very intense," Luigi added, applying more pressure, as if more
was needed.
"Where did you learn English?" Joel asked.
"At the university," Ermanno said. "In Bologna."
"So you haven't studied in the United States?"
"Yes, I have," he said, shooting a quick nervous glance at Luigi, as if
whatever happened in the States was something he preferred not to talk
about. Unlike Luigi, Ermanno was an easy read, obviously not a
professional.
"Where?" Joel asked, probing, seeing how much he could get.
"Furman," Ermanno said. UA small school in South Carolina."
"When were you there?"
Luigi came to the rescue, clearing his throat. "You will have plenty of time
for this small talk later. It is important for you to forget English, Marco.
From this day forward, you will live in a world of Italian. Everything you
touch has an Italian name for it. Every thought must be translated. In one
week you'll be ordering in restaurants. In

- 63 -

John Grisham

The Broker

two weeks you'll be dreaming in Italian. It's total, absolute immersion in the
language and culture, and there's no turning back."
"Can we start at eight in the morning?" Joel asked.
Ermanno glanced and fidgeted, finally said, "Perhaps eight- thirty."
"Good, I'll be here at eight-thirty.'
They left the apartment and strolled back to the Piazza dei Signori. It was
mid-afternoon, traffic was noticeably quieter, the sidewalks almost deserted.
Luigi stopped in front of the Trattoria del Monte. He nodded at the door,
said, "I'll meet you here at eight for dinner, okay?"
"Yes, okay."
"You know where your hotel is?"
"Yes, the albergo."
"And you have a map of the city?"
"Yes."
"Good. You're on your own, Marco." And with that Luigi ducked into an
alley and disappeared. Joel watched him for a second, then continued his
walk to the main square.
He felt very much alone. Four days after leaving Rudley, he was finally free
and unaccompanied, perhaps unobserved, though he doubted it. He decided
immediately that he would move around the city, go about his business, as if
no one was watching him. And he further decided, as he pretended to
examine the items in the window of a small leather shop, that he would not
live the rest of his life glancing over his shoulder.
They wouldn't find him.
He drifted until he found himself at Piazza San Vito, a small square where
two churches had been sitting for seven hundred years. The Santa Lucia and
San Vito were both closed, but, according to the ancient brass plate, they
would reopen from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. What kind of place closes from
noon to four?
The bars weren't closed, just empty. He finally mustered the courage to
sneak into one. He pulled up a stool, held his breath, and said the word
"Birra" when the bartender got close.
The bartender shot something back, waited for a response, and for a split
second Joel was tempted to bolt. But he saw the tap, pointed

- 64 -

John Grisham

The Broker

at it as if it was perfectly clear what he wanted, and the bartender reached for
an empty mug.
The first beer in six years. It was cool, heavy, tasty, and he savored every
drop. A soap opera rattled from a television somewhere at the end of the bar.
He listened to it from time to time, understood not a single word, and
worked hard to convince himself that he could master the language. As he
was making the decision to leave and drift back to his hotel, he looked
through the front window.
Stennett walked by.
Joel ordered another beer.

- 65 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The Backman affair had been closely chronicled by Dan
Sandberg, a veteran of The Washington Post. In 1998, he'd broken the story
about certain highly classified papers leaving the Pentagon without
authorization. The FBI investigation that soon followed kept him busy for
half a year, during which he filed eighteen stories, most of them on the front
page. He had reliable contacts at the CIA and the FBI. He knew the partners
at Backman, Pratt & Boiling and had spent time in their offices. He hounded
the Justice Department for information. He'd been in the courtroom the day
Backman hurriedly pled guilty and disappeared.
A year later he'd written one of two books about the scandal. His sold a
respectable 24,000 copies in hardback, the other about half of that.
Along the way, Sandberg built some key relationships. One in particular
grew into a valuable, if quite unexpected, source. A month before Jacy
Hubbard's death, Carl Pratt, then very much under indictment, as were most
of the senior partners of the firm, had contacted Sandberg and arranged a
meeting. They eventually met more than a dozen times while the scandal ran
its course, and in the ensuing years

- 66 -

John Grisham

The Broker

had become drinking buddies. They sneaked away at least twice year to
exchange gossip.
Three days after the pardon story first broke, Sandberg called Pratt and
arranged a meeting at their favorite place, a college bar near Georgetown
University.
Pratt looked awful, as if he'd been drinking for days. He ordered vodka;
Sandberg stuck with beer.
"So where's your boy?' Sandberg asked with a grin.
"He's not in prison anymore, that's for sure." Pratt took a near lethal slug of
the vodka and smacked his lips.
"No word from him?"
"None. Not me, not anyone at the firm."
"Would you be surprised if he called or stopped by?"
"Yes and no. Nothing surprises me with Backman." More vodka. "If he
never set foot in D.C. again, I wouldn't be surprised. If he showed up
tomorrow and announced the opening of a new law firm, I wouldn't be
surprised."
"The pardon surprised you."
"Yes, but that wasn't Backman's deal, was it?"
"I doubt it." A coed walked by and Sandberg gave her a look. Twicedivorced, he was always on the prowl. He sipped his beer and said, "He can't
practice law, can he? I thought they yanked his license."
"That wouldn't stop Backman. He'd call it 'government relations' or
'consulting' or something else. It's lobbying, that's his speciality, and you
don't need a license for that. Hell, half the lawyers in this city couldn't find
the nearest courthouse. But they can damned sure find Capitol Hill."
"What about clients?"
"It's not gonna happen. Backman ain't coming back to D.C. Unless you've
heard something different?"
"I've heard nothing. He vanished. Nobody at the prison is talking. I can't get
a word from the penal folks."
"What's your theory?" Pratt asked, then drained his glass and seemed poised
for more.
"I found out today that Teddy Maynard went to the White House late on the
nineteenth. Only someone like Teddy could squeeze it out of Morgan.
Backman walked away, probably with an escort, and vanished."

- 67 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Witness protection?"
"Something like that. The CIA has hidden people before. They have to.
There's nothing official on the books, but they have the resources."
"So why hide Backman?"
"Revenge. Remember Aldrich Ames, the biggest mole in CIA history?"
Sure.
"Now locked away securely in a federal pen. Don't you know the CIA would
love to have a crack at him? They can't do it because it's against the law-they
cannot target a US. citizen, either here or abroad."
"Backman wasn't a CIA mole. Hell, he hated Teddy Maynard, and the
feeling was very mutual."
"Maynard won't kill him. He'll just set things up so someone else will have
the pleasure."
Pratt was getting to his feet. "You want another one of those?" he asked,
pointing at the beer.
"Later, maybe." Sandberg picked up his pint for the second time and took a
drink.
When Pratt returned with a double vodka, he sat down and said, "So you
think Backman's days are numbered?"
"You asked my theory. Let me hear yours."
A reasonable pull on the vodka, then, "Same result, but from a slightly
different angle." Pratt stuck his finger in the drink, stirred it, then licked his
finger, thinking for a few seconds. "Off the record, okay?"
"Of course."They had talked so much over the years that everything was off
the record.
"There was an eight-day period between Hubbard's death and Backman's
plea. It was a very scary time. Both Kim Boiling and I were under FBI
protection, around the clock, around the block, everywhere. Quite odd,
really. The FBI was doing its best to send us to prison forever and at the
same time felt compelled to protect us." A sip, as he glanced around to see if
any of the college students were eavesdropping. They were not. "There were
some threats, some serious movements by the same people who killed Jacy
Hubbard. The FBI de

- 68 -

John Grisham

The Broker

briefed us later, months after Backman was gone and things settled down.
We felt a bit safer, but Boiling and I paid armed security for two years
afterward. I still glance in the rearview mirror. Poor Kim has lost his mind."
"Who made the threats?"
"The same people who'd love to find Joel Backman."
"Who?"
"Backman and Hubbard had made a deal to sell their little product to the
Saudis for a trainload of money. Very pricey, but far less than the cost of
building a brand-new satellite system. The deal fell through. Hubbard gets
himself killed. Backman hurries off to jail, and the Saudis are not happy at
all. Neither are the Israelis, because they wanted to make a deal too. Plus,
they were furious that Hubbard and Backman would deal with the Saudis."
He paused and took a drink, as if he needed the fortitude to finish the story.
"Then you have the folks who built the system in the first place."
"The Russians?"
"Probably not. Jacy Hubbard loved Asian girls. He was last seen leaving a
bar with a gorgeous young leggy thing, long black hair, round face, from
somewhere on the other side of the world. Red China uses thousands of
people here to gather information. All their US. students, businessmen,
diplomats, this place is crawling with Chinese who are snooping around.
Plus, their intelligence service has some very effective agents. For a matter
like this, they wouldn't hesitate to go after Hubbard and Backman."
"You're sure it's Red China?"
"No one's sure, okay? Maybe Backman knows, but he never told anyone.
Keep in mind, the CIA didn't even know about the system. They got caught
with their pants down, and ol' Teddy's still trying to catch up."
"Fun and games for Teddy, huh?"
"Absolutely. He fed Morgan a line about national security. Morgan, no
surprise, falls for it. Backman walks. Teddy sneaks him out of the country,
then watches to see who shows up with a gun. It's a no- lose game for
Teddy."
"It's brilliant."
"It's beyond brilliant, Dan. Think about it. When Joel Backman

- 69 -

John Grisham

The Broker

meets his maker, no one will ever know about it. No one knows where he is
now. No one will know who he is when his body is found."
"If it's found."
"Exactly."
"And Backman knows this?"
Pratt drained the second drink and wiped his mouth with a sleeve. He was
frowning. "Backman's not stupid by any measure. But a lot of what we know
came to light after he went away. He survived six years in prison, he
probably figures he can survive anything."
Critz ducked into a pub not far from the Connaught Hotel in London. A light
rain grew steadier and he needed a place to stay dry. Mrs. Critz was back at
the small apartment that was on loan from their new employer, so Critz had
the luxury of sitting in a crowded pub where no one knew him and knocking
back a couple of pints. A week in London now with a week to go before he
pushed himself back across the Atlantic, back to D.C. where he would take a
miserable job lobbying for a company that made, among other hardware,
defective missiles that the Pentagon hated but nonetheless would be forced
to buy because the company had all the right lobbyists.
He found an empty booth, one partially visible through a fog of tobacco
smoke, and wedged himself into it and settled in behind his pint. How nice it
was to drink alone without the worry of being spotted by someone who
would rush over and say, "Hey, Critz, what were you idiots thinking with
that Berman veto?" Yakety-yaketyyak.
He absorbed the cheery British voices of neighbors coming and going. He
didn't even mind the smoke. He was alone and unknown and he quietly
reveled in his privacy.
His anonymity was not complete, however. From behind him a small man
wearing a battered sailor's cap appeared and fell into the booth across the
table, startling Critz.
"Mind if I join you, Mr. Critz?" the sailor said with a smile that revealed
large yellow teeth. Critz would remember the dingy teeth.
"Have a seat," Critz said warily. "You got a name?"
"Ben." He wasn't British, and English was not his native tongue. Ben was
about thirty, with dark hair, dark brown eyes, and a long pointed nose that
made him rather Greek-looking.
