
Bullish Pivot Point Patterns
Multitudes of trading books and articles talk about various chart patterns. Some are fairly simple, while others require a special decoder
ring to identify. The list that we have included is not comprehensive,
but it does represent some of the more reliable patterns and signals
for buyers.
• Bullish engulfing pattern
• Hammer
• Doji
• Piercing line
Bullish Engulfing Pattern

The bullish engulfing pattern is one of our favorites because it creates such as strong indication of the return of the buyers after a short
sell-off. This pattern does not require confirmation; it’s okay to enter
the trade on the day of the bullish engulfing candle without waiting
for a follow-up day to show that the uptrend is continuing. Here are
the key points of this pattern:
• The stock must be in a short-term downtrend within a longer
uptrend. Remember, we don’t want to be buying stocks with
an overall bias toward the downside. This is just a pullback
within a larger positive run.
• The first day of the pattern is a down day, as evidenced by a red
or black candle. The black candle tells us that the short-term

c09.indd 186

11/2/07 12:45:08 PM

Going with the Flow

187

downtrend is still controlled by the sellers, who are pushing
the stock to lower levels.
• The second day’s candle should be green or white, indicating
that the buyers are in control for that day.
• Here’s the key to the bullish engulfing pattern: The second
day’s body must completely engulf the first day’s body. The
open of the second day could be equal to the first day’s close,
although ideally the second day’s open is lower than the first
day’s close. Likewise, while the second day’s close may be equal
to the first day’s open, it’s better if the second day closes above
the previous open. Finally, while not required, it shows more
strength if the second day’s body completely engulfs the first
day’s body and shadows.
Figure 9.4 illustrates the formation of a pivot point with a bullish
engulfing pattern. In this chart, we see that the prevailing trend is
upward. As the stock moves higher, it takes a short breather, noted
by the three black candles that drop to the role reversal support
line. We’ve expanded the bullish engulfing pattern to reveal how
the second day opened slightly below the first day’s close. The stock
then closed well above the high of the previous day. In fact, it closed
higher than the two previous days’ trading. When you see the stock
forming this pattern, it’s acceptable to enter the trade in the last
10 to 15 minutes of the trading day. Alternatively, you could wait
until the next trading session to open your trade.

Figure 9.4 Bullish Engulfing Pattern

c09.indd 187

11/2/07 12:45:08 PM

188

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Hammer

The hammer pattern develops at the bottom of a downtrend when
the sellers continue their sell-off during the day but fail to hold it
by the close. The long shadow below the candle body tells us how
far the sellers took the price down before the buyers stepped in and
forced them into a retreat. The hammer pattern does require confirmation. You need to wait until the day after the hammer pattern to
verify that the buyers are going to continue pushing the stock back
up. Also, the hammer pattern itself does not create a pivot point; it
creates the apex of the “V.” The pivot point is formed by the confirmation candle, which follows the hammer itself. Here are the key
points of the hammer pattern:
• The stock is in a short-term downtrend, as shown by a series of
lower highs and lower lows with black candle bodies.
• The hammer body is relatively small compared to previous
day’s candle bodies. The color of the body is not critical for
the hammer.
• The lower shadow is at least 2 to 3 times as long as the body
length. We tend to be a little cautious if the lower shadow is
extremely long, however. For example, if the shadow is 10 times
as long as the body, that tells us that the sellers were able to
penetrate deeply into new low territory. We’d prefer to see a
moderate testing but not a heavy sell-off, even though the buyers do push the price back up toward the end of the trading
session.
• The top shadow should be no longer than the length of the
candle body. It’s also fine if there is no top shadow.
In Figure 9.5, we see an example of a hammer reversal during an
uptrend. We’ve expanded the view on seven candles to highlight the
setup and then the hammer with confirmation. The stock is clearly
in an uptrend, with higher highs and higher lows. As the price crests
one of the higher highs, we see the slight pullback in the expanded
view. This is followed by the white hammer at point A in the large view.
Remember that the hammer pattern does require confirmation, so
we won’t consider the reversal complete until we see the white day
following the hammer. This tells us that the buyers are in control and
we can enter a long trade after the following days’ trading.

c09.indd 188

11/2/07 12:45:09 PM

Going with the Flow

189

Figure 9.5 Hammer Reversal Pattern
Doji

The doji is a single candle that represents indecision by the buyers and sellers. The interpretation of a doji is highly dependent
on where it falls in relation to other types of candles. If a stock is
printing a series of doji candles, that indicates that there is general
indecision and it may not be resolved for quite some time. This is
especially true if the volume is low. Indecision on low volume simply
tells us that nobody is willing to commit to a direction and so the
price just floats along. That type of stock does not offer good trading opportunities. However, if a stock is in a strong fall on heavy
volume and then you see a doji immediately following a long black
candle, that would be a strong sign that the sellers have lost the
momentum. The doji always requires confirmation, since it signifies indecision rather than a change of direction. We want to see a
confirmation of a new direction before we jump into the trade. The
doji is very easy to identify:
• The open and close are the same price, or very nearly the same
price. This creates a horizontal line in place of the body.
• The shadows create various styles of doji. A simple doji has a
top and bottom shadow of approximately equal length. This
creates the doji cross. The gravestone doji has no bottom
shadow and a long top shadow. A dragonfly doji has no top
shadow and a long bottom shadow. The four-price doji occurs

c09.indd 189

11/2/07 12:45:09 PM

190

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

in the unique situation when the open, close, high, and low
are all the same price. The four-price doji appears as simply a
small dash.
Figure 9.6 is especially instructive because it gives us an example
of a failed doji as well as a successful doji. Both of the doji candles
appear within a short-term downtrend. Therefore, we would expect
that a reversal signal would show us when the stock starts to rally.
Doji 1 is noted on the chart as the first doji candle in the downtrend.
Now, it would be tempting to look at doji 1 and reason that the stock
should rally here because the three days prior to doji 1 all found support at about the same price. Notice how the low of each of the three
previous days is approximately the same price as the low of doji 1.
This is where our rules come into play.
The doji requires confirmation, so we wouldn’t enter the long
trade even though there are other factors that may tempt us. Our
rules would have protected us from the long black candle that followed doji 1. Next, we see doji 2 appear after the long black candle.
Follow the mind-set here: The stock had a support level that held
for several days. This support was broken and the sellers pushed the
price down and closed the stock very near the day’s low. If the sellers still had control and momentum, we would expect to see more
long black candles. Instead, we’re given a doji, which tells us that

Figure 9.6 Doji Reversal Pattern

c09.indd 190

11/2/07 12:45:09 PM

Going with the Flow

191

the fall was short-lived. Following our rules, we wait until the day
after doji 2 before we enter the trade. The next day was a white day,
indicating that the buyers had stepped back in, and it is there that
we buy the stock. The second day after doji 2 might have rattled your
nerves since it was a black candle, but don’t lose sight of the fact that
the stock still had a higher high and higher low. Doji 2 would have
yielded a $2 move in four days if you waited for the proper confirmation. Jumping in too early on doji 1 would most likely have stopped
you out at a loss.
Piercing Line

Many of the reversal patterns that we look at have a counterpart for the
opposite trend. The piercing line is a bullish reversal signal in a downtrend; the same type of pattern yields the dark cloud pattern at the top
of an uptrend. The piercing line does not require confirmation like
the doji and the hammer. Because the pattern itself is a strong show of
buyer momentum, a long trade may be entered as soon as the pattern
forms. The key points of the piercing line are as follows:
• The stock must be in an established short-term downtrend. A
series of long red or black candles leading into the piercing
line is especially strong. In any event, the day immediately preceding the piercing line must be a long black candle, indicating that the sellers are pushing the stock strongly downward.
• The piercing line is a green or white candle that opens below
the low of the previous day. Ideally, the opening price of the
piercing line candle will be below both the low and the close
of the previous day. In order to create this scenario, the stock
must gap down on the open of the piercing line day.
• The closing price of the piercing line candle must be between
the previous day’s open and body midpoint. This shows that the
piercing line candle penetrates deeply into the previous day’s
trading range but doesn’t fully engulf the previous candle. If
the piercing line closed above the previous day’s open, the
pattern would be the bullish engulfing candle. It is best if
the piercing line has little or no top shadow. We don’t like to
see a piercing line with a long top shadow because that tells us
that the buyers were able to push the stock much higher but
were repelled by the sellers.

c09.indd 191

11/2/07 12:45:09 PM

192

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 9.7 Piercing Line Reversal Pattern

Figure 9.7 shows an uptrend with the higher lows connected.
Notice the long black candle as the stock pulls back to the trendline
support just before the piercing line. On the piercing line day, the
stock gapped down slightly, sold off to the trend line, and then rallied to close well within the previous day’s body. There is a very small
top shadow, which may very well have been some profit taking at
the end of the day. A new long trade could be entered at the end of the
piercing line day or during the next trading session.

Bearish Pivot Point Patterns
As with buying patterns and signals, the selling patterns and signals are
many and varied. Our goal is to find the signs that tell us that the sellers are once again in control of the trading. When we see the selling
signals, we want to be sellers so as to put our money with the money
flow. You will notice that some of the bearish pivot point patterns are
simply the reverse of the bullish patterns.
• Bearish engulfing pattern
• Hanging man
• Shooting star
• Dark cloud
Bearish Engulfing Pattern

Like its bullish counterpart, the bearish engulfing pattern is a strong,
single-day indication of a reversal following a short-term uptrend.

c09.indd 192

11/2/07 12:45:10 PM

Going with the Flow

193

The pattern is best used within a longer-term downtrend, when the
stock is rallying toward resistance. The buyers push the stock higher
for a few days but the momentum is halted by the bearish engulfing
candle. We can recognize this pattern by following these points:
• The stock is in a short-term uptrend, characterized by green
or white candles. The candle that immediately precedes the
bearish engulfing candle must be a long white candle.
• The bearish engulfing candle must be a long black or red candle. This is our sign that the sellers have the upper hand.
• The bearish engulfing day must gap up at the open, so that the
top of the bearish engulfing candle is above the previous day’s
close. Ideally, the gap will be higher than the previous day’s high,
so that the body engulfs the shadows as well as the previous body.
While this is preferred, it is not required. Finally, the bearish engulfing candle must close below the previous day’s open. Again,
if the bearish engulfing day closes below the previous low, that’s a
bonus.
The first point to observe in Figure 9.8 is that both the trend line
and the 200-day SMA (curved line) are trending down. Therefore,
the overall trend is negative. The stock rallied from $29 to $32 just
prior to the bearish engulfing day. This is the short-term uptrend
that we want to see within the longer downtrend. As the stock
reaches $32, it also bumps its head against the downtrend resistance

Figure 9.8 Bearish Engulfing Reversal Pattern

c09.indd 193

11/2/07 12:45:10 PM

194

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

line. It is at this point that the bearish engulfing candle forms. The
stock gaps up above the previous day’s close, which also happens to
be the high. The very small upper shadow tells us that the buyers
pushed the stock marginally higher before the sellers came in and
took control of the trading. While the bearish engulfing candle low
is slightly higher than the previous low, the close is below the previous open. As we can see, the black body fully engulfs the prior white
body. This pattern does not require confirmation, so you could enter
a short trade at the close of the bearish engulfing day or during the
following trading session.
Hanging Man

We find it a bit funny that although many of the candle patterns have
names that reflect their Japanese origin (doji, harami, marabozu,
etc.), some of the patterns have less mystical origins. The hanging
man falls into the latter category. With a small head and long body
swinging from the top of an uptrend, the hanging man is a signal
that the bears may be entering the arena once again. The hanging
man definitely requires confirmation. Although the sellers pushed
the stock lower during the trading day, the buyers stepped back in
and brought the closing price closer to the open. For this reason, the
hanging man signals indecision more than a reversal, so we need to
see the sellers before we enter a short trade. The main points to look
for with the hanging man are:
• The stock is in a short-term uptrend within a longer-term
downtrend. Remember, we want the reversal to return to the
prevailing trend.
• The body of the hanging man is relatively small compared
to recent candle bodies. The color of the body isn’t critical,
although a red or black body does add strength to the sellers’
movements.
• The top shadow should be smaller than the body length. It’s
also fine to have no top shadow at all. If there is no top shadow
and the body is black, that means that the stock opened on the
highest price of the day and only traded lower from there.
• The bottom shadow should be at least two to three times
the length of the body. Once again, we’re a little cautious
if the bottom shadow is extremely long. There’s not a hard

c09.indd 194

11/2/07 12:45:10 PM

Going with the Flow

195

Figure 9.9 Hanging Man Reversal Pattern

definition for “extremely long” but, as U.S. Justice Potter Stewart
said in 1964, “I know it when I see it.” You, too, will develop the
ability to know it when you see it.
The hanging man in Figure 9.9 occurs after a series of long white
candles. Even though the overall trend is downward, as seen by the
trend line connecting the lower highs, the stock is in a strong shortterm rally. At the point noted in the chart, the black-body hanging
man is formed. The hanging man appears right at the downtrend
resistance line; this is a good reversal sign. The next day is a doji, so
we don’t actually get our confirmation until the second day following the hanging man. Here, we see a black candle dropping off the
resistance line and that tells us that we can enter a short trade.
Shooting Star

The shooting star has all of the characteristics of the hanging man,
except that the long shadow occurs at the top instead of the bottom.
We prefer the shooting star to the hanging man because it does a
better job of showing the shift toward the sellers. With the shooting
star, it is the buyers who make an attempt to continue the rally, but
the sellers step in and push the close toward the low of the trading
session. Most traders wait for confirmation with the shooting star;
however, we don’t mind entering a short trade on the shooting star if
it forms against a key resistance level. The main points related to the
shooting star are:

c09.indd 195

11/2/07 12:45:10 PM

196

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 9.10 Shooting Star Reversal Pattern

• The stock must be in a short-term uptrend within a longerterm downtrend.
• The body must be small relative to recent candle bodies. If the
body is black, that’s an added bonus.
• The top shadow should be at least two to three times as long
as the body. With the shooting star, we’re not as concerned if
the top shadow is relatively long. This tells us that the sellers
pushed the stock down from much higher levels.
• The lower shadow should be nonexistent or at least less than the
body length.
Figure 9.10 shows a classic shooting star pattern that formed
against the downtrend line. Pay attention to how closely the top
shadow ran up to the resistance line before the sellers started the
retreat in price. We would be willing to enter the short trade at
the open of the following day and use the resistance line to help us
set our buy stop protection. If the price should rally back up through
the downtrend resistance, it would be time to exit the trade.
Dark Cloud

The dark cloud is the counterpart to the bullish piercing line pattern. Since the dark cloud penetrates deeply into the short-term
uptrend, this pattern typically does not require confirmation.

c09.indd 196

11/2/07 12:45:11 PM

Going with the Flow

197

Chatter Box—Rick
The dark cloud is one of the first candlestick patterns that I learned to
use and, as such, I overused it. In fact, I had programmed my trading software to identify the dark cloud pattern and back-tested the
program to check its success. Sure enough, with the parameters I had
set, this pattern formation yielded a high return with minimal drawdown. I was ready to battle the market. One of the first short positions
I entered was on Dell Computer (ticker symbol: DELL) in the mid-1990s.
Do I need to remind any of you what technology stocks were doing in
the mid-1990s? My initial position quickly went out-of-the-money, so
I shorted more. By the end of the day, I had an open short position with
6,000 shares, and the average cost basis was $8 out of the money.
I went home that day with a $50,000 loss. The black dog visited me
that night and I had almost no sleep. I tossed and turned and wondered how much my dog would fetch at auction.
I returned to the trading floor the next morning before the open
and was met by grinning colleagues. It turned out that DELL was
indicating a strong gap down at the open. I sat down at my trading
terminal and watched the premarket activity. Just before the opening bell, my $50,000 loss position had turned into a $30,000 profit position. As soon as the market opened, I started selling at the market in
1,000-share blocks. The stock was so volatile that by the time I closed
the entire position, I had made a net profit of less than $2,000. I thought
surely there must be ways to make that kind of money without aging
10 years overnight.
The fatal flaws in my trading then were numerous, but I learned
incredibly valuable lessons. First, I traded against the prevailing trend.
A dark cloud in a raging bull market is nothing more than a breather—
not an invitation to start short selling. Second, candlestick patterns
are not infallible. You may have your favorite patterns, but sooner or later
they will be completely wrong. That’s when you need to tap out! Third,
adding to a losing position just makes you a bigger loser. Don’t do it!

Let’s look at the factors that make up the dark cloud reversal
pattern:
• The stock must be in a short-term uptrend within a longerterm downtrend.

c09.indd 197

11/2/07 12:45:11 PM

198

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 9.11 Dark Cloud Reversal Pattern

• The day before the dark cloud pattern must be a long white
or green candle. This shows us that the buyers have strong
momentum. It’s even better if the several days prior to the
dark cloud are long white candles.
• The dark cloud candle must gap up at the open. This gives
us a candle body where the opening price of the dark cloud
candle is higher than the previous day’s close.
• The dark cloud’s closing price must be above the previous day’s
open but below the previous day’s midpoint. A small or nonexistent lower shadow just adds to the dark cloud’s strength.
The dark cloud in Figure 9.11 is evident at the resistance line
drawn on the chart. This is the same level from which the stock
dropped in mid-October on the left side of the chart. Here, we see
a short-term rally up to the resistance line. The stock gaps up on the
dark cloud day and falls to form a long black candle. From the dark
cloud to the subsequent low of the downtrend, the stock lost almost
50 percent of its value.

Use the Market without Guilt
It’s natural to try to find the secret that will allow you to buy when
everyone else is selling. That crystal ball would be more than worth

c09.indd 198

11/2/07 12:45:12 PM

Going with the Flow

199

its weight in gold. Until you find it, the better suggestion for traders
is to watch where the money is going and step in front of the flow as
early as possible.
Your challenge is to learn to read the maneuvering of the market
and then work that movement to your advantage. Like the jiu-jitsu
fighter we described in the beginning of this chapter, you need to
watch for the action that you can profit from. That’s what the pivot
point is designed to create for you. Have patience until the proper
time, and you’ll find success with less stress. In the end, isn’t that what
we’re all after?
