
80

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

'J)\JJLE 2.1 Subjective Patterns and Their Expected Outcomes
Pattern/Signal

Expected Outcome

Head-and-shoulders top

Downtrend

Completed 5th Elliott wave

Corrective wave

Strong uptrend, then flag

Continuation of uptrend

Extremely bullish sentiment readings

Bear market

Hidden or Missing Data Compounds the Problem
of Illusory Correlations

The discussion so far shows how people come to believe in bogus correlations because of an insufficient consideration of all relevant information
in a contingency table. However, the subjective technician's plight does
not end here. Further compounding the propensity to detect illusory correlations is the problem of missing data. The cell counts needed to fill in
the contingency table are not even readily available. The missing data
problem is yet another consequence of subjective analysis.
Without objectively defined signals/patterns and without objectively
defined standards for evaluating their outcomes, it is impossible obtain
the requisite counts that are needed to fill the cells of the contingency
table. Without these counts, the true efficacy of the signal/pattern cannot
be evaluated. This applies even to the confirmatory instances found in the
upper left cell of the table, although subjective practitioners seem never
to run short of confirmatory examples. 1I8 Objective definitions are the
only solution to the missing data problem. Until TA adopts objectivity, it
will continue to operate on the basis of magical thinking and myth.
Once an illusory correlation is accepted as fact, two previously mentioned cognitive errors assure the misconception's longevity. The mere belief in the specious relationship increases the likelihood that additional
supportive evidence will be noticed (confirmation bias). Moreover, the alleged correlation is easily assimilated into one's system of beliefs. As
Gilovich points out, once a phenomenon is suspected to exist, people are
easily able to come up with an explanation about why it exists and what it
means. In other words humans are very good at inventing stories after the
fact. 119 Studies show that when people are falsely informed that they are
either above average or below average at some task, they can readily invent a reason that explains why.120 Part of the appeal of subjective TA is
the fascinating story offered about why it works. The story itself helps
sustain belief.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

81

A Behaviorist's Explanation of Illusory
Correlations
Thus far, the discussion has explained the birth and longevity of erroneous beliefs in terms of cognitive psychology. A separate subdiscipline of
psychology, behaviorism, offers a somewhat different account of why
erroneous beliefs as to the efficacy of subjective TA should be so durable.
Behavioral psychology is concerned with roles of reward (positive reinforcement) and punishment (negative reinforcement) in the learning of
habitual behaviors. If a pigeon is put in a cage and rewarded with a food
pellet each time it pecks at a button, it will eventually learn the habit of
pecking the button. Once this behavior has been acquired, the bird will
continue pecking the button so long as the food pellets keep coming.
However, if the reward is stopped, the bird eventually learns that the behavior no longer pays, and the learned behavior is extinguished.
One area of interest within behavioral psychology is the relationship
between the strength of a habit, indicated by the degree to which it resists extinction, and the specific type of reinforcement schedule that
originally led to the habit's formation. The question is which type of reinforcement schedule produces the strongest habits. The simplest type of
reinforcement is rewarding every action-each peck earns a pellet. Another is partial reinforcement, in which rewards come only at fixed time
intervals, such as every 60 seconds, or fixed behavior intervals, such as
every tenth peck. It has been discovered that partial reinforcement
schedules produce slower learning (habit takes longer to form) but
stronger habits.
Most relevant to the domain of TA is the fact that of all the partial reinforcement schedules investigated, random reinforcement 121 produces
habits that are most resistant to extinction. Under random reinforcement,
the organism's behavior is not truly associated with the receipt of a reward. Behavior is rewarded by chance. In one experiment, a pigeon
pecked at a colored button and received random reinforcement for a mere
60 seconds. However, the pecking behavior continued for 3.5 hours after
the reward was stopped. In other words, the pathetic bird engaged in a
fruitless activity for a period that was 210 times longer than the random
reinforcement period that produced the habit. 122
Random reinforcement is precisely the type of reward received by
someone who believes in an illusory TA correlation. Every so often, by
chance, the signal/pattern is followed by the expected outcome, thus reinforcing the belief. Behaviorist studies would predict that such a belief
would be extremely resistant to extinction. Superstitions and compulsive
gambling, two habits that rest on illusory correlations, are known to be
extremely difficult to cure. 123

82

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

When I worked on the floor of the American Stock Exchange, I met
several traders who displayed superstitious behavior. One fellow insisted
on wearing the same tie every day, which contained an accurate historical
record of his tastes in soup. Another was adamant about entering the trading floor through one particular door of the several available. Another refused to use a red pen. Each of these odd habits was probably initiated by
an accidental pairing of the behavior with a desired or undesirable outcome and then perpetuated by random reinforcement.

MISPlACED FAITH IN CHART ANALYSIS
Subjective technicians, irrespective of the specific method they practice,
believe in the efficacy of visual chart analysis. Price charts are presumed
to be a valid method for detecting exploitable order in financial market
data. The pioneers of TA used charts to discover the discipline's foundational principles, and today they remain the primary analysis tool. This
section explains why confidence in chart analysis is misplaced.
This is not to say that charts have no role in TA. They can serve as a
source of inspiration that leads to the forn1ation of testable hypotheses
about market behavior. However, unless and until these conjectures are
vigorously and objectively tested, they remain mere suppositions rather
than trustworthy knowledge.

An Informal Search for Order Is Sure to Find It
Humans have both the need and the capacity to find order and meaning in
their experience. "It may have been bred into us through evolution because of its general adaptiveness: We can capitalize on ordered phenomena in ways that we cannot on those that are random. The predisposition
to detect patterns and make connections is what leads to discovery and
advance. The problem is that the tendency is so strong and so automatic
that we sometimes detect coherence even when it does not exist."124
A trait of intuitive, nonscientific thinking is the tendency to accept
without question surface impressions and obvious explanations. Unfortunately, what is obvious at first blush is not necessarily valid. To the
ancients it seemed obvious the sun orbited the earth. To the pioneers of
TA it seemed obvious that financial market prices formed patterns and
trends. Just as early observers of the heavens perceived mythical figures like Leo the Lion and Orion the Hunter in the random arrangements of stars, the first technicians saw heads-and-shoulders, double
and triple tops, and other patterns in the meandering movements of

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

83

stock and commodity prices. These patterns form the lexicon of subjective chart analysis.
Our nervous system seems to be wired to see shapes regardless of
whether they are real. Dr. John Elder,125 a noted authority on predictive
modeling and data mining, calls this the "bunnies in the clouds" effect.
There is, however, good reason to question the validity of chart analysis,
and by extension, to question the validity of knowledge based on it. I contend that trends and patterns on charts that appear real to the eye may often be illusions born of the mind's voracious, though indiscriminate,
appetite to perceive order.
This is not meant to imply that financial markets are devoid of authentic trends and patterns. In fact, there is sound empirical evidence that patterns exist which have predictive power. 126 It does mean, however, that
visual inspection of charts is an inadequate means for discovering or verifying the authenticity of patterns. Studies l27 have shown that even expert
chartists cannot reliably distinguish between authentic stock charts and
simulated charts produced by a random process. A method of analysis
that cannot discriminate real charts from fakes cannot provide reliable
analysis of the real. A jeweler who can't tell the difference between authentic diamonds and dime-store costume jewelry is in no position to appraise a diamond necklace.

Illusory Trends and Patterns in Financial Data
Statistician Harry Roberts said that technical analysts fall victim to the illusion of patterns and trends for two possible reasons. First, "the usual
method of graphing stock prices gives a picture of successive (price) levels rather than of price changes and levels can give an artificial appearance of pattern or trend. Second, chance behavior itself produces
patterns that invite spurious interpretations."128
Roberts showed that the same chart patterns to which TA attaches
importance l29 appear with great regularity in random walks. A random
walk is, by definition, devoid of authentic trends, patterns, or exploitable
order of any kind. However, Roberts' random-walk charts displayed headand-shoulder tops and bottoms, triangle tops and bottoms, triple tops and
bottoms, trend channels, and so forth.
You can create a random-walk chart from a sequence of coin flips by
starting with an arbitrary price, say $100, and adding one dollar for each
head and subtracting one dollar for each tail. In other words, the face of
the coin represents a price change and the chart shows a sequence of simulated price levels. Each simulated price in the sequence is equal to the
cumulative algebraic sum of all prior random changes added to the starting value. If you carry out this process for three hundred or so flips, you

84

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

may be amazed at the patterns that appear. Many will be similar to the patterns found on actual charts of financial assets. Clearly the patterns or
trends that appear on a coin-flip chart cannot predict its future evolution.
This raises an important question: if chartist-like patterns can appear
with such regularity in random walks, and it is known that these patterns
cannot be predictive, how can the same patterns be considered predictive
simply because they happen to appear on a real chart?
Perhaps we should not trust the eye of Roberts. He was a statistician,
not an expert in TA. If an expert chartist were able to spot the patterns
occurring in random-walk charts as fakes the way a competent jeweler
can spot a counterfeit diamond, then Roberts's random-walk experiment
would not prove anything other than his lack of chart expertise. Certainly, expert chartists should claim that they can tell the difference between patterns occurring in random walks and those occurring on real
charts. After all, if the patterns on actual markets charts form as a result
of changes in supply and demand and/or oscillations in market mood, as
TA claims, they should look different from the accidental meanderings on
a random-walk chart! 130
Unfortunately expert chartists have been unable to tell the difference
between real and fake charts. Arditti 131 put them to the test. When presented with an assortment of real charts mixed with random-walk charts,
the chartists examined by Arditti were no more accurate at telling the real
from the fake than a guess. This result was subsequently confirmed in an
informal study l32 by Professor Jeremy Siegel of the Wharton Business
School. 133 Siegel presented the graphs shown in Figure 2.18 (four real and
four random) to a group of top Wall Street stockbrokers who considered
themselves competent chart readers. Again, the experts were unable to reliably distinguish the real from the random. I conducted a similar experiment using graduate business students who had just completed a course
in technical analysis. Their accuracy was consistent with guessing. The
real charts are indicated by the X.
What can we conclude from these results? First, they do not imply
that financial markets are random, and hence devoid of valid trends and
patterns. But they do call into question the efficacy of subjective/visual
chart analysis as a means of knowledge acquisition and forecasting. If
chart reading were a valid skill, it should at least be possible to distinguish
an actual chart from a random fake.

Evidence of Illusory Trends in Sports
Financial markets are not the only arena in which observers are plagued
by the illusion of order. Many sports fans and athletes believe in performance trends, periods of hot and cold performance. What baseball fan or

85

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

~~
121 ~
k\d@
~~
~J..l\~l\~.l'tJl\

'\rJ

1~IGUKr~ 2.18 Real and randomly generated stock charts.
Siegel, Jeremy J.. Stocks for the Long Run, 3rd Edition, Copyright 2002, 1998,
1994, McGraw-Hili; the material is reproduced with the permission of The McGrawHill Companies.

player does not think batting slumps or hitting streaks are real? Basketball
fans, players, coaches, and sports commentators speak of the so-called
hot hand, a trend of above-average shooting accuracy.
These beliefs are widely held because trends in athletic performance
seem so obvious, However, rigorous statistical analysis of player performance l34 indicates that the hot hand phenomenon is an illusion. The fans
have been duped by their intuition. This erroneous belief stems from a
faulty notion about how random phenomena ought to behave. 135 Common
sense would have us believe that streaks (a sequence of strike-outs, or a
sequence of successful shots, and so forth) should not occur in a random
process. Rather, intuition incorrectly tells us that random processes
should display something resembling an alternating pattern of positive
and negative outcomes.
The truth is that sports trends are, by and large a cognitive illusion.
What appears to be a batting slump or a hitting streak is often nothing
more than a run of similar outcomes, a phenomenon that is quite common
in random processes. A valid trend is a streak of longer duration than
those that are ordinary in random data. That is to say, a real trend is a
streak of sufficient length that it would be rare in a random process.
Gilovich points out that "although a player's perfonnance does not
display longer streaks than those allowed by chance, it does not mean that
the player's perfornlance is chance detem1ined. It is not. Whether a given

86

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

shot is hit or missed is determined by a host of non-chance factors, foremost among them being the skill of the offensive and defensive players involved. However, one factor that does not influence or predict the
outcome is the player's recent hit rate."136
To understand why sports fans, athletes, and chart analysts fall prey
to the illusion of trends and patterns in data that may in fact be random
we must delve a bit deeper into the nature of intuitive judgment.

THE INTUITIVE JUDGMENT AND THE ROLE
OF HEURISTICS
"To simplify, there are basically two types of thought processes: automatic
and controlled."137 "Intuition is automatic. It is our capacity for direct
knowledge, for immediate insight without observation or reason."l38 It is
perception-like, rapid, and effortless, notes Princeton University psychologist Daniel Kahneman. In contrast, "deliberate or controlled thinking
is reasoning-like, critical, and analytic."139 The prototype of controlled
thought is scientific reasoning. The prototype of intuition is the brilliant
medical diagnostician who always seems to sniff the underlying disease.
Subjective technicians rely primarily on intuition, and they do so to their
detriment.
Human intelligence has limits. We can only pay attention to an
extremely small fraction of the information that comes to us through
our sensory organs. Moreover, the mind is not well suited to complex
tasks such as estimating probabilities and making decisions in a logically and probabilistically correct manner in situations characterized
by uncertainty.
To cope, we must simplify. We reduce the complexities of estimating
and decision making by resorting to a variety of quick and dirty rules of
reasoning known as judgment heuristics. They focus our attention on a
limited portion of the total information picture and utilize relatively simple forms of infonnation processing and reasoning to arrive at conclusions quickly. All of this is done without awareness or exertion. We make
intuitive judgments as automatically and effortlessly as we recognize
someone's face, a task for which the mind is very well suited.
We acquire judgment heuristics from life experience. The term
heuristic refers to the notion of discovery by trial and error, and this is
how these rules of thought are acquired. Moreover, they slip into usage so
subtly that we are unaware of how or when we learned them. And we
adopt them because, in general, they work. However, they work imperfectly and when they fail our judgment suffers.

The JIIusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

87

The good news is that heuristic judgment tends to err in a consistent
manner. In other words, the judgments are biased-they tend to be wrong
in the same way over and over again. 140 This consistency makes it possible
to predict the conditions under which heuristic judgments will fail and
how they will fail-whether the deviation from true value will be a positive or a negative one.
In general, heuristic judgments tend to err in situations characterized
by uncertainty. 141 Financial markets are highly uncertain, so intuitive judgments in this arena are likely to be biased. The specific bias that afflicts
subjective technicians is the propensity to see trends and patterns in data
where such structures are not truly present. In other words, there is a systematic tendency to perceive order where only random behavior exists.
This may explain why chartists are unable to distinguish real charts from
pseudocharts produced from random data.
In the words of Professor Burton Malkiel, "Randomness is a difficult
notion for people to accept. When events come in clusters and streaks,
people look for explanations and patterns. They refuse to believe that
such patterns-which frequently occur in random data-could equally be
derived from tossing a coin. So it is in the stock market as well."142 Malkeil
takes the extreme position that the market is random. I do not share this
conviction but agree that people misperceive order in data that is random.
For this reason visual inspection of price charts cannot be trusted.
The illusion of trends and patterns in data that is truly random may be
attributable to the failure of a specific judgment heuristic called reasoning by repr-esentativeness. That is to say, a faulty application of the generally useful representativeness rule biases us toward the perception of
order where it does not exist.
Heuristic Bias and the Availability Heuristic
To recap, heuristics help us make complex decisions rapidly in spite of
the limitations of human intelligence, but they can cause those decisions
to be biased. The notion of heuristic bias is easily explained by considering the availability heuristic.
We rely on the availability heuristic to estimate the likelihood of future events. It is based on the reasonable notion that the more easily we
can bring to mind a particular class of events, the more likely it is that
such events will occur in the future. Events that are easily brought to
mind are said to be cognitively available. For example, plane crashes are
a class of events with high cognitive availability.
The availability heuristic makes a certain amount of sense. The ability
to recall a class of events is indeed related to how frequently they have occurred in the past, and it is also true that events that have happened fre-

88

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

quently in the past are generally more likely to occur in the future. This is
in keeping with one theory of probability that asserts that the future likelihood of an event is related to its historical frequency.143 Taken as a class,
thunderstorms have been more frequent in the past than asteroid impacts,
and they do indeed have a higher future likelihood.
The problem with the availability heuristic is that there are factors
that can enhance an event's cognitive availability that have nothing to do
with its historical frequency and are, therefore, irrelevant to estimating
its future likelihood. Consequently, our judgments of likelihood are
sometimes falsely inflated by the intrusion of these irrelevant factors.
Two factors that have no relevance to an event's likelihood but that do increase its cognitive availability are recency and vividness. That is to say,
how recently144 an event of the type in question took place and how vivid
the event was both impact how easily we can bring such events to mind.
Consider plane crashes as a class of events. A plane crash that just occurred is both vivid and recent. As a result, in the period right after a
well-publicized plane crash many people tend to overestimate the likelihood of future plane crashes and are inordinately fearful of flying. Note
the bias in the judgment is one of overestimating a probability. The availability heuristic never causes us to underestimate an event's likelihood.
The error is always one of overestimating the probability.

The Representativeness Heuristic:
Reasoning by Similarity
The representativeness heuristic, which was first identified by Tversky
and Kahneman 145 is of particular relevance to subjective TA. We use this
rule to make intuitive classification judgments. In other words, it is used
to estimate the probability that a particular object, for example the dog
before me, belongs to a particular class of objects, for example the class
of poodles. The underlying premise of the representativeness heuristic is
that each member of a class should display the key common attributes
that define the class. It is quite reasonable to expect that objects from the
same class should possess a similar set of characteristics. In arriving at a
judgment by representativeness about whether a given object belongs to a
particular class, we unconsciously consider the degree of similarity or
match between the attributes of the object and the set of attributes presumed to be representative of that class. This is why this heuristic is referred as a reasoning by representativeness.
In this section and the next, I will argue that visual chart analysis is inherently flawed because of a bias toward the perception of order and pattern even in data that is truly random. I will contend that this bias is due to
a misapplication of the representativeness heuristic. In other words, a
