
112

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

tweaked, except for a few inviolate rules, including money management
rules. Even if a system seems to do better after dropping those rules, you
should not expose your account to unlimited risk.

Answer 42
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the correct answer.
The main value of paper trading is it allows you to test your discipline
and ability to do homework day after day, although most people simply
escape into it after losing money. If done right, paper trading takes just
as much time as the real thing. The results of paper trading almost
always look better than real trading, because there is no emotional pressure from risking money.

Answer 43
1. C
2. D
3. A
4. D
5. B
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
You cannot argue with the direction or the numerical value of an
indicator, which is why their signals are more objective than chart patterns. The three indicator groups almost always give contradictory signals. One of the main challenges in technical analysis is to reconcile
those conflicts and profit from them.

TRADING

113

Answer 44
D. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Give yourself four points for choosing the correct
answer.
The contradictions between signals in different timeframes present a
challenge, as well as an opportunity. We can filter them against one
another, leaving only the best signals. Long-term as well as short-term
charts are defined by their relationships to the intermediate timeframe,
using the Rule of Five. Short-term charts allow you to get closer to the
markets, but it is much more important to begin your analysis by making a strategic decision on long-term charts.

Answer 45
Phrase 3 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right
answer.
One of the key rules of the Triple Screen is to make your decisions in
several timeframes, moving down from the longest to the shortest. If you
work with weekly, daily, and intraday charts, then make your strategic
decision, either bullish or bearish, on the weekly chart, then tactical on
the dailies, and find entry and exit points using intraday charts.

Answer 46
Choice 4 is not acceptable. Give yourself three points for choosing the
right answer.
Buying an upside breakout puts you in the direction of the trend,
whereas buying pullbacks provides less expensive entries. These are
all acceptable methods, but it is seldom a good idea to put in orders
without even knowing what price you will have to pay at the opening
tomorrow.

114

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Answer 47
D. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
There are many methods for exiting trades. A longer-term trader will
watch the EMA, the resistance, or the channel, whereas the shorter-term
trader will focus on the channel or the spikes in Force Index. Use the
method that appeals to you, but do not make your decisions “on the
gut.” If you sell on the gut today, you will be tempted to buy on the gut
tomorrow, and that’s where the real trouble will start.
Rating Yourself
Below 24 Poor. You need to give yourself a little more time to learn
about trading before putting money on the line. Testing systems and
indicators, while combining different timeframes, is a key concept of
successful trading. Please return to the recommended reading materials, study them, and retake this test a few days later before proceeding to the rest of the Study Guide.
24–28 Fairly good. You understand the key concepts of trading. Still, it
would make sense to read up on the questions that you have missed.
This topic is too important to leave out a few blanks.
29–32 Excellent. You understand the key trading ideas. If you are interested in day-trading, please proceed to the next chapter; otherwise,
skip it and go directly to Advanced Concepts, Chapter 7.
Required Reading
Elder, Alexander. Come into My Trading Room (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 2002). See “System Testing” and “Triple Screen Update” in Chapter 6 (pages 121–134).

Additional Reading
Elder, Alexander. Trading for a Living (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993).
See “Triple Screen Trading System” (pages 235–243).
Kaufman, Perry J. Smarter Trading (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995).
Schwager, Jack D. Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1995).

S I X

DAY-TRADING

Answer 48
D. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
In day-trading, profits are smaller and expenses are higher. There are
long periods of “dead time,” but when a signal comes, you must recognize it instantly and trade without pausing to ruminate. Losses are generally smaller than in position trading because losing trades are closed
out no later than at the end of the day.

Answer 49
C. 1 and 4. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Day-trading demands a much higher degree of concentration than
position trading because it does not leave you time to think. Impulsivity
is deadly because you have no time to correct your mistakes. Daytrading is an expensive proposition that generates high commissions and
leads to purchases of software, data, and other tools, that are the main
reasons why brokers and vendors love it. To succeed, you must face
your impulsivity and work to reduce it. A written trading plan is a useful step in that direction.

115

116

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Answer 50
2. Penny stocks are unsuitable for day-trading. Give yourself four points
for choosing the right answer.
The two essential criteria for choosing day-trading stocks are liquidity and volatility. You can find stocks that keep making big moves on
high volume among the most actives or the most popular stocks. Penny
stocks may be promising for investors, but are not good for day-traders
because of their narrow intraday ranges and low liquidity.

Answer 51
1. D
2. E
3. C
4. B
5. A
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
The intraday volume curve is normally U-shaped—highest during the
first and last half-hours of trading. Early in the session outsiders crowd
into the market, and by the end of the day the pros dominate the action.
A wide opening range may define the high and the low of the day, but
prices are likely to break out of a narrow opening range.

Answer 52
1. B
2. A
3. D, E, F, G
4. C
5. C-H

DAY-TRADING

117

Give yourself a point for each correct answer (half a point if you missed
one of several occurrences). Add two points if you got the bonus question right, or a point for getting it partly right.
When a downward gap first appears, it is hard to tell whether it is a
continuation of the downtrend or an exhaustion move prior to an
upside reversal. The downside breakout from the opening range confirms the downtrend and gives the first good shorting signal of the day.
The deepening bottoms of MACD-Histogram show that the bears are
growing stronger and lead one to expect lower prices ahead. Rallies to
the EMA create shorting opportunities throughout the day. During the
last hour of trading prices dip to a new low, while MACD-Histogram
traces a higher bottom. This bullish divergence gives a buy signal—time
to take profits on shorts.
At the right edge of the chart—bearish. The trend is down, and prices
closed near the lows; expect a lower opening tomorrow. The beauty of
day-trading is that there is no overnight risk. We can wait for the opening, monitor the opening range, and then trade the breakout.

Answer 53
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
The best time to make strategic decisions is before the opening—if
the stock does this, I will trade this way, and so on. Then, as you review
your stocks throughout the day, you are ready to act fast whenever your
conditions are met. There is no harm listening to tips, as long as you put
them through the same screens as your regular stocks; perhaps they
should be added to the regular list. Trading in a room full of people is
much more likely to lead to emotional decisions. Successful traders
almost always sit at the edge of the trading room, isolating themselves
from the masses.

118

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Rating Yourself
Below 21 Poor. With grades like this, you should steer clear of daytrading. If you are intent on day-trading, please return to the recommended materials and study them carefully before retaking this test.
21–24 Fairly good. You understand the key concepts of day-trading. Do
yourself a favor, and review the questions that you missed. This topic
is too important to leave out a few blanks!
25–28 Excellent. You have a good grasp of the essential concepts. Just
keep in mind that the Advanced Concepts, described in the next
chapter, also can be applied to day-trading.
Required Reading
Elder, Alexander. Come into My Trading Room (New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 2002). See “Day-Trading” in Chapter 6 (pages 134–153).
Additional Materials
Appel, Gerald. Day-Trading with Gerald Appel (video) (New York:
Financial Trading, Inc., 1989).

S E V E N

ADVANCED CONCEPTS

Answer 54
1. E
2. B
3. D
4. F
5. A
6. C
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
The slope of the EMA reflects the direction of market inertia, whereas
the slope of MACD-Histogram shows the direction of market momentum. Combining the messages of these two indicators is the key principle of the Impulse System. The longer you wait to recognize a splash
of momentum, the lower the profitability. Taking profits and jumping
out of successful trades is the hardest psychological factor of momentum trading.

Answer 55
1. D, F
2. A, B, C, E, G, H
119

120

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Give yourself a point for each correctly identified cluster. Add two points
if you got the bonus question right, or a point for getting it partly right.
Buy signals emerge when both the EMA and MACD-Histogram are
rising together; sell signals emerge when both are falling. The weekly
uptrend (not shown) gives extra weight to bullish signals. Bearish clusters show reactions against the uptrend, but once those signals cease,
the uptrend embarks on its sharpest upmoves.
At the right edge of the chart—neutral. The trend is getting old, and
MACD-Histogram is weakening. Tighten stops on long positions.

Answer 56
1. E
2. B, C, F, G
3. A
4. C
5. B, D
6. D-G
Give yourself a point for each correct answer (half a point if you missed
one of several occurrences). Add two points if you got the bonus question right, or a point for getting it partly right.
The day begins with a string of shorting signals: a downward gap,
followed by a cluster of Impulse sell signals, followed by a downside
breakout from the opening range, and then more Impulse sell signals.
The deepening bottoms of MACD-Histogram call for lower prices
ahead. The best day-trading opportunities tend to present themselves in
the beginning of the session, although the Impulse System continues to
give sell signals throughout the day. At point G prices sink to a new low,
but MACD-Histogram completes a bullish divergence—the last call to
take profits on intraday shorts.

ADVANCED CONCEPTS

121

At the right edge of the chart—neutral. The trend is down and prices
are weak and closing near the lows, but there is a bullish divergence.
Tomorrow check the 25-minute chart and be ready to follow the first
cluster of the Impulse System signals.

Answer 57
B. 1 and 2. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Most people are more objective when they do not have money at
risk. Before he enters a trade, a rational trader estimates his profit as
well as his risk, compares them and makes his go–no go decision. He
tries to select trades in which he stands to win more than he risks—the
higher the ratio, the better. If the exit target is at a channel line, that target will move with the passage of time, but it is important to have a general idea where it is before you enter.

Answer 58
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
One of the few statistically proven market behaviors is the tendency
of prices to fluctuate above and below value. Channels help identify
manic levels for selling longs and going short and depressed levels for
covering shorts and going long. Before putting on a trade, make sure
that the channel is wide enough to be worth trading. A well-drawn
channel contains about 95% of prices, but no channel is perfect. Some
price swings are so strong that they punch out of the channel, whereas
others are too weak to reach it.

122

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Answer 59
1. A, C, D
2. B, E
Give yourself a point for each correctly identified signal. Add two points
if you got the bonus question right, or a point for getting it partly right.
When prices hit the upper line of a well-drawn channel, they reveal
market mania and give a sell signal. You can place your sell order in
advance, at the channel line. If you are in front of the screen during the
day, you may wait for prices to punch above that line and then exit
when prices fail to make a new high for the day or, as a fallback, when
they weaken and hit the channel wall from above. The time to cover
shorts is when prices hit the lower channel wall. Notice a beautiful buy
signal between points C and D. Prices came back to touch the EMA
before embarking on their most dynamic rally. The only way to have
caught that buy signal was to estimate tomorrow’s EMA value each day
and place a buy order there for the day ahead.
At the right edge of the chart—bullish. The EMA has ticked up, and
prices straddle the EMA, offering a value trade. It is time to buy and be
ready to take profits near the upper channel line.

Answer 60
True 1, 4, 5
False 2, 3
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
Stops must be defined by both technical analysis and money management and placed immediately after entering a trade. Most traders should
place actual stop orders: only the pros of proven discipline may use mental stops. Relying on so-called advanced analysis instead of stops is a sign
of arrogance that has been the undoing of countless traders.

ADVANCED CONCEPTS

123

Answer 61
1. B
2. E
3. D
4. C
5. A
6. F
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
Market noise is the extent by which today’s extreme price extends outside yesterday’s extreme—the high in downtrends, the low in uptrends.
Average Penetration is the average level of market noise during the
lookback period. We multiply Average Upside Penetration by the coefficient and add it to the highs to place stops in downtrends, or multiply
Average Downside Penetration by the coefficient and subtract it from
the lows to place stops in uptrends.

Answer 62
D. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Margin works great when you’re right, but hits you even harder on
losing trades. It raises the cost of trading, as well as the stress level,
because with margin you trade beyond your means. A small trader who
goes on margin can make more money when he is right, but is almost
certain to underperform a cash trader in the long run.

124

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Answer 63
1. A
2. C
3. A
4. B
5. B
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
Trends tend to emerge from sleepy trading ranges in formerly obscure
stocks. The width of a channel matters little if you are positioning yourself for a major trend. Stocks are likely to swing within the trend, requiring wider stops. Wide channels, active trading, and taking profits at the
channel line are required for swing trading. Anyone who says that trading, either trends or channels, is easy is either a genius or, more likely,
a beginner.

Answer 64
Item 3 is not a factor. Give yourself four points for choosing the right
answer.
The more time to expiration, the closer the exercise price, the higher
the volatility and the interest rates, and the more expensive an option.
Options are remarkably blind to trends, even though they are highly
attuned to market volatility.

Answer 65
1. B
2. E
3. A
4. C
5. D

ADVANCED CONCEPTS

125

Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
Options offer an enormous range of choices, from buying calls outright—the beginners’ favorite tactic—all the way up to diagonal butterfly spreads and beyond. Sophisticated traders tend to write rather than
buy options.

Answer 66
C. 1, 2, and 3. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
Writing covered options is an expensive proposition because of commissions on both stocks and options; naked writing exposes traders to
unlimited risk. For those reasons, money management is the cornerstone of any intelligent option-writing campaign. Option writers profit
from selling hope—it is better to sell hope that is unlikely to be fulfilled,
writing calls in downtrends and puts in uptrends. Time works for the
writer because the options he sells lose value with each passing day.
There is no reason to wait for the expiration if the option you sold has
lost almost all its value—buy it back, kill the risk, and move on to the
next trade.

Answer 67
1. D
2. E
3. A
4. B
5. C
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
If you grow wheat and hedge by selling a corresponding quantity of
futures contracts, you eliminate price risk between that time and the harvest, when wheat is sold to consumers and futures bought back. Razorthin margins in futures lure beginners into overtrading, and they take on

126

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

more risk than they can handle. Faraway months normally sell for more
than nearby ones because of storage and insurance costs; an inverted
market, with more expensive nearby contracts, reflects very high
demand, which is bullish. Industrial producers and consumers can
legally trade futures using inside information. Supply-driven markets
tend to be fast and furious; bad weather can stress the balance between
supply and demand much faster that changing consumer tastes.
Rating Yourself
Below 56 Poor. If you have already learned conventional methods, you
should be able to do better with these advanced techniques. Please
return to the recommended materials, study them, and retake this test
a few days later.
56–66 Fairly good. You are starting to get a handle on new, unconventional methods. It would be a good idea to return to the recommended literature, review answers to the questions you missed, then
return to the Study Guide a few days later.
67–77 Excellent. You are way ahead of the game. Now tighten your seat
belt because you will be moving forward to the topic that separates
the winners from the losers—money management.
Recommended Reading
Elder, Alexander. Come into My Trading Room (New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 2002). See Chapter 5 “Trading.”
Additional Reading
McMillan, Lawrence G. Options as a Strategic Investment, 3rd ed. (New
York: New York Institute of Finance, 1999).
Teweles, Richard J., and Frank J. Jones. The Futures Game, 3rd ed. (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1998).

E I G H T

MONEY MANAGEMENT

Answer 68
Choice 5 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
A system with a positive expectation allows you to make money over
a long series of trades—it gives you an edge but not a guarantee of
success. A system may deliver more losing than winning trades but still
be profitable if winners are bigger than losers. Each individual trade is
dicey, but a well-designed system creates a positive expectation over a
long series of trades. Money management can protect a trader using
such a system, but it cannot turn a losing system into a winner.

Answer 69
1. 533
2. 24
3. 69
4. 18,750
5. 37.5%
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
Modern society makes it easy to live without counting, but if you
want to succeed in trading you have to think—and count—on your feet.
You may own a calculator, but you must be able at least to estimate the
results of any arithmetic operation in your head.
127

128

ANSWERS AND RATING SCALES

Answer 70
Choice 3 is correct. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer.
The 2% Rule, the most important rule of money management, protects
you from ever losing more than 2% of your account equity on any single trade. If your stop is close and risk per share is small, you may trade
a bigger size, as long as you are mindful of the overnight risk. If the stop
is far and risk per share is high, the size has to be smaller because your
total dollar risk may never exceed 2% of your account equity.

Answer 71
B. 1 and 2. Give yourself four points for choosing the right answer, or
two points if you answered C.
According to the 2% Rule, you may not risk more than 2% of your
account equity on any given trade, including commissions and slippage. Having a $50,000 account allows you to risk no more than
$1,000 per trade. Trade 1: you risk $1.50 per share on 500 shares, for a
total of $750, which is acceptable. Trade 2: you risk $3 per share on 300
shares, for a total of $900, which is acceptable. Both trades leave room
for slippage and commissions. Trade 3: you risk $1 per share on 1,000
shares, for a total of $1,000, which leaves no room for slippage or commissions. Trade 4: you risk $6 per share on 200 shares, for a total of
$1,200, which would break the 2% limit. Trade 5: you risk $2 per share
on 700 shares, for a total of $1,400, which would break the 2% limit.

Answer 72
A. 1, 3
B. 2, 4, 5
Give yourself a point for each correct answer.
The key rule of money management is never risk more than 2% of
your account on any given trade. The dividing line is drawn at 2%—if
you risk less, it is a businessman’s risk, and if you risk more, you are

MONEY MANAGEMENT

129

staring at a loss. Two percent of $100,000 comes to $2,000, 2% of
$20,000 to only $400—this is your maximum permitted risk per trade.
Trade 1: you risk $1.25 per share on 1,000 shares for a total of $1,250—
less than 2% of a $100,000 account (businessman’s risk). Trade 2: you
risk $2 per share on 300 shares for a total of $600—more than 2% of a
$20,000 account (risk of loss). Trade 3: you risk $1.50 per share on 200
shares for a total of $300—less than 2% of a $20,000 account (businessman’s risk). Trade 4: you risk $4 per share on 1,000 shares for a total
of $4,000—more than 2% of a $100,000 account (risk of loss). Trades
2 and 4 could still be done, only with a smaller size, pushing the risk
below 2% of each account. In trade 5, without a stop, what if that stock
slides to $5, which could happen in a bear market? Busting through the
2% risk limit can damage even the biggest account.

Answer 73
Yes. Give yourself three points for choosing the right answer.
Bill plans to risk $4 per share on 100 shares, or $400, plus commissions and slippage. The 2% Rule allows him to risk up to $500. His
trade is within the limits of the 2% Rule. Still, he is pushing it a bit. As
a beginner, he’d better stay farther away from the 2% limit. Perhaps he
could focus on lower-priced stocks and work on his analysis, entry, and
exit techniques without coming so close to the 2% limit.
