
book_c01.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 5

In Search of Amazing Profits

5

I clicked through every screen in the software to learn about the different
trades I could take, and I read an article about how currency pairs were
quoted. I learned that currencies traded in pairs, meaning when you
traded currency you were always buying one currency and selling another, or selling one currency and buying another. You could not trade currency just as a stand-alone financial instrument—and that made sense.
Here is what I read:
If you think the U.S. Dollar is going up, you have to ask yourself:
going up against what? Obviously, another currency. So you choose
a currency that it is going up against, and you buy that other currency. And because you buy it with U.S. Dollars, you are selling Dollars and buying that other currency.
It took a while to sink in, but within a couple of hours, I was a former
filing clerk turned currency guru. I knew the major currencies were the
Euro (EUR), the Great Britain Pound (GBP), the Japanese Yen (JPY), and
of course, the U.S. Dollar (USD). I figured out how to read a currency
quote. This is what one looks like:
GBP/USD 1.8000/1.8005
This meant that the Great Britain Pound against the U.S. Dollar could
be sold for 1.8000, and could be bought for 1.8005. Simple enough. I also
learned that if the Pound moved from 1.8000 to 1.8001, just one point, that
would be called a one pip move—a pip, in other words, referred to a Percentage in Point in the world of foreign exchange. And the software was
going to tell me how to do all this stuff.
The next morning I submitted all the necessary documents to open a
trading account at a firm suggested by the Amazing Forex people. Within
24 hours, I was promised that I could fund my account with a credit card.
More waiting, and this time it would be even more excruciating. Imagine
the profits I was missing out on! All night, I had watched as the software
called for buys and sells on currency pairs. Trade after trade was profitable. On a sheet of paper next to my computer, I calculated the point
gains I could have made just by following along: over 110. It was going to
be difficult to concentrate on my job that day knowing that I was letting
more of the same profits go by. The challenge was not going to be making
the money—it was going to be finding a way to trade as much as possible.
I hadn’t slept that night, but it had been worth it. More motivated than
ever to start trading, I felt invigorated and determined that during my lunch
break that day I would schedule out all the times of day that I could trade.
Although it would require me to get less sleep and steal some time from my
employer, the payoff would be huge. Definitely worth any sacrifice!

book_c01.qxd

6

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 6

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

THE ANSWER TO MY FINANCIAL PROBLEMS
Most people never do anything about their problems. When I was 10, I
broke my “Tommy Baseball Home Run Challenge” electronic handheld
game. After realizing that I could not fix it by shaking the game, or reinserting the batteries backwards, or praying to God, I hid the device away deep
in my closet, behind the winter blankets and underneath my T-ball uniform. I put it there for two reasons. First, so my parents would not discover
that I had broken an expensive toy when I celebrated a home run by spiking the game to the floor as if it were a football. The second reason? I knew
that underneath the protective and magical cloth of my T-ball uniform,
there was a chance that the baseball gods would heal the toy and bring it
back to life.
I learned soon enough that this was not a useful method for fixing my
problems. When my parents divorced later on that year, it became clear
that simply hiding my father underneath my T-ball uniform was not going
to keep my parents from yelling at each other (and in any case, the game
was still using that space under the uniform). But hiding my problems, or
storing my biggest challenges away in a closet, became one of my most frequently utilized methods for approaching difficulties in my life.
But when I purchased the Amazing Forex Profits software, I took control of my financial situation. I was doing something. This felt really good.
I knew that my wife would be skeptical, so it was important to hide my decision from her at first. This small deception would turn out to be an inconsequential necessity on the road to riches. When she understood how
much money I could make, it would seem less like a lie and more like a
surprise.
Surprise is actually a good word to describe how we both felt about
the results.

I BECOME CONVINCED OF MY GENIUS
A week passed; it was far more difficult to open the trading account than I
had imagined, especially considering that I needed to fax the forex broker
copies of my passport, utility bills, and everything except the results of a
prostate exam. During this time, I watched as the Amazing Forex software
lived up to its name. During the hours at work alone (as I stayed late every
evening and kept an eye on it during the day), it was racking up hundreds
of point gains every day. This was nearly too much for me to bear, as I realized how much in dollar terms this could mean.
Knowing that the forex broker (Universal Currency Brokers, based in
Florida) would alert me by e-mail when the account was opened, I decided

book_c01.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 7

In Search of Amazing Profits

7

to dedicate this unintended downtime to becoming more capable with my
e-mail so that I would know immediately when I could fund my account.
Scott even took an entire day to teach me to use a BlackBerry, so that I
could receive the e-mail no matter where I was. The more I used e-mail, the
computer, the Amazing Forex software, and the BlackBerry, the more I realized how powerful all this technology was. Perhaps I could run the software on the BlackBerry and trade no matter where I was. The possibilities
were endless. This claim of reaching financial freedom through trading did
not seem unrealistic at all.
Tuesday, March 16, 2004, at precisely 12:06 P.M. Eastern Standard
Time, I received the e-mail. I was in the conference room with the insurance litigation team, who were debating the merits of charging Wakeman
clients in 6-minute increments versus 15 minutes. I was thrilled to be in
the meeting, because it was easy to keep an eye on the BlackBerry, avoid
doing any real work in the office, and then make a short presentation
about how it was possible for our attorneys to bill a bit extra for administrative time by classifying “filing” as “research.” I was near the end of my
presentation when my BlackBerry buzzed and I knew that the moment
had arrived.
“I’m sorry, I’ve got to take this,” I said, excusing myself, “our daughter
is in the emergency room and I’ve got to check on her.”
Every attorney, especially the ones with small children at home, was
quick to excuse me for this important break. Of course I had told a whopping lie, but once again, this was a minor indiscretion on the way to a more
important goal: my own enrichment.
Outside the conference room, I read the blissful news: The trading
account was open and I could fund it with my credit card at any time.
I dropped into my cubicle, took out my credit card, and called the forex
dealer.
It only took a few moments, but I was so wrapped up in funding the account with $1,000, that I didn’t realize that I was being watched. John Murphy, a young attorney who did lots of work with contracts, stood near the
entrance to my cubicle.
“I heard you reading out your credit card numbers,” he said. “I didn’t
mean to pry, but is everything all right?”
I nodded. “Yeah, thanks.” Dang! He knew that I was lying about my
daughter going to the hospital. I probably owed him an apology.
“Well if you need anything, let me know. Did you have to pay out-ofpocket expenses for the ER?”
Hooray! He had no idea I had lied! “Yes,” I told him, adding another
small lie to my growing list of Minor Indiscretions on the Path to Riches.
“If you need anything, let me know. Your insurance ought to cover it. I
know we’ve got problems with the benefits here, so I will see what I can do
to help.”

book_c01.qxd

8

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 8

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I thanked him, then I thanked God that I hadn’t been caught, and then
I totally forgot about John Murphy and the ER and the lie. It was time to
trade. I booted up the Amazing Forex software and my trading account,
pinned the “Out to Lunch” sign outside my cubicle, and made sure my computer monitor was still positioned so that only I could see it.
Barely had I signed into Amazing Forex (Login: SUPERTRADER_2000,
Password: G$TRICH) that I noticed Scott standing behind me.
“You got your account set up?”
Just hearing his voice was disturbing. Right now I needed privacy! The
clock was ticking down, and I only had 37 more minutes of lunchtime to
make as many trades as I could.
“Yeah, Scott. Got it set up. I am going to check it out now, see what’s
going on, you know, during my lunch.”
He nodded. “Gonna make some coin at the office! Nice.”
“No,” I replied, showing some frustration in the tone of my voice, “I am
going to just take it easy today and watch.” I didn’t mean this either. The
lying was coming easier, and right now I was grateful that I could use a
plausible distortion of the truth to distance myself from unwanted intrusive eyeballs.
“Well, then I might stay and watch.”
I sighed and realized that arguing with Scott would steal precious trading time. “You can stay but just keep quiet. I am trying to learn this and it’s
not easy for me.”
“Looks like you have a buy alert on the Gee-Bee-Pee,” he replied.
He was right. There it was, my first order alert! I quickly toggled to my
trading platform, hit the GBP/USD quote, and up popped an order window.
Without a moment’s hesitation—for there could be other trades just
waiting to be taken—I clicked the okay button and boom! My trade was
opened with a slick whooshing sound. There, in the open trades window, I
saw it, but I was already down $50! How could that be?
“How could that be?” I found myself saying out loud.
“You already suck at trading,” Scott said. I considered poking out his
eyes with a pen, but that would also rob me of precious time that could not
be wasted.
I toggled back to the Amazing Forex software screen. It told me that
the GBP/USD trade, the one that I had just taken, should be negative 5
points (or $50, since I had traded for $10 per market point) right then.
Phew! Knowing that the Amazing folks were experiencing the same quick
loss helped ease my mind. I faintly remembered that nearly all trades in the
system started off unprofitable. Good. I planted my feet firmly on the floor
under my desk and waited for the next order to appear.
Then my cell phone rang. The ring tone told me it was my wife, Gini.
Scott had set that up for me so I would not miss her calls.

book_c01.qxd

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 9

In Search of Amazing Profits

9

“You gonna get that?” Scott asked, knowing it was my wife. This time I
considered taping his mouth shut, but all I had was clear office tape and
that would not do the trick.
I took the call, if only to appear that I was cool and calm, even though
my palms were sweaty as I opened the phone. My nerves were rattling as I
spoke.
“What’s up?”
“Hi sweetie,” she happily chirped. “How’s your day?”
I answered that it was going fine in the tone of voice that a husband
uses when he wants to tell his wife that she has called at a bad time, but
does not want to actually say that she called at a bad time.
“Is this a bad time,” she asked. “I wanted to know what you wanted for
dinner.”
“Anything is great.”
“Any-thing,” she replied, speaking slowly as if she were writing it
down. “Got it. I will check at the market for Anything. Want to say hi to
your son?”
“Not now,” I quickly answered. It was impossible to hold my cell phone
up to my ear and toggle back to the trading account. I tried, but all I managed to do was switch to a screen that showed my e-mail. Now I couldn’t
see anything!
“Okay, I just wanted to say hello and that I love you,” she told me, and
I could tell that she wanted to talk more even though she was kindly willing to end the call if I insisted. Which is what I did.
“Not now,” I barked. “I gotta go.”
I immediately felt terrible, but I hung up the phone anyway. I didn’t
even give her a chance to respond; I was now sweating badly and having
trouble keeping my right leg from bouncing on the floor, which is what I always do when I am nervous.
Scott didn’t say anything about the way I hung up with my wife. I
clicked on the trading software and up popped my account. I looked at the
current profit on the open trade: Three hundred dollars. Three hundred
dollars!
Scott’s jaw dropped down. My sweat turned cold. I heard my heart
beating, and my foot stopped drumming on the floor. I think 10 seconds
passed, but to Scott and me time had ceased to have meaning, and I cascaded into a deep trance.
I imagined quitting my job that day. I could see my wife driving a new
sporty sedan, the kids happily cheering her on as she sped through the EZpass gate on the way to our summer home in the Hamptons; then I could
see myself diving into an oval of midnight blue water, with reggae music
playing in the background and leggy blondes sunning themselves around
the edges of the pool. This was the life! Trading had brought it to me!

book_c01.qxd

10

12/20/06

1:50 PM

Page 10

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Scott knocked me from the daydream by gripping my shoulder and
shaking. “Dude, dude, you gotta take that money!” he told me, and he was
right. I had no idea what Amazing Forex said, but there was no way I was
going to miss out on three hundred bucks. I clicked once on the open trade
window, and up popped a box that asked me if I wanted to close the trade.
“Darn right!” I said, speaking much louder than I should.
“Woo hoo!” yelled Scott, happy for me and now much more interested
in the Amazing Forex software than he had been the week before.
I clicked a button and all of a sudden, my account value had gone from
$1,000 to $1,300. Holy moley, I thought. This really is simple. This really is
the answer to my financial problems. In less than a minute, I had made
enough to buy a new iPod for my wife. I determined that this was exactly
the present I would give to her to tell her all about the trading.
Scott wanted me to see what the software was telling us, so I switched
back to look at it. But something was wrong. The trade was still there, but
it was showing a 34 pip loss, not a gain.
“What’s up with that,” Scott asked. “Did it go the other way?”
I spent a moment looking over the screen for clues. It wasn’t hard to
find.
“Sheez, Scott. We bought when we were supposed to sell.”
Scott was speechless.
I had taken the wrong trade! Immediately, I checked the trading account again. Yes, the sweet profits were still safely secure in my “account
equity” window. This meant that Amazing Forex Profits’ suggestion to sell
the GBP/USD had been a horrible idea—but that we had mistakenly taken
the opposite trade and profited. As I watched the sell trade go deeper into
a loss, I actually felt happy.
I smiled. We had cheated the Amazing Forex software! We were victorious. It stood to reason, in my moment of complete insanity, that I could
beat the software. I was that good.
Scott agreed, and appropriately took credit for first misreading the
software’s recommendation to sell. I patted him on the back and promised
to share some of the profits with him over time. Maybe he could be my
technology right-hand man. Surely there were other programs out there
like the Amazing Forex Profits software, and we could install a few of
them.
I determined that I owed my wife a phone call, instead of doing any
more trades. It was the right thing to do and she happily accepted my apology. I told her I had a surprise for her when I got home. She giggled on the
phone, and I realized that my superpowers as a trader were only exceeded
by my Amazing Relationship skills.

book_c02.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 11

CHAPTER 2

The Future
Looks Bright

fter work that day, I bought my wife an iPod and hopped on the subway, smiling the entire way home. Of course, I needed to make a lot
more money before I quit my job, but that day I felt as if I had already
given notice.
When I arrived home, I was so consumed by thoughts of trading that I
forgot to give my wife her surprise present. But that doesn’t mean I wasn’t
happy to see her. I found her in the kitchen, and I wrapped my arms around
her waist and hugged her tightly.
“Not so tight,” she said, laughing. “Caroline’s in there!” Caroline was
our five-month-old fetus, growing strong and healthy and on schedule. My
wife was starting to grow bigger now, and was as beautiful as ever. I kissed
her neck and she turned around to face me.
“I am happy to see you, too. We’re late for our rent payment again. I
don’t mean to ruin the happy moment.”
I knew she loved me, and I knew she had to remind me that the rent
was late. Otherwise, I was going to pretend that it wasn’t happening. We
were knee-deep, or deeper, in debt. I hated to face it. My usual response,
as I said before, was to ignore financial problems and hope they would
disappear. Once I got around to admitting there was a problem, I would
dwell on the depressing state of affairs until I had a knot in my stomach
and a headache. That evening, admitting that the rent was late was, for
once in my life, not so terrible: I could face it, knowing that during 60 seconds of my lunch break I had made enough money to pay a nice chunk of
the rent.

A

11

book_c02.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 12

12

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

After dinner, and when the kids were in bed, I retreated to our small
family room and I opened my wallet. Here is what I found:
• Regular identification
• Six credit cards
I took out the cards one by one. I shifted them between my fingers.
These would soon be history! My wife walked in and noticed what I was
doing.
“I didn’t mean to worry you about the rent,” she said.
“I’m not worried at all,” I replied happily and put the cards away.
As I got ready for bed, I started to calculate in my mind everything that
we owed. The total came to $24,000, give or take a few hundred. Our
monthly payments on the cards were low—interest rates were falling—so
that wasn’t so bad. Sometimes I paid our rent from one of the cards. But
what was going to happen when the introductory low rates ended? What
was going to happen when we ran out of credit? Without trading, we were
going to be screwed. I couldn’t believe how lucky I was to have found trading—it had come along at just the right moment. My wife was trying to be
as supportive as possible. But I knew that a big talk was coming between
the two of us, and it was not going to be an easy one. I wanted to be optimistic. Ignoring the problems wasn’t optimism, though. I had been lying to
myself, living in a daze, expecting to ignore my problems.
But now I didn’t have to ignore them anymore. I could face them, three
hundred dollars at a time!

THE FIRST NIGHTMARE
At 2:00 in the morning, I woke up with my wife tossing violently at my side,
and my golden retriever, Franklin (who slept in the bed with us), nudging
me to do something because he was worried but did not know how to help.
I rubbed my eyes and looked at my wife, who was whispering something
while she thrashed back and forth. It was obvious that she was having a
nightmare.
“We will pay you,” she said. It was eerie to see her speaking and tossing
around, with her eyes closed the entire time.
“We will pay you. We will pay you.”
She said it twice more, and then I put my hand on her shoulder to keep
her from rolling over onto the floor, and spoke her name loud enough to
wake her up, but not so loud that it would scare her.

book_c02.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

The Future Looks Bright

Page 13

13

She bolted upright in bed and gripped my hand that had been on her
shoulder, and then let out a huge gasp for air. She was covered in sweat
and trembling.
I hugged her. “You were having a bad dream.”
A few moments passed before she could speak. “I did. I did have a
nightmare.”
I got her a drink of water and sat on the bed next to her. She laid her
head on my lap. “I heard you talking in your sleep,” I told her. “I heard you
talking about paying someone.”
“I’m worried about money, Harry.”
“I know.”
Franklin was now awake as well and was up on all fours, panting and
ready to go to battle for my wife.
“It’s okay Frank,” I told him. “I’m all right. Sorry we woke you up.”
“We can’t pay our rent,” Gini reminded me. She had only been awake
from the nightmare for a few moments, but she was speaking clearly as if
she had never been asleep. I heard the traffic outside our open window
that was definitely not providing enough cool air. I kicked the sheets off
the bed.
I could feel my heart pounding. This was not something that I could ordinarily feel. Gini continued.
“And Judy needs a uniform for Girl Scouts.”
“Can we use a credit card?” I hated to even say the words.
She shook her head and I heard a sniffle. A street lamp sent light into
our room, and onto her face, where it reflected off a teardrop. She wiped
her nose and sniffled.
“I don’t think we have any more credit.” She was probably right, especially since I had charged $250 to a credit card to buy her the iPod.
Out of credit. Not good. Franklin stirred a bit, as if we had just destroyed his plans to order some dog biscuits online. I spoke up. I needed to
take control of the situation and stop playing like I didn’t care.
“I think I know a way we can get out of this.”
She perked up a bit. It was obvious that she was so upset that any solution seemed like a good idea, even if she had not heard it yet. I could have
told her that I was going to start a meth lab in our walk-in closet, and she
probably would have gone along with it for a few moments. She felt as bad
about not buying that Girl Scout uniform as if she had been unable to feed
the family. It was coming down to this: We were so far down the well that
we could no longer see the light at the top.
“How?” she asked.
“I might be able to do some trading.”
Her head shot up. She wiped her nose and smiled. “Really?”
Her eyes were brighter.
