
MACD HISTOGRAM
Gerald Appel’s classic MACD (moving average convergence-divergence) tracks the interaction
between two moving averages over time. Momentum increases when a shorter average turns away
from a longer one and decreases when it turns toward it. The indicator smoothes these raw numbers
to reduce false readings and whipsaws. It then generates a relationship between this slower average
and the original calculation to trigger buy or sell signals.
The indicator yields an excellent pattern tool when drawn with vertical bars instead of two plotted
lines. Alex Elder popularized this classic variation in Trading for a Living. The method calculates
the distance between the plots at each data point and illustrates that length below price. It builds
rising and falling slopes as momentum oscillates that accurately track subtle changes in a market’s
underlying trend.
MACD histograms locate reversals and time breakouts. Start with classic settings and customize as
experience builds. Most swing traders rely on standard 12- and 26-period moving averages
smoothed by 9 periods. Use this popular output through all time frames to track crowd behavior.
But never apply the indicator in a vacuum. Momentum means little unless the markets offer good
opportunities to capitalize upon it. Because everyone who watches the classic settings sees the same
thing at the same time, successful entry requires superior trading tactics.
MACD histograms generate two types of signals. The early one rings when the histogram changes
direction from an extreme level. These sharp turns often occur before price but print relatively few
false readings. The later signal flashes when price crosses the central -0- line. Most whipsaws will
occur right near this axis. Always cross-verify this center signal against key S/R and breakout levels
on the price pattern.
Histograms often print double bottoms or tops when they shift direction from extreme levels. This
natural tendency saves swing traders from unprofitable entry. While the indicator often turns ahead
of a market, its double top or bottom generally forms after price reverses. One effective strategy
filters setups through this lagging confirmation and then enters on the first pullback or other lowrisk opportunity. Unfortunately, histograms may just draw sharp V bottoms or tops, so be prepared
to miss the execution boat when this occurs.

The indicator’s zero line pinpoints the center balance zone. Positive acceleration flags as columns
thrust above this point. Likewise, down steps below the line point to negative acceleration. Markets
may flatten as histograms approach this important signal level. Pay close attention to the angle of
the indicator’s rise or fall as it approaches. The sharper the inclination, the more likely that price
will break through with little or no resistance.
Buy and sell signals generally track the same territory. Exit positions on -0- line violations after
deciding that MACD will not whipsaw. Or use the first reversal column at an indicator extreme to
exit or enter in the opposite direction. Histograms often reach the same level for two continuous
price cycles before reversal. Many participants notice the first extreme and how it flagged a
turnaround on the last pass. This triggers a self-fulfilling event as the histogram reapproaches that
level.
Customize MACD values to speed up signals or view specific markets. Faster histograms increase
false readings but allow quicker response to new trends. Try the 8-17-9 MACD for buy signals but
use the traditional 12-26-9 to locate sell zones. Or place both histograms in separate panes below
price and use one to filter the other. For example, when the faster calculation triggers a buy signal
but the slower one does not, look to the price pattern and decide which reading offers the most
reliable information.
Intraday traders can experiment with an 8-13-8 MACD histogram on 1-minute and 5-minute charts
to capture very short-term momentum swings. But switch back to the traditional 12-26-9 for 60minute and longer views. Intraday signals must trigger faster than daily or weekly ones because
short-term opportunities come so quickly. With these very narrow settings, the histogram will flip
more often and act more like an oscillator than directional indicator. Continue to rely upon the
MACD in the time frame above the holding period for many signals but focus timing through these
shorter readings.

RSI AND STOCHASTICS
Market conditions change quickly, and secrets often hide in very short-term price movement. The
last candlestick at the chart’s hard right edge may supply crucial information that will decide the
success or failure of the trade setup. Strength oscillators emit continuous feedback on this last bar’s
contribution to recent price action. When properly tuned, they react quickly to new swings and align
positions to natural market cycles.
Oscillators generate important data on relative strength and weakness. They point to overboughtoversold conditions where the prevailing crowd may lose its determination and trigger a reversal.
Swing traders must always examine the hidden forces that manufacture price change. Oscillators
uncover these subtle mechanics as they look forward in reaction to market input. They also respond
more quickly to new information than trend-following measurements such as moving averages.
Strength tools range from simple calculations to complex pattern-based systems, but a common
theme ties all of them together. Oscillators try to predict whether short-term relative strength favors
or opposes the current price direction. While several tools can accomplish this task, two stand out
for their durability and diverse applications. Both Stochastics and Wilder’s Relative Strength Index
(RSI) offer powerful methods to examine these cyclical swings.
FIGURE 5.23
MACD histograms track shifts in market momentum but also trigger bad trades. Indicator tutorials often present
the zero line crossover as an entry or exit signal. But Purchasepro.com produces sharp whipsaws when histograms
pass through this important line (1, 5, and 7). Even entries at 2, 4, and 6 right after histogram extremes would
have also failed. The double bottom signal at 3 and the rising slope at 8 mark the only good profit opportunities.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Both oscillators assume that market strength reveals itself in the price bar’s closing tick. Each
applies this essential theory in an original manner. Stochastics measures the relationship of the close
to the high and low extremes for that bar. RSI compares the number of up closing bars to down
closing bars. These two different methodologies produce unique results. Accurate predictions come
through selective use of both tools to evaluate different aspects of market behavior.
Stochastics and RSI target overbought-oversold conditions in constricted ranges. But they also have
tremendous value in trending markets. Acceleration-deceleration quickly reveals itself as indicator
directional movement follows price swings. These lower-pane plots draw patterns that mimic
classic formations. Look for both indicators to print double bottoms or tops near important market
swings. Stochastics also displays a 1-2-3 phenomenon when traversing the pane. It will often thrust,
pull back in a small wave near the halfway point, and then thrust again to the other side.
Market participants spend too much time trying to adjust the exact over-bought-oversold lines for
each indicator. Both plots oscillate between 0% and 100%. Classic technical analysis often places
extreme lines at 20–80 and advises that oscillator violations increase the odds for a reversal. Other
approaches try to find this mystical turning point in different ways. For example, Elder suggests a
5% rule. Measure the overbought and oversold levels that RSI penetrates less than 5% of the time
over the last 4–6 months. Draw lines at these zones and review them every 3 months.

Every market responds differently to oscillators. Most swing traders should just take the path of
least resistance and choose the standard settings. For both Stochastics and RSI, 20–80 works well
under most circumstances. This common level does a good job of balancing false signals against
lost opportunity. Truthfully, these settings mean little to profit or performance. Success requires
reading the patterns that print at oscillator reversals rather than finding exact locations for the turns
themselves.
Use Stochastics for short-term feedback and RSI for longer cycle information. Simple RSI output
tends to be choppier than Stochastics and requires longer smoothing averages to avoid false
readings. Stochastics can be applied effectively through very short settings on intraday charts. Each
indicator plots differently below price bars. Smoothed RSI shows a single line that flows slowly
from overbought to oversold extremes. Stochastics flips faster and tracks a second line that rises
above it or falls below it very quickly as cycles turn.
Stochastics accurately measures short-term shifts in price momentum. But useful output begins to
dry up once it pierces the extremes of its wide bands. Stochastics fails completely in strongly
trending markets. The plot will move to one end and wobble randomly while the market charges
ahead or sells off. This again confirms the leadership of the price pattern over the indicator. But pay
close attention to all oscillators once they begin to roll over. They tend to be highly accurate at these
turning points.
Set a 5-3-3 Stochastics for each intraday chart at or below the main holding period. For example,
plot it on both 1-minute and 5-minute charts when trading within the 5-minute view. Use
Stochastics for the next-larger scale if it appears to have value. But trend becomes more important
than oscillation when swing traders examine the time frame above the trade. Focus attention at these
levels on a well-built MACD (or other momentum) indicator to capture the larger market swing.
Jake Bernstein examines a fascinating Stochastics phenomenon, which he calls the Stochastics pop,
in The Compleat Day Trader. He recommends a trend-following execution just as an outer signal
line crosses above a 75% or below a 25% extreme level. The trade recognizes that the last phase of
a swing can offer the most dynamic price movement. The pop rings a contrarian entry just as other
participants respond to exit signals. Once again, standing apart from the crowd appears to offer
special rewards. He advises to exit the trade as soon as the faster line crosses back over the slower
one. This suggests the start of a swing back in the opposite direction.
Daily oscillators must provide an effective reading of broad cyclical behavior. To accomplish this
task, apply a longer-term RSI instead of a daily Stochastics whenever possible. Set the indicator to a
14-day period with a 7-day smoothing average for an effective view with few whipsaws. Some
software applications don’t have a smoothing function for RSI. Their canned 14-day RSI outputs
too much noise for swing traders. Try a 14-7-3 Stochastics instead in this unfortunate situation. This
will track the RSI but exhibit a plot with a bit more fluctuation and misinformation.
Long-term RSI works well through most market conditions and accurately captures major turning
points. Follow the signals when RSI penetrates extreme territory after rapid price change and then
rolls over. This valuable indicator also displays smooth oscillation in mildly trending markets. Plots
may never reach over-bought or oversold levels during these periods of frequent thrusts and
pullbacks.

VOLUME TOOLS
Volume tools offer important data at major reversals. They also yield accurate signals of impending
breakouts and breakdowns when their action leads the price chart.

FIGURE 5.24
The Stochastics pop, set to a conservative 80% level, still yields two profitable trades. This trend-following
technique relies on defensive risk management. Take a quick exit as soon as the fast Stochastics line crosses
under the slower one.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

OBV
Joseph Granville’s On-Balance Volume (OBV) presents the most popular study of accumulationdistribution in the trading world. This simple indicator distributes daily volume based on each day’s
close. When a stock closes higher than the prior day, OBV accumulates that daily
volume. Conversely, the indicator subtracts the daily volume when that stock closes down. Over
time, it builds a complex picture of buying and selling behavior.
OBV displays pattern characteristics similar to price bars. This permits examination through
charting landscape features such as trendlines, triangles and double bottoms. Swing traders should
compare these formations to underlying price patterns and review predictive convergencedivergence. OBV will often lead price and complete an important reversal just ahead of trend
movement.
Confine all accumulation-distribution study to the daily chart. Intraday time bias distorts volume
measurements. Sixty percent or more of all daily trading volume occurs within about 30% of the

day. This defeats genuine comparisons between intraday price bars and volume. Stick with
individual volume histograms rather than complex calculations during the trading session. Rely on
time and sales data to interpret volume’s impact on very short-term trends.
FIGURE 5.25
On Balance Volume draws a series of head and shoulders reversals during this Citrix Systems decline. Note how the
indicator exhibits classic pullback behavior and responds to horizontal S/R from past congestion. OBV often leads the
price action by several bars. Use it at new highs and lows to measure supply and demand.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Always check OBV or another accumulation-distribution indicator at new highs and lows where
they exhibit their greatest power of prediction. This study will generate two unique situations. OBV
may strike new levels before price or price may break through before OBV. Follow the wisdom that
price needs the crowd to move higher but can fall of its own weight. If OBV reaches a new high
before price, look for bars to accelerate and catch up. If price gets there first, expect that it will
pause while accumulation builds. But when price hits a new low before OBV, gravity alone will
likely carry it much lower before the crowd catches up. And if OBV hits a new low before price,
run for the hills—that market has lost all of its support.
Major divergences between OBV and trend point to stress between price and volume. Use that
information to play swings that remain hidden from the competition. But this valuable indicator also
has major limitations. It allocates the entire day to one side of the crowd and triggers very bad

signals in long sideways markets. These important ranges set the stage for future price movement,
but OBV routinely fails to predict important breakouts. Watch out when applying OBV to Nasdaq
stocks. This exchange double-counts volume because it registers once for the purchase and again
for the sale. Also avoid OBV with less liquid issues where it often triggers false volume readings
right at critical price levels.

FARLEY’S ADA (ACCUMULATION-DISTRIBUTION ACCELERATOR)
Accumulation-distribution oscillates as the crowd jumps in and out of active markets. This closed
system feeds on itself as constant price change encourages new participants to act and old ones to
react. Within its complex boundaries, a hidden supply-demand equation forces markets to reach
natural excitement levels and reverse course over and over again. While external shocks may alter
this dynamic organism, they cannot change its persistent oscillation.
Farley’s Accumulation-Distribution Accelerator (ADA) tracks this volume oscillation while it
reduces the impact of shock events. Swing traders benefit when they locate natural levels where the
crowd may turn and trigger contrary price movement. This examination of herd behavior through
volume offers a classic approach to cycle discovery that often pinpoints insider activity and
unexpected price change.
ADA formations print clear S/R and trendlines as well as oscillating between expected upper-lower
boundaries. Use ADA to measure lag between price and volume. When price leads, expect it to
pause for ADA to catch up. The most dynamic trends erupt when ADA significantly leads the price
action. This valuable indicator also triggers much faster signals and cleaner pattern formations than
OBV or other common accumulation-distribution measurements.
The calculation begins with the Larry Williams Accumulation-Distribution indicator. Williams
formulated this handy tool in The Secret of Selecting Stocks for Immediate and Substantial Gains
(1986). This initial mathematics represents the cumulative total of the variable X. Take this figure
and add it to all preceding bars to plot his indicator.
A. Measure LWAccDis as follows:
1. If the current Close is greater than the prior Close, then:
LWAccDis = Close – TrueLow
2. If the current Close is less than the prior Close, then:
LWAccDis = Close – TrueHigh
3. If the current Close is equal to the prior Close, then:
LWAccDis = 0
B. Calculation of TrueLow:
1. If prior Close < current Low, then TrueLow = prior Close
2. If prior Close ≥ current Low, then TrueLow = current Low
C. Calculation of TrueHigh:
1. If prior Close > current High, then TrueHigh = prior Close
2. If prior Close ≤ current High, then TrueHigh = current High
TABLE 5.2
Farley’s Accumulation-Distribution Accelerator
(Formula uses TradeStation language)
Start with LWAccDis above
1. (and available in most charting
LWAccDis
programs).
2. Calculate the difference between
F1 = LWAccDis – LWAccDis[1]

the LWAccDis of current bar
and prior bar.
Compute a 14-bar exponential
3. moving average (EMA) of this
difference.
Smooth this average with a 7-bar
4. exponential moving average
(EMA).
5. Plot 0 Line.

F2 = @XAverage(F1,14)

Farley’s ADA = @XAverage(F2,7)
F3 = 0

Track indicator trendlines, channels, and horizontal extremes to locate natural breakout points.
ADA patterns will often complete one to three bars faster than price. Watch the indicator for signs
of a natural trend-range axis. Movement out of multimonth or multiyear congestion can uncover
long-term price breakouts with considerable profit opportunity. Don’t demand perfection with
ADA trendlines. This raw tool works best when swing traders allow for small violations in both
directions.

SPECIAL TOOLS
Use special tools to locate hidden S/R and gain an important market edge. These powerful resources
perform custom analysis but remain poorly understood by the emotional crowd. Use their results to
execute profitable trades at locations that few others will see or understand.

FIBONACCI
Fibonacci (Fib) retracement benefits all strategies that depend on price pullbacks. Swing traders
examine these hidden levels when they apply Fib grids, simple calculations or physical tools to
relative highs and lows on price charts. Study these important price relationships every day even if
they appear arcane or mystical. Fibs have a solid basis in mathematics, although prior generations
never visualized their application to the modern financial world.
Twelfth century monk-mathematician Leonardo de Pisa (better known as Fibonacci) uncovered a
fascinating mathematics sequence that appears throughout nature. Begin with a simple 1 + 1 and the
sum of the last two numbers that precede it creates another Fibonacci value:
1 + 1 = 2, 1 + 2 = 3, 2 + 3 = 5, 3 + 5 = 8, 5 + 8 = 13, 8 + 13 = 21,
13 + 21 = 34, 21 + 34 = 55, etc.
Major ratios that arise from these numbers describe a predictable interaction between trend and
countertrend market movement. 38%, 50%, and 62% form the primary retracement levels. Swing
traders apply these percentages through rallies and corrections to predict the extent of movement
contrary to the underlying trend. Fibs also examine how far new highs or lows should travel before
congestion ends the trend. These hidden points represent invisible S/R zones where prices should
hesitate and/or reverse.
Fibs describe proportion within nature through a simple mathematical relationship. They work their
numbers magic in both flower petals and seashell ribs. Few modern students apply Fib calculations
in high school math class, although the sequence was documented over 800 years ago. This will
likely change as the number set slowly enters the mainstream of mathematical thought and
application over the next century. Many decades from now, our grandchildren will likely see Fib
applications revolutionize their understanding of left-right brain interaction.

FIGURE 5.26
ADA trendline breaks signal important action well ahead of Oracle’s price bars. The first arrow confirms the low in a
pronged base just before a 30-point rally. The second signals an important top one bar after it occurs. ADA then flags a
major mid-April low. Finally, the fourth arrow catches ORCL as it rises off a new base toward a test of its last high.
Note that ADA forms ascending, descending, and horizontal trendlines that track classic S/R behavior.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The swing trader acts according to careful planning and complex logic. The emotional crowd acts
according to nature. Fibs uncover the concealed interface between mathematics and emotion as they
predict how the herd will respond to price development. Most participants use Fibs to examine
countertrends but rarely explore their ability to generate price projections at new highs or lows.
These Fib extensions require more faith because the charting landscape lacks trend mirrors to crossverify suspected reversal levels.
FIGURE 5.27
Use Fibonacci extensions to establish initial price targets for new highs or lows. Trend thrusts often stretch 38% beyond
the distance between the last high or low and the pullback before the breakout or breakdown. Find a double bottom or
top within the congestion and stretch a Fib grid from that point to the last high or low. Then set the software tool to
draw a line 38% beyond that level to reveal the target.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Modern tools ease the study of Fib retracement. For many years, swing traders needed a calculator
to compute each individual pullback by hand. Most charting programs now provide grid tools that
do all of the math work in seconds. Locate relative highs and lows for a dynamic trend leg and
stretch a grid across them. Then move outward and overlay multiple grids of different lengths (and
colors if possible) that capture larger rallies and corrections. Finally, look for interactions between
major retracement levels of different grids. Find these convergence zones and use their S/R for trade
planning.
Set grid levels to the standard 38%, 50%, and 62%. Then forget about them. Markets tend to reverse
when pulling back to these retracements in all time frames. Common wisdom dictates that if a
pullback pierces the 62% level, the trend in that time frame ends and a 100% retracement should
follow. This sets up the first rise/first failure pattern discussed in prior chapters.
Fibonacci numbers consistently mark hidden S/R. Use these key pivots to enter and exit profitable
positions. But Fibs work best when they cross-verify other landscape features. Key retracement
levels say little about subsequent price targets all by themselves. Although a Fib bounce may offer a
good setup, it may end quickly unless cross-verification supports a larger trade. Price can roll over
easily to the next retracement level when it can’t find strong support. But odds increase for a
substantial bounce when Fibs align with important highs, lows and major averages.
