
Correlation coefficient: A
statistical measure of the
interdependence of two or
more random variables.
Fundamentally, the value
indicates how much of a
change in one variable is
explained by a change in
another.25

Smart clients of Dunn look at his performance chart and buy in
when his fund is experiencing a drawdown. Why? Because if he is
down 30 percent, and you know from analysis of past performance
data that his recovery from drawdowns is typically quick, why not
“buy” Dunn while he is on sale? This is commonly referred to as
equity curve trading. Trend trader Tom Basso makes the case:
“I haven’t met a trader yet that wouldn’t say privately that
he would tend to buy his program on a drawdown,
particularly systematic traders. But, investors seem to not

111

Chapter 3 • Performance Data

add money when, to traders, it seems to be most logical to
do so…Why don’t investors invest on drawdowns? I believe
the answer to that question lies in the investing psychology
of buying a drawdown. The human mind can easily
extrapolate three months of negative returns into ‘how long
at this rate will it take to lose 50 percent or everything?’
Rather than seeing the bargain and the positive return to
risk, they see only the negative and forecast more of the
same into the future.”24
Not only do trend followers tell clients to buy into their funds
during a drawdown, but they also buy into their own funds with
their own capital during the drawdowns. I know many employees at
top trend who follow funds and are giddy when they are in a
drawdown because they know they can buy their fund “cheap.”
Do other trading styles have drawdowns? You bet. For example,
look at the return you would have generated by buying and holding
the NASDAQ index since 2000, a still 71 percent drawdown as of
November 2008. Does it seem like a recovery is right around the
corner? On top of that example, some of the best names on Wall
Street (nontrend followers) have had tough sledding in 2008:
Warren Buffett (Berkshire Hathaway): –43 percent
Ken Heebner (CMG Focus Fund): –56 percent
Harry Lange (Fidelity Magellan): –59 percent
Bill Miller (Legg Mason Value Trust): –50 percent
Ken Griffin (Citadel): –44 percent
Carl Icahn (Icahn Enterprises): –81 percent
T. Boone Pickens: Down $2 billion since July 2008
Kirk Kerkorian: Down $693 million on Ford shares alone
Drawdowns happen. The key is to determine how quickly and
successfully you can recover and get back to making new money
again, but a comparison between trend trading drawdowns and buy
and hold drawdowns doesn’t seem to be much of a comparison.

Correlation
Correlation comparisons help to show that trend following is a
legitimate style and demonstrate the similarity of performances

Maryland-based
Campbell and Co., a
trend following managed
futures firm with almost
$3 billion in assets under
management, has
returned 17.65 percent
since its inception in
1972, proving that
performance can be
sustainable over the
long-term.26

The Millburn Diversified
Portfolio has a 10 percent
allocation which has
historically exhibited
superior performance
characteristics coupled
with an almost zero
correlation of monthly
returns to those of
traditional investments. If
an investor had invested
10 percent of his or her
portfolio in the Millburn
Diversified Portfolio from
February 1977 through
August 2003 he or she
would have increased the
return on his or her
traditional portfolio by
73 basis points (a 6.2
percent increase) and
decreased risk (as
measured by standard
deviation) by 0.26 of a
percent (an 8.2 percent
decrease).
www.millburncorp.com

112

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

among trend followers. Correlation is not only important in
assembling the portfolio you trade (see Chapter 9, “Holy Grails”),
but it is a critical tool to analyze and compare performance
histories of trend followers. Unlike misguided comparisons, such as
using standard deviation, I find correlation comparisons of
performance data useful.
In a research paper titled “Learning to Love Non-Correlation,”
correlation is defined as “a statistical term giving the strength of
linear relationship between two random variables. It is the
historical tendency of one thing to move in tandem with another.”
The correlation coefficient is a number from –1 to +1, with –1 being
the perfectly opposite behavior of two investments (for example, up
5 percent every time the other is down 5 percent). The +1 reflects
identical investment results (up or down the same amount each
period). The further away from +1 one gets (and thus closer to –1),
the better a diversifier one investment is for the other. But because
his firm is keenly aware of keeping things simple, it also provides
another description of correlation: the tendency for one investment
to “zig” while another “zags.”27
I took the monthly performance numbers of trend followers and
computed their correlation coefficients. Comparing correlations
provided evidence that trend followers trade typically the same
markets in the same way at the same time.
Look at the correlation chart (see Chart 3.5) and ask yourself:
“Why do two trend followers who don’t work in the same office, who
are on opposite sides of the continent, have the same three losing
months in a row with similar percentage losses?” Then ask: “Why
do they have the same winning month, then the same two losing
months, and then the same three winning months in a row?” The
relationship is there because they can respond only to what the
market offers. The market offers trends to everyone equally.
They’re all looking at the same market aiming for the same target of
opportunity.
Does Chart 3.5 mean trend followers are using similar
techniques? Absolutely.

113

Chapter 3 • Performance Data

CHART 3.5:

Correlation Among Trend Followers

AbrDiv

CamFin

CheDiv

DUNWor

EckSta

JohFin

ManAHL

MarSta

RabDiv

AbrDiv

1.00

0.56

0.81

0.33

0.57

0.55

0.56

0.75

0.75

CamFin

0.56

1.00

0.59

0.62

0.60

0.56

0.51

0.57

0.55

CheDiv

0.81

0.59

1.00

0.41

0.53

0.55

0.60

0.72

0.75

DUNWor

0.33

0.62

0.41

1.00

0.57

0.62

0.61

0.51

0.45

EckSta

0.57

0.60

0.53

0.57

1.00

0.57

0.58

0.74

0.71

JohFin

0.55

0.56

0.55

0.62

0.57

1.00

0.53

0.55

0.50

ManAHL

0.56

0.51

0.60

0.61

0.58

0.53

1.00

0.57

0.59

MarSta

0.75

0.57

0.72

0.51

0.74

0.55

0.57

1.00

0.68

RabDiv

0.75

0.55

0.75

0.45

0.71

0.50

0.59

0.68

1.00

AbrDiv: Abraham Trading Co.
CamFin: Campbell and Co.
CheDiv: Chesapeake Capital Corporation
DUNWor: DUNN Capital Management, Inc.
EckSta: Eckhardt Trading Co.
JohFin: John W. Henry & Company, Inc.
ManAHL: Man Inv. Products, Ltd
MarSta: Mark J. Walsh & Company
RabDiv: Rabar Market Research

Surprisingly, correlation can be a touchy subject for some trend
followers. The Turtles (see Chapter 2) were all grateful to Richard
Dennis for his mentoring, but some seemed to become ambivalent
over time, obviously indebted to Dennis but struggling to achieve
their own identity:
“[One Turtle] says his system is 95 percent Dennis’ system
and the rest his ‘own flair…I’m a long way from someone
who follows the system mechanically…but by far, the
structure of what I do is based on Richard’s systems, and
certainly, philosophically, everything I do in terms of
trading is based on what I learned from Richard.’”28
Even when correlation data still shows similar patterns of
trading among Dennis’ Turtle students, the desire to differentiate
themselves from each other is stronger than their need to honestly
address obvious similarities in their return streams:

114

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“There no longer is a turtle trading style in my mind. We’ve
all evolved and developed systems that are very different
from those we were taught, and that independent evolution
suggests that the dissimilarities to trading between turtles
are always increasing.”29
A Turtle correlation chart paints a clear picture. The
relationship is solid. The data (Chart 3.6) is the judge:
CHART 3.6: Correlation Among Turtle Traders

Chesapeake

Eckhardt

Hawksbill

JPD

Rabar

Chesapeake

1

0.53

0.62

0.75

0.75

Eckhardt

0.53

1

0.7

0.7

0.71

Hawksbill

0.62

0.7

1

0.73

0.76

JPD

0.75

0.7

0.73

1

0.87

Rabar

0.75

0.71

0.76

0.87

1

Correlation coefficients gauge how closely an advisor’s performance resembles
another advisor. Values exceeding 0.66 might be viewed as having significant
positive performance correlation. Consequently, values exceeding –0.66 might be
viewed as having significant negative performance correlation.
Chesapeake Capital Corporation
Eckhardt Trading Co.
Hawksbill Capital Management
JPD Enterprises Inc.
Rabar Market Research

Of course, there is more to the story than just correlation.
Although correlations show the Turtles trade in similar ways, their
returns can also differ because of their individual leverage choices.
Some traders use more leverage, whereas others, such as Jerry
Parker, use less. Parker explains, “The bigger the trade, the greater
the returns and the greater the drawdowns. It’s a double-edged
sword.”30

Zero Sum Nature of the Markets
Zero-sum trading is arguably the most important concept in
this chapter. Larry Harris, chair in Finance at the Marshall School
of Business at University of Southern California, gets to the crux of
the matter:

Chapter 3 • Performance Data

“Trading is a zero-sum game when gains and losses are
measured relative to the market average. In a zero-sum
game, someone can win only if somebody else loses.”31
Another good explanation of zero sum is found in “The Winners
and Losers of the Zero-Sum Game: The Origins of Trading Profits,
Price Efficiency and Market Liquidity,” a white paper authored by
Harris. In speaking with Harris, he told me that he was amazed at
how many people came from the TurtleTrader.com website to his
site to download his white paper on zero-sum trading.
In brief, Harris examines what factors determine who wins and
who loses when trading. He does this by categorizing traders by
type and then evaluating their trading styles to determine whether
the styles lead to profits or losses. Harris adds:
“Winning traders can only profit to the extent that other
traders are willing to lose. Traders are willing to lose when
they obtain external benefits from trading. The most
important external benefits are expected returns from
holding risky securities that represent deferred consumption. Hedging and gambling provide other external benefits.
Markets would not exist without utilitarian traders. Their
trading losses fund the winning traders who make prices
efficient and provide liquidity.”32
There are those who absolutely do not accept that there must
be a loser for them to be a winner. They cannot live with the idea
that everyone can’t win. Although they want to win, many do not
want to live with the guilt that by their winning, someone else has
to lose. This is a poorly thought out, yet an all too common view of
the mindset of a losing trader.
What separates winners from losers? Harris was clear: “On any
given transaction, the chances of winning or losing may be near
even. In the long run, however, winners profit from trading because
they have some persistent advantages that allow them to win
slightly more often (or occasionally much bigger) than losers
win.”33
For anyone who has ever played poker or studied “edges” in
gambling, Harris’ words ring true:

115

If you get people asking
the wrong questions, you
don’t have to worry about
the answers.
Hunter S. Thompson

116

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“To trade profitably in the long run, you must know your
edge, you must know when it exists, and you must focus
your trading to exploit it when you can. If you have no edge,
you should not trade for profit. If you know you have no
edge, but you must trade for other reasons, you should
organize your trading to minimize your losses to those who
do have an edge. Recognizing your edge is a prerequisite to
predicting whether trading will be profitable.”34
The noted finance professor Robert Samuelson adds, “For every
trader betting on higher prices, another is betting on lower prices.
These trades are matched. In the stock market, all investors
(buyers and sellers) can profit in a rising market, and all can lose in
a falling market. In futures markets, one trader’s gain is another’s
loss.”
In “The Gartman Letter,” Dennis Gartman clarifies the
situation even more: “In the world of futures speculation, for every
long there is an equal and opposite short. That is, unlike the world
of equity trading where there needn’t be equal numbers of longs
versus shorts, in the world of futures dealing there is. Money is
neither made, nor lost, in futures; it is simply moved from one
pocket to the next as margins are swapped at the close of trading
each day. Thus, every time there is a buyer betting that prices shall
rise in the future, there is an equal seller taking the very opposite
‘bet,’ betting that prices will fall.”
These observations will save your skin if you’re willing to accept
them, but as you can see throughout this chapter and the next,
many traders are either ignorant of zero-sum thinking, choose to
ignore it, or refuse to believe it.

George Soros and Zero Sum
The success of famed trader George Soros is well known.
He is the best-known hedge fund manager. In 1992 he was
called ‘the man who broke the British Pound’ for placing $10 billion
in bets against the British pound that netted him at least $1 billion
in profit.35
That said, even really smart guys sometimes miss the key point.
Years back, Soros appeared on Nightline, the ABC news program.

Chapter 3 • Performance Data

The following exchange between Soros and then host Ted Koppel
goes straight to the core of zero sum:
Ted Koppel: “…as you describe it, it [the market] is, of course,
a game in which there are real consequences. When you bet and
you win, that’s good for you, it’s bad for those against whom you
have bet. There are always losers in this kind of a game?”
George Soros: “No. See, it’s not a zero-sum game. It’s very
important to realize…”
Ted Koppel: “Well, it’s not zero sum in terms of investors. But,
for example, when you bet against the British pound that was not
good for the British economy?”
George Soros: “Well, it happened to be quite good for the
British economy. It was not, let’s say, good for the British treasury
because they were on the other side of the trade…It’s not—your
gain is not necessarily somebody else’s loss.”
Ted Koppel: “Because—I mean put it in easily understandable
terms—I mean if you could have profited by destroying Malaysia’s
currency, would you have shrunk from that?”
George Soros: “Not necessarily because that would have been
an unintended consequence of my action. And it’s not my job as a
participant to calculate the consequences. This is what a market is.
That’s the nature of a market. So I’m a participant in the market.”
Soros opens a can of worms with his view on zero sum. Here’s
an online weblog post that incorrectly analyzes Soros’ interview.
The poster argues:
“Cosmetically, Koppel wipes the floor with Soros. He’s able
to portray Soros as a person who destroys lives and
economies without a second thought, as well as simplify,
beyond belief, something that should not be simplified.”36
This is nonsense. The fact that Soros is a player in the market
does not establish him as a destroyer of lives. You might disagree
with Soros’ political ideology, but you can’t question his morality for
participation in the market. Do you have a 401k plan designed to
generate profits from the market? Of course you do, just like Soros.
Others, such as Lawrence Parks, a union activist, correctly
states that Soros is in a zero-sum game, but gets sidetracked by
declaring zero sum unfair and harsh for the “working man”:

117

What objectivity and the
study of philosophy
requires is not an “open
mind,” but an active
mind—a mind able and
eagerly willing to
examine ideas, but to
examine them critically.
Ayn Rand 37

118

I believe the answer lies
in coming to terms with
what Heisenberg’s
research uncovered in the
field of physics: that we
cannot expect to
accurately predict the
future given this present
environment. There are
quite simply too many
mixed signals, and too
much uncertainty. In my
view, we just cannot
expect to understand the
present situation with
any exactness. Perhaps a
more reasonable
approach would be to
embrace the uncertainty.
Once we embrace the
uncertainty, we may be
able to use it to our
advantage.
Jon C. Sundt. President,
Altegris Investments,
2nd Quarter 2004 Commentary

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“Since currency and derivative trading are zero-sum games,
every dollar ‘won’ requires that a dollar was ‘lost.’ Haven’t
they realized what a losing proposition this has been?
What’s more, why do they keep playing at a losing game?
The answer is that the losers are all of us. And, while
neither rich nor stupid, we’ve been given no choice but to
continue to lose. And every time one of these fiat
currencies cannot be ‘defended,’ the workers, seniors, and
business owners of that country—folks like us—suffer big
time. Indeed, as their currencies are devalued, workers’
savings and future payments, such as their pensions,
denominated in those currencies lose purchasing power.
Interest rates increase. Through no fault of their own,
working people lose their jobs in addition to their savings.
There have been press reports that, after a lifetime of
working and saving, people in Indonesia are eating bark off
the trees and boiling grass soup. While not a secret, it is
astonishing to learn how sanguine the beneficiaries have
become of their advantage over the rest of us. For example,
famed financier George Soros in his recent The Crisis of
Global Capitalism plainly divulges: ‘The Bank of England
was on the other side of my transactions and I was taking
money out of the pockets of British taxpayers.’ To me, the
results of this wealth transfer are inescapable.”38
Parks argues that the only choice he has been given is to lose.
He loses; his union loses. It seems everyone loses in the zero-sum
game. Of course, there are winners and he knows that. The zerosum game is, indeed, a wealth transfer. The winners profit from the
losers. Parks correctly describes the nature of the zero-sum game,
but positions the game in terms of morality. Life is not fair. If you
don’t like being a loser in the zero-sum game, perhaps it is time to
consider how the winners play the game.
Although it might appear that I am defending Soros, I am not.
The market is a zero-sum game. Trying to understand Soros’
reasons for denying this would be speculation on my part. Soros is
not always a zero-sum winner either. Soros was on the losing side
of the zero-sum game during the Long Term Capital Management
fiasco in 1998. He lost $2 billion. (I discuss this in more detail in
Chapter 4.) He also had severe trouble in the 2000 technology
meltdown:

Chapter 3 • Performance Data

“With bets that went sour on technology stocks and on
Europe’s new currency, the five funds run by Soros Fund
Management have suffered a 20 percent decline this year
and, at $14.4 billion, are down roughly a third from a peak
of $22 billion in August 1998.”39
These wins and losses seem to have taken a toll on Soros:
“Maybe I don’t understand the market. Maybe the music has
stopped but people are still dancing. I am anxious to reduce my
market exposure and be more conservative. We will accept lower
returns because we will cut the risk profile.”40
I don’t see evidence that the market has changed. Nor has the
zero-sum game of the markets changed. However, something might
have changed within George Soros.

Dot-Com Meets Zero Sum
Judge Milton Pollack’s ruling a few years back that dismissed
class action suits clearly illustrates the concept of zero sum. He
minces no words in warning whiners about the game they are
playing:
“Seeking to lay the blame for the enormous Internet bubble
solely at the feet of a single actor, Merrill Lynch, plaintiffs
would have this Court conclude that the federal securities
laws were meant to underwrite, subsidize, and encourage
their rash speculation in joining a freewheeling casino that
lured thousands obsessed with the fantasy of Olympian
riches, but which delivered such riches to only a scant
handful of lucky winners. Those few lucky winners, who are
not before the Court, now hold the monies that the unlucky
plaintiffs have lost, fair and square, and they will never
return those monies to plaintiffs. Had plaintiffs themselves
won the game instead of losing, they would have owed not
a single penny of their winnings to those they left to hold
the bag (or to defendants).”41
A 96-year-old judge bluntly telling the plaintiffs to take
responsibility for their own actions might have been painful reading
for investors who were following the case hoping for a bailout.
Pollack nails the losers for trying to circumvent the zero-sum

119

It’s all a matter of
perspective. What some
consider a catastrophic
flood, others deem a
cleansing bath.
Gregory J. Millman42

120

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

market process by using the legal process. He is basically saying
that there would be no free lunch.
The harsh reality of the markets is that you only have yourself
to blame for the decisions you make with your money. You can
make losing decisions or winning decisions. It’s your choice.
David Druz, a student of Ed Seykota and a longtime trend
follower, takes Judge Pollack’s ruling a step further and spells out
the practical effects of the market’s zero-sum nature:
If all it took to beat the
markets was a Ph.D. in
mathematics, there’d be a
hell of a lot of rich
mathematicians out
there.
Bill Dries43

“Everyone who enters the market thinks they will win, but
obviously there are losers as well. Somebody has to be
losing to you if you are winning, so we always like to stress
that you should know from whom you’re going to take
profits, because if you’re buying, the guy that’s selling
thinks he’s going to be right, too.”
The market is a brutal place. Forget trying to be liked. Need a
friend? Get a dog. The market doesn’t know you and never will. If
you are going to win, someone else has to lose. Don’t like these
survival-of-the-fittest rules? Then stay out of the zero-sum game.
