
DOW THEORY Y2K
Update and apply Dow Theory for modern American markets. Those experts who still use the Dow
Transportation and Utility Averages to predict broad intermediate trends don’t deserve our
attention. Market interplay now revolves around the Dow Industrials, S&P 500, and Nasdaq
Composite. Swing traders can evaluate the character of most major rallies and corrections by using
these three indices. Also consider the growing dominance of the Nasdaq market as the world shifts
from the industrial into the information age. In a few years even the Dow Industrials may no longer
capture anyone’s interest.
Leader-laggard relationships among the big indices define most current market conditions. When
Nasdaq leads the blue chips, it signals a retail-driven, speculative technology phase with sharp price
change and increased volatility. The ascent of the S&P 500 or Dow points to a flight to safety, with
big institutional money moving the markets. Their leadership signals a period of lower volatility
and a high probability for a quieter sideways pattern.
Nasdaq has several quirks very unfriendly to traders, although it attracts most retail attention. Three
separate subsectors comprise this dominant market: behemoth mega-techs, middle
technology/service, and a large universe of small caps. Evaluate Nasdaq price action only after
inspecting the current performance of each sub sector. Frequently, the four largest Nasdaq stocks
will account for most price change in the index. Other times, lethargy in these same mega-stocks
masks small cap rallies or selloffs.
Verify that actual market conditions support the chosen swing strategies. Mega-caps trade like small
indices and often require little external analysis. But positions in thinner issues can depend on the
right index subsector acting in a supportive manner. Most swing traders should follow the broad
Nasdaq Composite and a small cap index to filter out distortions. Add the Nasdaq 100 or individual
mega-stocks to track the impact of these behemoths. Always take a peek at their movement just
before entering an intraday position whenever possible.
A tendency toward rally or correction drives the major market averages at almost all times. The
emotional pull between bullishness and bearishness practically ensures that prices will swing too far
toward whatever directional bias exists at the moment. This broad market inefficiency invokes a
profound mechanism that underlies all swing trading profit: when directional force places an object
in motion, it tends to remain in motion until another force intercedes.
Capitalize on directional bias by watching for follow-through days. After wide range index bars,
markets tend to surge in that same direction the next morning. This may occur as a large gap move
or a just a slow grind. In either case, overnight positions use this tendency to increase profits. One
popular strategy takes a closing position in a trending stock that prints a wide range bar and ends the
day near its high or low. The swing trader then grabs a quick exit in the pre-morning action or early
in the first hour before price discovery steals the profit.
Positions held after this first morning surge face increased risk. An opening gap often marks a
short-term trend climax. Since markets require very strong trends to print two wide directional bars
in a row, indices often reverse sharply right after wide range movement. Swing traders recognize
this tendency and watch the volatile morning action very closely. They search their watch lists in

advance for new setups that may benefit if a sudden reversal appears. Then they confidently time
their execution to the broad indices when the market turns.

FINDING WINNERS
Work hard to find fresh opportunities in the equity markets. Start by throwing out most stocks as
unsuitable for trading. These include REITs (Real Estate Investment Trusts), closed-end funds,
ADRs (American Depository Receipts), and utilities. Then eliminate the bottom half to two-thirds
of all stocks sorted by average daily volume. Seek liquid stocks that allow low slippage entry and
exit. This narrows down choices to about 2,000 issues. At any given time, 90% of these higher
volume stocks lack the required characteristics to pocket a reasonable profit. So a daily scanning
strategy must search for the 10% that hide decent setups and opportunities. And most times
yesterday’s stocks won’t match tomorrow’s promising plays. So new scans must refresh an active
list as old choices are discarded.

NEEDLE IN THE HAYSTACK
Swing traders have two ways to locate good setups: find the stocks themselves or have someone
else do it for them. Chat room picks and website scans offer great opportunities when they match
individual trading styles and pose serious dangers when they don’t. Always perform a personal
analysis and never rely solely on someone else’s opinion for any stock pick. Long-term success will
not come from setups identified by someone else. That website operator, newsletter guru, or stock
board promoter has a different holding strategy and execution method than any individual market
participant.
A daily planning routine should identify promising Pattern Cycle setups, measure reward:risk and
locate appropriate execution levels in advance. Build an automatic filtering process that evaluates
every stock pick or scan objectively for these characteristics. The right workflow will uncover
setups that support all three considerations. Realize that a single major flaw that doesn’t fit into the
trading plan will negate an opportunity. For example, avoid a well-formed triangle breakout if
potential reward doesn’t offer good profit or the pattern conflicts with other landscape features.
Watch out for the tendency to see something that isn’t there. Detailed review through scanning or
chart study often uncovers the basic elements of a successful setup but offers no attractive
entry. Unfortunately, this analysis process can induce a form of secondary reinforcement. It
relaxes, puts the brain into game theory mode, and soothes the ego that sees all those past setups
that could have been entered with perfect hindsight. This unconscious enjoyment encourages the
mind to fill in the missing pieces on questionable new patterns. Always exercise rigid self-discipline
when asking the eyes to look for opportunity.
The most urgent preparatory task throws out almost everything that looked great the first time
around. Know when a setup has no potential and be willing to move on to the next opportunity.
Nightly preparation must uncover stocks that show so much promise that the swing trader just can’t
wait for the next session. But before the new day finally begins, take a second look at every setup
that rang the dinner bell just the night before. Good prospects should not lose their luster in the
morning glare. Remember this golden rule for finding consistent winners: If you have to look, it
isn’t there. Forget your college degree and trust your instincts.

OPPORTUNITY COSTS
Consider an offline charting package and take the leap away from canned indicators. Use the
package to find fresh opportunities that match the personal trading style. Software allows far more

customization than the most sophisticated websites. It also offers the ability to modify the machine
language behind popular calculations and bend numbers to individual needs. Don’t confuse chart
analysis packages with database programs. Software that focuses on intensive market scanning
often provides a basic set of indicators that can easily be duplicated online. Charting programs will
scan markets, but their strength lies in heavy numbers crunching.
The Net still provides a great place to find fresh scans, picks, and opportunities. Build a filtered list
of stocks in promising setup positions. Then examine their charts in detail through multiple time
frames at the best online services available. Construct a second stock watch list to review each day
regardless of short-term opportunity. Become highly familiar with how their prices change, how
their spreads move, and how they react to general market conditions. While some active markets
will offer a few good setups over time, search for those issues that generate bread-and-butter trades
week after week.
Avoid trading the most liquid short-term stocks. Seasoned professionals actively compete against
each other in Dell Computer (DELL), Intel Corp (INTC), Cisco Systems (CSCO), and Microsoft
Corp. (MSFT). These stocks will crush most participants who lack extensive skill or experience.
Note that the current trading style may not support their volatile price action. These high-volume
stocks often move in price channels rather than simple lines. Any strategy that includes these
behemoths must also address the drawdowns associated with this type of chart behavior.
Every broker and execution system provides fast fills for some issues and slow ones for others.
Make sure to trade only what responds quickly and avoid what doesn’t. Direct-access issues must
have deep representation through ECNs or they will trigger heavy slippage. Discount brokers have
order flow arrangements with wholesale market makers that favor certain stocks over others. Some
may even fill as fast as ECN matching orders. Use this general rule for trade entry and exit: the
longer the holding period, the less urgent that instant execution becomes. For example, big Nasdaq
market makers spend so much time shaking out scalpers that 1–3 day swing traders can easily fill
low-risk positions below this radar and turn consistent profits.
Opportunity relates directly to the amount of time set aside for market analysis. Pick only one or
two issues and follow them exclusively if trading time is limited to a couple of hours per week.
Several hours per day presents the minimum commitment to successfully swing trade a variety of
stocks. Increase the watch list size as dedicated time expands. Success comes more quickly trading
2 or 3 well-analyzed stocks than chasing 20 or 30 poorly understand ones.
The ability to watch the markets in real-time determines the appropriate trading strategy. Lengthen
the holding period to multiple days when positions can’t be followed tick by tick. Use both physical
stops and limit orders to control risk. Real-time systems work best for the intraday swing trader and
scalper. The vast majority of market participants have a wide range of unrelated interests that take
substantial attention during each session. Don’t rely on snapshot quotes or Net utilities hiding under
the primary work window to manage trades. The boss will be standing right at the terminal just
when the market really starts to move.
Stock boards offer great places to chat with friends but do terrible damage to a trading account.
Almost everyone on the Net has a hidden agenda, and all information must be treated with
suspicion. Successful swing trading requires little knowledge about a company’s underlying
fundamentals. Chances are that participation on a board will only reinforce underlying bias. Be
prepared to understand the truth regardless of whether it helps or hurts an active position. Technical
traders don’t believe in companies. They believe in the numbers.

Only price, time, and risk should trigger trading actions. Know the charts inside and out without
looking at them. Pinpoint the exact location of price within each chart’s Pattern Cycle. Search for
that S/R level where the crowd will jump in or where a falling knife can be caught with safety.
Finding winners requires a level of emotional detachment that most individuals find very
uncomfortable. Discomfort and profit often stand side by side.

BUILDING WATCH LISTS
Modern technology offers fast access to short-term stock watch lists. Free online services scan
markets in real-time and output leaders/laggards in many categories. But over time, swing traders
find that these listings don’t address their growing needs, and they start to build their own custom
databases. These valuable tools rapidly organize market information and scan for impending
setups, often in real-time. Scans provide an efficient method to uncover subsets of the market
universe that match individual risk tolerance. Experience develops an affinity for stocks at defined
sectors, liquidity, and volatility. Scan filters target these unique quirks and do an excellent job
focusing on specific information needs.
Most CD and online market databases now contain entire exchanges of individual issues. Create a
subset of this total stock universe to isolate all of the major categories and sectors of interest. Many
database services let users define custom scans that include technical strength rankings and filter
output through volume, market capitalization, and price/earnings growth. But avoid too many rules
and filters. That beaten-up sector in today’s market could become liquid and volatile in a relatively
short period of time. So program the scans to capture these gems when they finally wake up from
the dead.
Carefully evaluate how trading account size will impact the watch list. In general, available capital
will rule out positions over or under certain price levels. Small retail traders may avoid issues over
$100, while many professionals won’t look at stocks valued under $30–40. Small accounts should
avoid the tendency to trade very low-priced stocks in the false belief that this will overcome
undercapitalization. High relative spreads on these issues negate their greater percentage price
movement. Bigger fortunes grow in small accounts that control risk than in those that chase quick
rewards.
Scan by exchange as well as individual stock characteristics. Nasdaq’s popularity for short-term
execution makes it the preferred choice for intraday traders. But position traders often conclude that
the NYSE provides better opportunities for gain with controlled risk. Most participants can build
effective watch lists through this simple method: retain the upper half of the NYSE but only the top
one-third of Nasdaq. Avoid thinner Nasdaq stocks unless executing trades through a direct-access
terminal that routinely fills between the spread. Without an execution advantage, illiquid stocks
steal profits and ruin risk management. For long-side opportunities, consider an additional filter to
sort low-volume issues by relative strength. Save only the best output from this group and add them
to the universe of liquid stocks.
The 1,000–3,000 stocks that survive the first scanning process become the raw material for end-ofday trading analysis. Run these issues through custom criteria that create separate watch lists to
target specific stock plays or setups (see Chapters 7–14). Remember that the best scans will build
multiple filters on top of one another. The size of these subsequent output lists must match the time
available for preparation. It makes no sense to uncover great setups that will never be traded.
Consider unique scan criteria to uncover promising short sales. Keep in mind that these issues
require greater average volume to minimize the dangers of the short squeeze. They also take more
effort to locate. While strong stocks usually make good long positions, weak stocks may not

produce good short sales. Markets fall faster than they rise and with less warning. Custom scans
must account for the fear-driven characteristics that produce quick declines.
Use scans to pick out emerging trends in addition to imminent setups. Create and manage a separate
core group of 50–100 major issues to review nightly. Add active output from this list to the top
picks from the specific setup groups. This produces a final hot list to focus the swing trader’s
attention during the following session. Try to follow these stocks on a tick-by-tick basis to catch the
predetermined execution price. If this list outputs too much to watch during market hours, create an
abbreviated group of 20–30 stocks and discard the rest. Alter the hot list each evening but keep the
core group for months at a time.

WRITING SCANS
Look at a typical database scan that searches for characteristics of the classic MACD (Moving
Average Convergence-Divergence) Histogram indicator with Worden’s TC2000 EasyScan
language. The scan applies the popular 12-26-9 settings as it moves step by step through a logical
filtering process:
1. MACD starts with the difference between a short moving average and a longer moving
average:
SCAN: (AVGC12)-(AVGC26)
TRANSLATION: Subtract a 26-day simple moving average of the closing price from a 12day simple moving average of the closing price.
2. MACD then looks for this difference smoothed over 9 days:
SCAN: AVG(AVGC12,9)-AVG(AVGC26,9)
TRANSLATION: Subtract a 26-day simple moving average of the closing price over the
last 9 days from a 12-day simple moving average of the closing price over the last 9 days.
3. MACD signals BUY based on UP histogram zero crossover:
SCAN: (AVGC12.1-AVGC26.1)-(AVG(AVGC12.1,9)-AVG(AVGC26.1,9))<0 AND
(AVGC12-AVGC26)-(AVG(AVGC12.1,9)-AVG(AVGC26.1,9))>0
TRANSLATION: Yesterday’s MACD is below histogram zero line and current MACD is
above histogram zero line.
4. MACD signals SELL based on DOWN histogram zero crossover:
SCAN: (AVGC12.1-AVGC26.1)-(AVG(AVGC12.1,9)-AVG(AVGC26.1,9))>0 AND
(AVGC12-AVGC26)-(AVG(AVGC12,9)-AVG(AVGC26,9))<0
TRANSLATION: Yesterday’s MACD is above histogram’s zero line and current MACD is
below histogram zero line.
This scan may appear complicated at first glance. But it just uses simple price inputs and looks back
several days to compare the current action. Signals generate from crossovers at a key indicator level
and adjust easily to user preferences. Fortunately, less math-inclined swing traders can locate many
of these scans free and online at websites dedicated to the various database packages. More
industrious technicians will find the scan languages easy to learn and highly versatile.
Keep in mind that scans serve two primary needs. First, they reach into broad databases and output
a primary list that meets the swing trader’s general specifications. Second, they perform narrow
analysis on this remaining subset to uncover specific trading setups and patterns. Perform frequent
maintenance on the primary list but don’t rerun the entire database every day. Develop a sense of
how often they clog with dead data and need a fresh spin. However, run setup scans nightly as each
day’s data become available. The markets change so quickly that the edge belongs to those who
prepare fresh tactics for the opening bell.

3 CHAPTER
ANALYZING THE MARKET

PATTERN CYCLES
Original market analysis must uncover high probability setups, point to exact entries and tell swing
traders when they’re wrong. It must apply to all time frames, be intuitive, and support accurate,
real-time decision-making. This versatile tool must work through all markets, provide continuous
feedback, and make trading simple yet profitable.
Pattern Cycles fulfill these demanding characteristics. They provide a complete, powerful method to
locate opportunity regardless of market conditions. These classic stages evolve as the charting
landscape repeats common and predictable elements. Since markets cannot travel upward to infinity
or downward below zero, well-marked ranges evolve within each time frame. Trends slowly
awaken at these narrow levels and shoot forward in emotional waves.
Stocks and their related charts cycle through a finite number of bull and bear conditions. Price bars
shape common patterns over and over again through impulses that may last only a few seconds or
persist for decades. When swing traders recognize the separate stages of this market evolution,
their skilled vision awakens to a world of low-risk opportunity. Learn the well-marked steps of
Pattern Cycle development and discover the hidden language of the master pattern.
Chart polarity appears everywhere in the financial markets. Pattern Cycles feed off this axis to
simplify decision-making. Use their mechanics to register market trends quickly and see profit
setups at logical interfaces. They offer a potent visual tool that unites left and right brain functions.
The pattern-trained eye intuitively sees natural execution levels that can then be verified through
objective measurement. No complex or math-driven trading system will respond more quickly to
changing price in real-time market conditions.
Pattern Cycles evolve through the engine of greed and fear. The emotional crowd acts in a
predictable manner through chart patterns. This herd behavior translates into directional movement
that offers a rich source for profits. But the swing trader must first define a competitive relationship
with the crowd as part of every new analysis. This requires an understanding of how insiders may
fade popular response to obvious trading opportunities.
Look for a low-risk execution target (ET) in each Pattern Cycle setup. This elusive trigger identifies
the optimum price, time, and risk parameters for each intended entry. Find this important action
level through analysis, experience, and common sense. Then determine whether the next few
sessions should activate its specific criteria. If not, filter out the setup and move on to the next
pattern. Never compromise an ET to force a position. Use it as a situational filter to avoid very bad
timing.

BOTTOMS
Bottoms print as a direct result of Pattern Cycle physics. The natural movement of impulse and
reaction dictates that two unique formations must develop at some point within each cycle. In an
uptrend, a lower high will eventually follow a higher high and mark a new top. In a downtrend, the
sequence of lower lows will finally end when price forms a higher low. This second event marks the
birth of the double bottom.

Double bottoms draw their predictive power from the trends that precede them. Downtrends often
accelerate as a series of lower lows prints on a bar chart. The trading crowd notices and develops a
gravity bias that expects the fall to continue unabated. Then suddenly the last low appears to hold.
The crowd takes notice and bottom fishers slowly enter new positions. Apparent price stability
triggers more players to recognize the potential pattern and jump in.
Stock percentage growth potential peaks at the very beginning of a new uptrend. For this reason,
being right at a bottom can produce the highest profit for any trade. But picking bottoms can be a
very dangerous game. Swing traders must weigh all evidence at their disposal before taking the leap
and exercise strict risk discipline to ensure a safe exit if proven wrong. Losses must be taken
immediately upon violation of the prior low.
Double bottoms generate excellent swing trades when price first thrusts toward the last relative high
(center peak), and after that level becomes a base of support for the next move upward. The Adam
and Eve bottom illustrates the center peak’s importance in the creation of this classic reversal. A
very sharp and deep first bottom (Adam) initiates this pattern. The stock then bounces high into a
center retracement before falling into a gentle, rolling second bottom (Eve). Price action
FIGURE 3.1
Legato Systems draws a well-formed Adam and Eve reversal on the daily chart. Eve’s rounded bottom takes
longer to print than the sharp Adam spike. Look for volume to decrease as the stock heals and prepares for a new
uptrend breakout. Adam and Eve patterns aren’t limited to bottoms. Watch for their mirror image at the end of
parabolic rallies.
