
While cycle gurus are creatures of the stock market, “method gurus” are more
prominent in the derivatives markets. A “method guru” erupts on the financial scene
after discovering a new analytic or trading method.
Traders always look for an edge, an advantage over fellow traders. Like knights
shopping for swords, they are willing to pay handsomely for their trading tools. No
price is too high if it lets them tap into a money pipeline.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

5. REALITY VERSUS FANTASY

15

A magic method guru sells a new set of keys to market profits—speedlines, cycles, Market Profile, etc. It may have an edge in the beginning, but as soon as enough
people become familiar with a new method and test it in the markets, it inevitably
deteriorates and starts losing popularity. Markets are forever grinding down each
method’s edge, and what worked yesterday is less likely to work today and highly
unlikely a year from now.
Oddly enough, even in this era of global communications, reputations change
slowly. A guru whose image has been destroyed in his own country can make money
peddling his theory overseas. That point has been made to me by a guru who compared his continued popularity in Asia to what happens to faded American singers
and movie stars. They are unable to attract an audience in the United States, but they
can still make a living singing abroad.
Dead Gurus

The third type of a market guru is a dead guru. His books are reissued, his market
courses are scrutinized by new generations of eager traders, and the legend of the
dear-departed analyst’s prowess and personal wealth grows posthumously. The dead
guru is no longer among us and cannot capitalize on his fame. Other promoters profit
from his reputation and expired copyrights. One dear-departed guru is R. N. Elliott,
but the best example of such a legend is W. D. Gann.
Various opportunists sell “Gann courses” and “Gann software.” They claim that
Gann was one of the best traders who ever lived, that he left a $50 million estate,
and so on. I interviewed W. D. Gann’s son, an analyst for a Boston bank. He told me
that his famous father could not support his family by trading but earned his living by
writing and selling instructional courses. He could not afford a secretary and made
his son work for him. When W. D. Gann died in the 1950s, his estate, including his
house, was valued at slightly over $100,000. The legend of W. D. Gann, the giant of
trading, is perpetuated by those who sell courses and other paraphernalia to gullible
customers.
The Followers of Gurus

A guru has to produce original research for several years, then get lucky when the
market turns his way. While some gurus are dead, those who are alive range from
serious academic types to great showmen. To read about scandals surrounding many
gurus, try Winner Takes All by William R. Gallacher.
When we pay a guru, we expect to get back more than we spend. We act like a
man who bets a few dollars against a three-card Monte dealer on a street corner. He
hopes to win more than he put down on an overturned crate. Only the ignorant or
greedy take the bait.
Some people turn to gurus in search of a strong leader. They look for a parent-like
omniscient provider. As a friend once said, “They walk with their umbilical cords in
hand, looking for a place to plug them in.” A smart promoter provides such a receptacle, for a fee.
The public wants gurus, and new gurus will come. As an intelligent trader, you must realize
that in the long run, no guru is going to make you rich. â•—You have to work on that yourself.

16

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Occasionally, when I give a talk or appear on TV, someone introduces me as a
“famous guru.” I shudder at those words and interrupt such introductions. A guru
is someone claiming to lead the crowds across the desert for a donation. No such
pitches here!
I always begin by explaining that there are no magic methods, that the field of
trading is as huge and diverse as that of medicine, where one needs to choose one
specialty and work hard to become good at it. I chose my path a long time ago, and
what I do in front of a class is simply think out loud, sharing my modes of research
and decision making.

Trade with Your Eyes Open
Wishful thinking is stronger than dollars. Recent research has proven that people
have a prodigious ability to lie to themselves and avoid seeing the truth.
Duke University professor Dan Ariely describes a clever experiment. A group of
people are given an intelligence test, but half of them are “accidentally” shown a response sheet, allowing them to look up correct answers before recording their own.
Needless to say, they score above the rest. Next, everybody is asked to predict their
grades on the next IQ test, in which there will be absolutely no cheat sheets—and
those who predict correctly will get paid. Surprisingly, the half of the group that
scored higher with cheat sheets predicted higher results for the next test. The cheaters wanted to believe they were very smart, even though their incorrect predictions
of success would cost them money.
A successful trader cannot afford wishful thinking—he must be a realist. There
are no cheat sheets in the markets—you can see the truth in your trade diaries and
equity curves.
To win in the markets, we need to master three essential components of trading:
sound psychology, a logical trading system, and an effective risk management plan.
These are like three legs of a stool—remove one and the stool will fall. It is a typical
beginner mistake to focus exclusively on indicators and trading systems.
You have to analyze your feelings as you trade to make sure that your decisions are sound.
Your trades must be based on clearly defined rules. â•—You have to structure your money management so that no string of losses can kick you out of the game.

■■6. Self-Destructiveness
Trading is a very hard game. A trader who wants to win and remain successful in the
long run has to be extremely serious about his craft. He cannot afford to be naive or
to trade because of some hidden psychological agenda.
Unfortunately, trading often appeals to impulsive people, gamblers, and those
who feel that the world owes them a living. If you trade for the excitement, you’ll
inevitably take trades with bad odds and accept needless risks. The markets are unforgiving, and emotional trading always results in losses.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

6. SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS

17

Gambling
Gambling means betting on games of chance or skill. It exists in all societies, and
most people have gambled at some point in their lives.
Freud believed that gambling was universally attractive because it was a substitute
for masturbation. The repetitive and exciting activity of the hands, the irresistible
urge, the resolutions to stop, the intoxicating quality of pleasure, and the feelings of
guilt link gambling and masturbation.
Dr. Ralph Greenson, a prominent California psychoanalyst, has divided gamblers
into three groups: the normal person who gambles for diversion and who can stop
when he wishes; the professional gambler, who selects gambling as his means of
earning a livelihood; and the neurotic gambler, who gambles because he is driven by
unconscious needs and is unable to stop.
A neurotic gambler either feels lucky or wants to test his luck. Winning gives
him a sense of power. He feels pleased, like a baby feeding at a breast. In the end, a
neurotic gambler always loses because he tries to recreate that omnipotent feeling of
bliss instead of concentrating on a realistic long-term game plan.
Dr. Sheila Blume, director of the compulsive gambling program at South Oaks
Hospital in New York, called gambling “an addiction without a drug.” Most gamblers
are men who gamble for the action. Women tend to gamble as a means of escape.
Losers usually hide their losses and try to look and act like winners, but are plagued
by self-doubt.
Trading stocks, futures, and options gives a gambler a high, while looking more
respectable than betting on the ponies. Gambling in the financial markets has a greater
aura of sophistication than playing numbers with a bookie.
Gamblers feel happy when trades go in their favor. They feel terribly low when
they lose. They differ from successful professionals who focus on long-term plans
and don’t get particularly upset or excited over any single trade.
The key sign of gambling is the inability to resist the urge to bet. If you feel that you are
trading too much and the results are poor, stop trading for a month.This will give you a chance
to re-evaluate your trading. If the urge to trade is so strong that you cannot stay away from the
action for a month, then it is time to visit your local chapter of Gamblers Anonymous or start
using the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, outlined later in this chapter.

Self-Sabotage
After practicing psychiatry for decades, I became convinced that most failures in life
are due to self-sabotage. We fail in our professional, personal, and business affairs
not because of bad luck or incompetence, but to fulfill an unconscious wish to fail.
A brilliant friend of mine had a lifelong history of demolishing his success. As a
young man, he was a successful pharmacist but lost his business; became a broker and
rose near the top of his firm but was sued; turned to trading but busted out while
disentangling himself from previous disasters. He blamed all his failures on envious
bosses, incompetent regulators, and an unsupportive wife.

18

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Finally, he hit bottom. He had no job and no money. He borrowed a quote terminal from another busted-out trader and raised capital from a few people who
had heard that he had traded well in the past. He started making money for his
pool, and as the word spread, more people invested. My friend was on a roll. At
that point, he went on a speaking tour of Asia but continued to trade from the
road. He took a side trip into a country famous for its brothels, leaving a very large
open position in bond futures, with no protective stop. By the time he returned
to civilization, the market had staged a major move and his pool was wiped out.
Did he try to figure out his problem? To learn? No—he blamed his broker! Afterwards I helped him get an attractive job at a major data company, but there he began to bite the hands that fed him and was fired. In the end, this brilliant man was
going door to door, selling aluminum siding—while others made money using his
techniques.
When traders get in trouble, they tend to blame others, bad luck, or anything
else. It hurts to look within yourself for the cause of your failure.
A prominent trader came to me for a consultation. His equity was being demolished by a rally in the U.S. dollar, in which he was heavily short. He had grown up
fighting an abusive and arrogant father. He had made a name for himself by betting
large positions on reversals of established trends. This trader kept adding to his short
position because he could not admit that the market, which represented his father,
was bigger and stronger than he was.
These are just two examples of how people act out their self-destructive tendencies. We sabotage ourselves by acting like impulsive children rather than intelligent
adults. We cling to our self-defeating patterns. They can be treated—failure is a curable disease.
The mental baggage from childhood can prevent you from succeeding in the markets.
You have to identify your weaknesses and work to change. Keep a trading diary—write down
your reasons for entering and exiting every trade. Look for repetitive patterns of success
and failure.

The Demolition Derby
All society members make small allowances to protect one another from the consequences of their mistakes. When you drive, you try to avoid hitting other cars, and
they try to avoid hitting you. If someone cuts in front of you on a highway, you may
curse, but you will slow down. If someone swings open the door of a parked car, you
swerve.You avoid collisions because they are costly for both parties.
Almost all professions provide safety nets for their members. Your bosses, colleagues, and clients will warn you when you behave badly or self-destructively.There
is no such safety net in trading, which makes it more dangerous than most human
endeavors. The markets offer endless opportunities to self-destruct.
Buying at the high point of the day is like swinging your car door open into the
traffic.When your order to buy reaches the floor, traders rush to sell to you—to tear
off your door along with your arm. Other traders want you to fail because when you
lose they get your money.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

7. TRADING PSYCHOLOGY

19

Markets operate without normal human helpfulness. Every trader gets hit by
others. Every trader tries to hit others. The trading highway is littered with wrecks.
Trading is the most dangerous human endeavor, short of war.

Controlling Self-Destructiveness
Most people go through life making the same mistakes decade after decade. Some
structure their lives to succeed in one area, while acting out their internal conflicts
in another.
You need to be aware of your tendency to sabotage yourself. Stop blaming your losses on bad
luck or on others, and take responsibility for your results. Start keeping a diary—a record of all
your trades, with reasons for entering and exiting them. Look for repetitive patterns of success
and failure.Those who don’t learn from the past are condemned to repeat it.
A trader needs a psychological safety net the way a mountain climber needs his
survival gear. I found the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, outlined below, to
be of great help at an early stage of trader development. Strict money management
rules also provide a safety net, while the diary helps you learn from your mistakes as
well as successes.

■■7. Trading Psychology
Your success or failure as a trader depends on your emotions.You may have a brilliant
trading system, but if you feel arrogant, frightened, or upset, your account is sure
to suffer. If you become aware of fear, greed, or a gambler’s high, close your trades.
In trading, you compete against the sharpest minds in the world. Commissions
and slippage slant the field against you. Now, on top of that, if you allow your emotions to interfere with your trading, the battle is lost. My friend and partner in
SpikeTrade.com Kerry Lovvorn is fond of repeating: “It is hard enough to know what
the market is going to do; if you don’t know what you are going to do, the game is lost.”
Having a good trading system is not enough. Many traders with good systems
wash out because psychologically they are not prepared to win.

Bending the Rules
Markets offer enormous temptations, like walking through a gold vault or through a
harem. They provoke great surges of greed and even greater waves of fear of losing
what we’ve got. Those feelings cloud our perceptions of market reality.
Most amateurs feel like geniuses after a short winning streak. It is exciting to
believe that you are so good that all your trades are sure to be winners. That’s when
traders start deviating from their rules and damage their accounts.
Traders gain some knowledge, win, their emotions kick in, and they self-destruct.
Most traders promptly give their “killings” back to the markets, which are full of
rags to riches to rags stories. The hallmark of a successful trader is the ability to accumulate equity.

20

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

You need to make trading as objective as possible. Be sure to follow money management rules. Keep a spreadsheet listing all your trades, including commissions and
slippage. Keep a diary of all your trades with “before and after” charts. At the early
stages of your trading career, you may have to devote as much energy to analyzing
yourself as analyzing the markets.
When I was learning to trade, I read every book on trading psychology I could
find. Many writers offered sensible advice. Some stressed discipline: “You cannot let
the markets sway you. Don’t make decisions during trading hours. Plan a trade, and
trade a plan.” Others stressed flexibility: “Don’t enter the market with any preconceived notions. Change your plans when markets change.” Some experts suggested
isolation—no business news, no Wall Street Journal, no listening to other traders, just
you and the market. Others advised being open-minded, keeping in touch with other
traders, and soaking up fresh ideas. Each piece of advice seemed to make sense, but
they contradicted one another.
I kept reading, trading, and focusing on system development. I also continued to
practice psychiatry. I never thought the two fields were connected—until I had a
sudden insight. The idea that changed how I trade came from psychiatry.

The Insight That Changed My Trading
Like most psychiatrists, I always had some patients with alcohol problems. I also
served as a consultant to a major drug rehabilitation program. It didn’t take me long
to realize that alcoholics and addicts were more likely to recover in self-help groups
than in classical psychiatric settings.
Psychotherapy, medications, and expensive hospitals and clinics can sober up a
drunk but seldom succeed in helping him remain sober. Most addicts quickly relapse. They have a much better chance to recover if they become active in Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) and similar self-help groups.
Once I realized that AA members were more likely to stay sober and rebuild
their lives, I became a big fan of Alcoholics Anonymous. I began sending patients
with drinking problems to AA and related groups, such as ACOA (Adult Children of
Alcoholics). If an alcoholic came to me for treatment, I insisted that he also go to AA
because otherwise he’d be wasting both our time and his money.
One night I stopped by a friend’s office on the way to a party. We had two hours
before it began, and my friend, who was a recovering alcoholic, said: “Do you want
to take in a movie or go to an AA meeting?” I had sent many patients to AA but had
never been to a meeting, since I have never had a drinking problem. I jumped at a
chance to attend an AA meeting—it was a new experience.
The meeting was held at a local YMCA. A dozen men and a few women sat on
folding chairs in a plain room. The meeting lasted an hour. I was amazed by what I
heard—these people seemed to talk about my trading!
They talked about alcohol, but as long as I substituted the word “loss” for “alcohol,” most of what they said applied to me! My account equity was swinging up and
down in those days. I left that meeting knowing that I had to handle my losses the
way AA handles alcoholism.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

8. TRADING LESSONS FROM AA

21

■■8. Trading Lessons from AA
Almost any drunk can stay sober for a few days—until the urge to drink drives him
back to the bottle. He cannot resist as long as he continues to think and feel like an
alcoholic. Sobriety begins inside a person’s mind.
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) has a system for changing the way people think and
feel about drinking. AA members use a 12-step program for changing their minds.
These 12 steps, described in the book Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions, refer to 12
stages of personal growth. Recovering alcoholics attend meetings where they share
their experiences with other recovering alcoholics, supporting each other in their
sobriety. Any member can get a sponsor—another AA member whom he can call for
support when he feels the urge to drink.
AA was founded in the 1930s by two alcoholics—a doctor and a traveling salesman who began meeting to help each other stay sober. They developed a system that
worked so well, others began to join them. AA has only one goal—to help its members stay sober. It doesn’t ask for money, takes no political positions, and runs no
promotional campaigns. AA keeps growing thanks only to word of mouth and owes
its success only to its effectiveness.
The 12-step program of AA is so effective that people with other problems now
use it. There are 12-step groups for children of alcoholics, gamblers, and others. I’ve
become convinced that traders can stop losing money if they apply the key principles
of Alcoholics Anonymous to their trading.

Denial
A social drinker enjoys a cocktail, a glass of wine, or a beer but stops when he feels
he’s had enough. An alcoholic’s chemistry is different. Once an alcoholic takes a
drink, he feels an urge to continue until he passes out or his money runs out.
A drunk may say that he needs to cut down on drinking, but can’t admit that it’s
out of control. Try telling an alcoholic relative, friend, or employee that his drinking
is out of control and damaging his life, and you’ll run into a wall of denial.
An alcoholic may say: “My boss fired me ’cause I was hung over and came in
late. My wife took the kids and left ’cause she had no sense to begin with. My
landlord is trying to kick me out of the apartment ’cause I’m a little behind
on the rent. I’m gonna have to cut down on my drinking, and everything will
be all right.”
This man has lost his family and his job. He is about to lose the roof over his head.
His life is spinning out of control—but he keeps saying that he can cut down on his
drinking. This is denial!
Alcoholics deny their problems while their lives are falling apart. As long as an
alcoholic believes that he can “control his drinking,” he is headed downhill. Nothing
will ever change, even if he gets a new job, a new wife, and a new landlord.
Alcoholics deny that alcohol controls their lives. When they talk of reducing
drinking, they talk about managing the unmanageable. They are like a driver whose
car spins out of control on a mountain road. When the car careens down a cliff, it is

22

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

too late to promise to drive carefully. An alcoholic’s life careens out of control, while
he denies he’s an alcoholic.
There is a stark parallel between an alcoholic and a trader whose account is being demolished by losses. As he keeps changing his trading tactics, he acts like an alcoholic who tries to
solve his problem by switching from hard liquor to beer. A loser denies that he’s lost control over
his trading life.

Rock Bottom
A drunk can begin his journey to recovery only after he admits that he is an alcoholic.
He must see that alcohol controls his life and not the other way around. Most drunks
cannot accept this painful truth. They can face it only after they hit rock bottom.
Some alcoholics hit rock bottom when they develop a life-threatening illness.
Others hit it after being rejected by their family or losing a job. An alcoholic needs to
sink to a point so low, so deep down in the gutter, so unbearably painful that it finally
penetrates his denial.
The pain of hitting rock bottom makes an alcoholic see how deep he has sunk. He
sees a simple stark choice—either turn his life around or die. Only then is an alcoholic ready to begin his journey to recovery.
Profits give traders an emotional high and a feeling of power.They try to get high again, put
on reckless trades, and give back their profits. Most traders cannot stand the pain of severe losses.
They die as traders after hitting rock bottom and wash out of the markets. The few survivors
realize that the main trouble is not with their methods—it is with their thinking. They can
change and become successful traders.
