
that begins with a sharp supply/demand imbalance that awakens price from a lengthy Accumulation
phase into the Realization phase.
These four components put the odds strongly in your favor when you place a trade that assumes that
price has reversed from one trend to the next. In this way, you wait until the weight of the evidence
suggests strongly that the trend is reversed. Such signals can only occur after price has moved upward
from the absolute low, or downward from the absolute high. What you surrender in potential profit is
the much higher probability of a successful reversal trade setup as opposed to a trader who shorts all
new highs or buys all new lows expecting a reversal. Just remember that it is better to pick up a fallen
knife off the floor than it is to try and catch a falling one.

Trend Reversal Example in the U.S. Dollar
Figure 9.4 shows these steps taking place on a daily chart of the Bullish U.S. Dollar Index ETF
(UUP).
FIGURE 9.4 Trend Reversal Progression in Bullish U.S. Dollar ETF Daily Chart in late 2009

Where do you officially call the persistent downtrend in the Bullish U.S. Dollar Index ETF fund
reversed from bull to bear? Can you identify the exact price at which the fund reverses its trend? If
you can, then that is your buy point for a trend reversal trade and no sooner. Hint, the price is not the
November 2009 of $22.00 per share.
Let's start with the left side of the chart and work our way forward, keeping in mind the four steps I

described earlier. We see price in a persistent downtrend since the chart began in early 2009 with the
PowerShares U.S. Dollar Index ETF at the $26.00-per-share level. Price continued its series of
lower lows and lower highs, along with a bearish EMA orientation (the 20-day EMA remained under
the 50 EMA) until the positive crossover just before 2010 began.
As we will see when we discuss retracement trades, the best strategy was to short all pullbacks to
the 20 or 50 EMA within the context of this persistent downtrend. There were a limited number of
fade trades when price became overextended to the downside from the falling 20 EMA, but those
opportunities required precise entries and exits, and went against the prevailing downtrend.
Let's assume you are a risky trader who loves reversal strategies. Notice that a lengthy positive
momentum divergence formed in the 3/10 MACD Oscillator, starting with the move off the oscillator
low in May 2009. Divergences do not require a trend to reverse, nor do they tell you when to enter a
reversal trade; rather, they only tell you that odds are decreasing for a continuation of the downtrend
and are increasing for an eventual reversal. We need additional chart evidence to inform us when it is
safe to make a reversal play, and until then, it is unsafe to do so.
Nothing changed in the structure of lower lows, lower highs, and the bearish EMA structure until a
sudden pop took price above the 20 EMA, 50 EMA, and declining trendline on the swing up in
November 2009. That pop-up in price undoubtedly lured some aggressive buyers off the sidelines to
bet on a trend reversal in the Dollar Index, which failed next month when price made a new low and
these eager traders took their stop-loss executions accordingly, with a stern reminder of the danger
and risk of trading reversals, even if price breaks above a trendline on positive divergences.
Look closely at the massive multi-month divergence that culminated with the absolute price low of
$22.00 per share in November 2009. Again, divergences do not guarantee reversals, nor do they
signal when it is safe to enter, but generally, the larger the divergence, the larger the eventual reversal
you can expect when price does reverse.
In December 2009, price gapped higher, breaking again through the declining trendline as well as
the 20- and 50-day EMAs at the $22.50-per-share level. Look very closely at the 3/10 MACD
Momentum Oscillator in December 2009. The oscillator forms a new indicator high of 0.30 which is
a high not seen since April 2009, at the same time the ETF traded at the $25.50 level. This is a
powerful technical signal that most traders miss or don't know how to identify. It is called a Kickoff
and is the first true sign of momentum or strength that signals the odds shifting strongly to favor a
reversal in trend as opposed to a continuation of the trend.
In terms of identifying trend reversals in price on any timeframe, use the 3/10 MACD or other
momentum oscillator to find lengthy divergences and then to locate a Kickoff signal in the oscillator
when price begins to rally off the lengthy divergence. A higher high in the oscillator when price is not
forming a higher high is most likely a Kickoff signal of a momentum burst, and potential new birth of
an uptrend.
Like divergences, Kickoff signals do not tell you when it is safe to enter, only that conditions now
strongly favor a reversal in trend. Aggressive traders will buy the immediate pullback in price after a
Kickoff signal occurs and place a stop under the most recent price low in anticipation of a true trend
reversal. This is generally the safest spot in the price structure to position yourself for a trend
reversal.
The alternate safe spot to position for a reversal, which appeals to conservative traders, is to wait
for price to complete the official reversal by forming a series of higher highs and lows, and taking out
a key resistance level. The break above the most recent initial higher high in price is true reversal

where it is safest to establish a long-term position or swing reversal trade. This is the type of signal
you must identify when trading reversals: stay on the sideline until the weight of the evidence, in
terms of price structure, moving average orientation, momentum divergences, and momentum
Kickoffs, favor that the trend has reversed and signaled you a safe entry into the newly developed
trend.
I labeled this spot on the chart in January 2010 when price breaks above the horizontal resistance
line at $23.20 per share. This is not only the safest spot on the chart to position yourself for a reversal
trade, but it is the location that officially confirms that the trend has reversed using the weight of the
evidence model. Once a trend has reversed, the new trend stays in effect until we have a similar
multi-step trend reversal, or price falls sharply to resume the larger downtrend, which is a lower
probability, but certainly possible outcome.
In trading, we cannot know the future with certainty, but can only assess the probabilities as they
exist at the time we analyze the price structure and trade opportunities in that structure. Ensuring that
price meets these criterion before entering a reversal trade will enhance the odds in your favor that
over time, you will trade more successful reversals than other traders who merely find a bottom and
buy. Hopefully, you're no longer one of those traders!

MEAN DEPARTURE STRATEGIES
If fade and reversal trades depend on price returning to the mean, specifically a swing higher in an
uptrend returning back to the rising moving average, or a long-term uptrend trend reversing and falling
lower to a lower average price, then mean departure strategies depend on price trading at or near the
average price and then moving away from that average price. Instead of expecting price to return to
the mean, we expect it to depart from it as the next likely swing in price.
Our final two types of trade setups build upon this concept of mean departure, and best fit within the
context of a market in range expansion mode breaking out of an established trading range, or rising in
the context of a prevailing uptrend. Specifically, we can label these types of trades classic breakout
trades, with which you are no doubt familiar now, and retracement trades. Let's examine them both.

Breakout Trades
By now, we have discussed breakout trades in detail, especially during the Price Alternation
Principle in Chapter 3. Breakout trades take advantage of the Price Alternation Principle as the
structure breaks free from an established trading range or negative feedback loop environment into a
new range expansion phase of positive feedback.
A trader using range breakout trading strategies seeks to enter a position as close as possible to a
confirmed breakout from an established trading range or price pattern such as a triangle or rectangle.
Refer to Chapter 5 for the types of price patterns that allow for specific breakout trading strategies,
namely the rectangle and three different triangle patterns. Shorting the breakdown from the neckline of
a head and shoulders pattern is also a type of breakout trading strategy.
The risk that breakout traders face comes from the potential for bull and bear traps, which occur
when price breaks out of an established boundary and then immediately returns inside the boundary,
trapping the aggressive traders who established positions as soon as the break occurred. Thus, if you
employ breakout strategies, you will need to determine whether to use an aggressive strategy that aims

to establish a position as soon as a breakout occurs, or a more conservative strategy that demands that
price hold the breakout for at least two bars, penetrate the boundary by at least 2 percent (or some
other predetermined percentage), or be confirmed by some other concept in technical analysis such as
a corresponding volume or momentum surge.
While no potential breakout setup is guaranteed to produce the desired positive feedback loop of
range expansion expected, traders can assess the broader structure and look for confirmation from
specific indicators. A corresponding increase in volume during a suspected breakout setup increases
the odds of a successful trade outcome. If you see a volume spike on the breakout, you can enter a
position with greater confidence than if you did not see a respective increase in volume. In fact,
sudden price breaks from an established trading range that occur on average or less-than-average
volume have a higher probability of being a false break, so be sure to monitor volume in relation to
the recent past figures when deciding whether or not to trade a breakout setup.
In addition to volume, a trader would also want to see a corresponding spike in a momentum
oscillator to confirm a potential breakout trade. Often, this momentum impulse will come in the form
of a price gap or powerful impulse bar such as a marabozu or other large candle. Look for a sign of
impulse in the form of immediate range expansion as price breaks free of an established trading range.
On the other hand, if you see price break free from a trading range on an intraday penetration that
forms a long upper shadow, this indicates a lack of impulse and may result in a trap.

Bollinger Band Squeeze Plays
If you use Bollinger Bands on your charts, look for a noticeable compression or narrowing of the
bands as price forms an extended consolidation. Then, wait for price to break and close at least one
bar outside either the upper or lower Bollinger Band. If this setup occurs, you can interpret this not
only as a sign of impulse, in that price closed two standard deviations away from the compressed
mean, but you can take it as a trade entry signal. When using Bollinger Bands, traders refer to this
specific setup as the Bollinger Band Squeeze when the bands have noticeably narrowed in range and
then price breaks strongly outside of the compressed bands. Many trend-following strategies demand
that price close outside Bollinger Bands, Keltner Channels, or Donchian Channels before establishing
a trade that is designed to capture the expected range expansion phase in price that originates from a
break beyond these indicator extremes.
Figure 9.5 shows two examples of simple price breakouts from compressed Bollinger Bands,
known as the Bollinger Band Squeeze Setup, on the daily chart of Ford Motor Company (F) in 2009.
FIGURE 9.5 Bollinger Band Compressions and Price Breakouts in Ford Daily 2009

For this setup, the first condition to observe is a visual compression in the Bollinger Bands that
corresponds with a range consolidation phase in price that you can identify without the assistance of
indicators. You may also want to confirm that the Average Directional Index (ADX Indicator) is
under 20, but that also is not necessary. A trader enters a position when price breaks outside the
Bollinger Band extreme and closes above the band, particularly with a large single bar or a price gap.
The breakout in March 2009 formed range expansion bars and broke above the horizontal trendline
high at the $2.00-per-share level and led to a rally above $6.00 per share by May. The second
example shows price breaking not only clear horizontal trendlines at the $6.50- and $5.00-per-share
level, but gapping strongly above this level in July 2009 on a sign of impulse. Aggressive traders seek
to buy shares immediately on a sharp range breakout, while conservative traders might wait to see if
price closes for two bars outside the break in order to avoid the potential of a bull or bear trap.

Holding on for the Ride
To capture the edge in this type of strategy, a trader would want to hold the position as long as
possible until noticeable momentum or volume divergences occurred, or some other known sell signal
developed on the price chart. Remember, you are trying to capture the edge from a positive feedback
loop that gives rise to a lengthy range expansion in price. Traders often place stops conservatively
under the low of the initial breakout bar, or more aggressively under the most recent swing low in
price prior to an upside break, or above the most recent swing high price in a downside break.

When determining when to enter a breakout trade, the best indication of a potential break comes
from simple hand-drawn trendlines from prior price highs and lows, specifically when these
trendlines compress into a triangle pattern formation. While not all traders use advanced technical
indicators, all traders monitor price highs and lows, and when price clearly breaks an established
price trendline, traders take notice and adjust positions accordingly, whether that means putting on a
new position willingly or taking off an old position unwillingly to limit losses. Either way, breakouts
from established trendlines often serve as self-fulfilling prophecies that create positive feedback
loops that give the edge inherent in such strategies.
In terms of edge, most breakout strategies have superior monetary edges over other strategies
because of the much larger expected price gains of the winning trades to the smaller losing trades.
However, to achieve this superior monetary edge, breakout strategies often suffer a reduced accuracy
edge that may not reach over 50 percent, which means that half or more of the attempted trades will
result in a loss from a bull or bear trap developing, instead of the desired breakout. Thus, the average
breakout strategy is lower in the accuracy edge but higher in the monetary or reward-to-risk edge than
many other strategies.
Professional traders do not mind sacrificing accuracy for profits over time, but many new traders
find such strategies difficult to trade because a string of consecutive losses can occur and frustrate
inexperienced traders. Keep this in mind when trading these types of strategies.

Retracement Trades
Retracement trading strategies take advantage of two foundation price principles, namely the Trend
Continuity principle and Momentum principle in terms of new momentum highs forecasting higher
price highs likely yet to come. By combining two principles when locating a trading opportunity, you
increase your odds of a successful trade outcome, and thus most well-planned retracement-specific
trading strategies have higher accuracy rates than other strategies, but a moderate monetary edge when
compared to breakout or trend reversal strategies. Retracement trades are often shorter in duration
than breakout or reversal trades, but the increase in frequency can make up for this seeming
disadvantage.
Retracement trades require the presence of a prevailing trend, whether up or down, and specifically
bet on the trend in place continuing. The setups from retracement strategies come from pullbacks to
key support levels, such as prior price support levels, or more commonly moving average support or
Fibonacci Retracement prices. Figure 9.6 shows us basic retracement strategies of buying shares
when price in an established uptrend retraces back to a rising short- or intermediate-term moving
average.
FIGURE 9.6 Basic Retracement Trades in an Uptrend—Apple Daily (AAPL) 2009

Apple (AAPL) hit a major price low in January 2009 at $80.00 during a period of accumulation and
range compression with price boundaries between $80.00 and $100.00 per share. Figure 9.6 shows
the Realization stage in the stock, though price continued its uptrend to the $300.00-per-share level in
October 2010, though neither the low nor the high appear on this chart. The main purpose of the daily
chart of Apple is to show the numerous simple retracement trade opportunities that occurred while
price traveled from the initial breakout above $100.00 in April 2009 higher in a steady, stable
uptrend, as seen in the chart.
The basic idea of a retracement trade is to purchase shares as price retraces downward in a normal
profit taking swing to the support area either of a rising short- or intermediate-term moving average, a
trendline, a Fibonacci Retracement price, or some other known price support level. Each opportunity
grants a buy setup to purchase shares on a downswing within the context of a rising primary uptrend. I
drew arrows on six specific simple retracements to the rising 20- or 50-day exponential moving
average, though pay special attention to the three retracements back to the rising 20 EMA at the
$160.00- and $180.00-per-share level.
I also drew a standard Fibonacci Retracement grid that stretched from the May 2009 swing low of
$120.00 per share to the June high under $150.00 per share. The respective 38.2 percent, 50 percent,
and 61.8 percent retracements intersected the rising 20- and 50-day moving averages as shown,
forming a support confluence and two trade entry opportunities as price retraced to the $135.00 level
at this time.

The Simplicity of Retracements
While retracement trades need only be as simple as price and a rising moving average, you can
enhance your odds of a successful trade outcome by buying shares only after a reversal candle, such

as a hammer, doji, bullish engulfing, or spinning top forms at the support of a trendline, moving
average, or Fibonacci retracement. You can know in advance exactly what price to purchase shares,
whether you are a conservative or aggressive trader. A conservative trader would demand proof that
price began its rally upward off support, or downward from resistance before putting on a trade.
Specifically, the trader would wait to buy shares only after price rises above the specific high of a
known reversal candle. The aggressive trader, more focused on the larger concept of edge and less
specifically on the accuracy edge, as described in Chapter 8, would buy shares the moment price
touched the rising trendline, moving average, or Fibonacci retracement price. By establishing a
position at the likely support price, a trader will establish a more favorable reward-to-risk
relationship in terms of establishing a reasonable stop-loss position and a larger potential profit
target.
Though there is no guarantee price will support as expected, in the event that it does, the aggressive
trader will have established a more favorable position than the conservative trader who waited for
proof in the form of an upward move off of support before participating in the move. Remember, you
must determine if you are more suited for conservative or aggressive execution tactics, and
understand the compromise in each strategy.

Combining Elements for Successful Trades
So far, we have incorporated moving averages, trendlines, Fibonacci retracements, and candles into
the retracement opportunities. If you prefer to increase the odds of a successful trade outcome, you
can incorporate the momentum principle into the setup by observing a new momentum high form on
the most recent swing to a new price high. According to the momentum principle, new momentum
highs often precede new price highs yet to come after a retracement.
Once you observe a new price high that forms on a corresponding new momentum high, if you buy
shares after a retracement forms into an expected support area, you are wisely combining the two
foundation price principles into a single trade setup, which increases the odds of a successful
outcome. To identify new momentum highs, compare the most recent price swing with an unbounded
momentum oscillator such as the 3/10 MACD Oscillator, Rate of Change, or Momentum indicator. By
identifying confluences of separate methods, you will increase the odds of a successful trade outcome
and increase your edge over time.
Beyond momentum, you can incorporate volume into your analysis. Like momentum, volume is a
confirming indicator and can be used in a similar fashion. In the context of a rising uptrend, you want
to see volume rise during the up-swings in price and either consolidate or decrease slightly during the
retracements in price. If you begin to see volume rise as price rallies upward from a confluence
support price, then you are observing a confirmation that suggests, like momentum, that higher prices
are yet to come because buyers are eagerly supporting price and demand is overcoming the supply
from the sellers.
If you are monitoring a major market index like the Dow Jones, S&P 500, or the NASDAQ, you can
also look at breadth indicators such as the McClellan Oscillator, number of advancing stocks minus
declining stocks (called breadth), net new highs, or other forms of market internals in a similar
method to volume. You want to see market internals rise and confirm new price highs in a prevailing
uptrend instead of forming divergences with price. If price forms a new swing high and a key market
internal confirms the new high by forming its own new relative indicator high, then that also suggests

that higher index prices are yet to come and that it is safe to establish retracement trades in the
direction of the prevailing trend.
The same is true in the context of a downtrend and new price lows confirmed by new breadth or
market internal lows, which suggests that lower index price lows are yet to come, and you should take
retracements up into declining moving averages as opportunities to short sell index ETFs or
purchased inverse ETFs if that is your dominant strategy.
In terms of price patterns, bull and bear flags are perfect retracement trade setups. Refer to Chapter
5 for more information on the specifics of these popular price patterns. The initial impulse that
