
2 Chapter 1

cian—price, volume, and open interest. (Open interest is used
only in futures and options.) The term “price action,” which is
often used, seems too narrow because most technicians include
volume and open interest as an integral part of their market
analysis. With this distinction made, the terms “price action” and
“market action” are used interchangeably throughout the remain-
der of this discussion.

PHILOSOPHY OR RATIONALE

There are three premises on which the technical approach is
based:

1. Market action discounts everything.
2. Prices move in trends.
3. History repeats itself.

Market Action Discounts Everything

The statement “market action discounts everything” forms what
is probably the cornerstone of technical analysis. Unless the full
significance of this first premise is fully understood and accepted,
nothing else that follows makes much sense. The technician
believes that anything that can possibly affect the price—funda-
mentally, politically, psychologically, or otherwise—is actually
reflected in the price of that market. It follows, therefore, that a
study of price action is all that is required. While this claim may
seem presumptuous, it is hard to disagree with if one takes the
time to consider its true meaning.

All the technician is really claiming is that price action
should reflect shifts in supply and demand. If demand exceeds
supply, prices should rise. If supply exceeds demand, prices
should fall. This action is the basis of all economic and funda-
mental forecasting. The technician then turns this statement
around to arrive at the conclusion that if prices are rising, for
whatever the specific reasons, demand must exceed supply and
the fundamentals must be bullish. If prices fall, the fundamen-


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 3

tals must be bearish. If this last comment about fundamentals
seems surprising in the context of a discussion of technical
analysis, it shouldn’t. After all, the technician is indirectly
studying fundamentals. Most technicians would probably agree
that it is the underlying forces of supply and demand, the eco-
nomic fundamentals of a market, that cause bull and bear mar-
kets. The charts do not in themselves cause markets to move up
or down. They simply reflect the bullish or bearish psychology
of the marketplace.

As a rule, chartists do not concern themselves with the rea-
sons why prices rise or fall. Very often, in the early stages of a
price trend or at critical turning points, no one seems to know
exactly why a market is performing a certain way. While the tech-
nical approach may sometimes seem overly simplistic in its
claims, the logic behind this first premise—that markets discount
everything—becomes more compelling the more market experi-
ence one gains. It follows then that if everything that affects mar-
ket price is ultimately reflected in market price, then the study of
that market price is all that is necessary. By studying price charts
and a host of supporting technical indicators, the chartist in effect
lets the market tell him or her which way it is most likely to go.
The chartist does not necessarily try to outsmart or outguess the
market. All of the technical tools discussed later on are simply
techniques used to aid the chartist in the process of studying mar-
ket action. The chartist knows there are reasons why markets go
up or down. He or she just doesn’t believe that knowing what
those reasons are is necessary in the forecasting process.

Prices Move in Trends

The concept of trend is absolutely essential to the technical
approach. Here again, unless one accepts the premise that markets
do in fact trend, there’s no point in reading any further. The
whole purpose of charting the price action of a market is to iden-
tify trends in early stages of their development for the purpose of
trading in the direction of those trends. In fact, most of the tech-
niques used in this approach are trend-following in nature, mean-
ing that their intent is to identify and follow existing trends. (See
Figure 1.1.)


4 Chapter 1

01/31/79 (*SPX) S&P 500 Stock Index 02/27/98

Monthly Line Chart

a ee

Figure 1.1 Example of an uptrend. Technical analysis is based on the
premise that markets trend and that those trends tend to persist.

There is a corollary to the premise that prices move in
trends—a trend in motion is more likely to continue than to reverse.
This corollary is, of course, an adaptation of Newton’s first law of
motion. Another way to state this corollary is that a trend in
motion will continue in the same direction until it reverses. This
is another one of those technical claims that seems almost circu-
lar. But the entire trend-following approach is predicated on rid-
ing an existing trend until it shows signs of reversing.

History Repeats Itself

Much of the body of technical analysis and the study of market
action has to do with the study of human psychology. Chart pat-
terns, for example, which have been identified and categorized
over the past one hundred years, reflect certain pictures that
appear on price charts. These pictures reveal the bullish or bearish


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 5

psychology of the market. Since these patterns have worked well
in the past, it is assumed that they will continue to work well in
the future. They are based on the study of human psychology,
which tends not to change. Another way of saying this last
premise—that history repeats itself—is that the key to under-
standing the future lies in a study of the past, or that the future is
just a repetition of the past.

TECHNICAL VERSUS
FUNDAMENTAL FORECASTING

While technical analysis concentrates on the study of market
action, fundamental analysis focuses on the economic forces of
supply and demand that cause prices to move higher, lower, or
stay the same. The fundamental approach examines all of the rel-
evant factors affecting the price of a market in order to determine
the intrinsic value of that market. The intrinsic value is what the
fundamentals indicate something is actually worth based on the
law of supply and demand. If this intrinsic value is under the cur-
rent market price, then the market is overpriced and should be
sold. If market price is below the intrinsic value, then the market
is undervalued and should be bought.

Both of these approaches to market forecasting attempt to
solve the same problem, that is, to determine the direction prices
are likely to move. They just approach the problem from different
directions. The fundamentalist studies the cause of market movement,
while the technician studies the effect. The technician, of course,
believes that the effect is all that he or she wants or needs to know
and that the reasons, or the causes, are unnecessary. The funda-
mentalist always has to know why.

Most traders classify themselves as either technicians or
fundamentalists. In reality, there is a lot of overlap. Many funda-
mentalists have a working knowledge of the basic tenets of chart
analysis. At the same time, many technicians have at least a pass-
ing awareness of the fundamentals. The problem is that the charts
and fundamentals are often in conflict with each other. Usually at
the beginning of important market moves, the fundamentals do


6 Chapter 1

not explain or support what the market seems to be doing. It is at
these critical times in the trend that these two approaches seem
to differ the most. Usually they come back into sync at some
point, but often too late for the trader to act.

One explanation for these seeming discrepancies is that
market price tends to lead the known fundamentals. Stated another
way, market price acts as a leading indicator of the fundamentals or the
conventional wisdom of the moment. While the known funda-
mentals have already been discounted and are already “in the mar-
ket,” prices are now reacting to the unknown fundamentals. Some
of the most dramatic bull and bear markets in history have begun
with little or no perceived change in the fundamentals. By the time
those changes became known, the new trend was well underway.

After a while, the technician develops increased confidence
in his or her ability to read the charts. The technician learns to be
comfortable in a situation where market movement disagrees with
the so-called conventional wisdom. A technician begins to enjoy
being in the minority. He or she knows that eventually the reasons
for market action will become common knowledge. It is just that
the technician isn’t willing to wait for that added confirmation.

In accepting the premises of technical analysis, one can see
why technicians believe their approach is superior to the funda-
mentalists. If a trader had to choose only one of the two
approaches to use, the choice would logically have to be the tech-
nical. Because, by definition, the technical approach includes the
fundamental. If the fundamentals are reflected in market price,
then the study of those fundamentals becomes unnecessary.
Chart reading becomes a shortcut form of fundamental analysis.
The reverse, however, is not true. Fundamental analysis does not
include a study of price action. It is possible to trade financial
markets using just the technical approach. It is doubtful that any-
one could trade off the fundamentals alone with no consideration
of the technical side of the market.

ANALYSIS VERSUS TIMING

This last point is made clearer if the decision making process is
broken down into two separate stages—analysis and timing.


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 7

Because of the high leverage factor in the futures markets, timing
is especially crucial in that arena. It is quite possible to be correct
on the general trend of the market and still lose money. Because
margin requirements are so low in futures trading (usually less
than 10%), a relatively small price move in the wrong direction
can force the trader out of the market with the resulting loss of all
or most of that margin. In stock market trading, by contrast, a
trader who finds him or herself on the wrong side of the market
can simply decide to hold onto the stock, hoping that it will stage
a comeback at some point.

Futures traders don’t have that luxury. A “buy and hold”
strategy doesn’t apply to the futures arena. Both the technical and
the fundamental approach can be used in the first phase—the
forecasting process. However, the question of timing, of deter-
mining specific entry and exit points, is almost purely technical.
Therefore, considering the steps the trader must go through before
making a market commitment, it can be seen that the correct
application of technical principles becomes indispensable at some
point in the process, even if fundamental analysis was applied in
the earlier stages of the decision. Timing is also important in indi-
vidual stock selection and in the buying and selling of stock mar-
ket sector and industry groups.

FLEXIBILITY AND ADAPTABILITY
OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

One of the great strengths of technical analysis is its adaptability
to virtually any trading medium and time dimension. There is no
area of trading in either stocks or futures where these principles
do not apply.

The chartist can easily follow as many markets as desired,
which is generally not true of his or her fundamental counterpart.
Because of the tremendous amount of data the latter must deal
with, most fundamentalists tend to specialize. The advantages
here should not be overlooked.

For one thing, markets go through active and dormant
periods, trending and nontrending stages. The technician can


8 Chapter 1

concentrate his or her attention and resources in those markets
that display strong trending tendencies and choose to ignore the
rest. As a result, the chartist can rotate his or her attention and
capital to take advantage of the rotational nature of the markets.
At different times, certain markets become “hot” and experience
important trends. Usually, those trending periods are followed by
quiet and relatively trendless market conditions, while another
market or group takes over. The technical trader is free to pick and
choose. The fundamentalist, however, who tends to specialize in
only one group, doesn’t have that kind of flexibility. Even if he or
she were free to switch groups, the fundamentalist would have a
much more difficult time doing so than would the chartist.

Another advantage the technician has is the “big picture.”
By following all of the markets, he or she gets an excellent feel for
what markets are doing in general, and avoids the “tunnel vision”
that can result from following only one group of markets. Also,
because so many of the markets have built-in economic relation-
ships and react to similar economic factors, price action in one
market or group may give valuable clues to the future direction of
another market or group of markets.

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
APPLIED TO DIFFERENT
TRADING MEDIUMS

The principles of chart analysis apply to both stocks and futures.
Actually, technical analysis was first applied to the stock market
and later adapted to futures. With the introduction of stock index
futures, the dividing line between these two areas is rapidly disap-
pearing. International stock markets are also charted and analyzed
according to technical principles. (See Figure 1.2.)

Financial futures, including interest rate markets and foreign
currencies, have become enormously popular over the past decade
and have proven to be excellent subjects for chart analysis.

Technical principles play a role in options trading. Technical
forecasting can also be used to great advantage in the hedging
process.


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 9

01/12/79 (*TNA) Tokyo Nikkei Dow 02/27/98

Weekly Line Chart

1500

Chart Support

4000

we eee ee ees

Figure 1.2 | The Japanese stock market charts very well as do most stock
markets around the world.

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS APPLIED
TO DIFFERENT TIME DIMENSIONS

Another strength of the charting approach is its ability to handle
different time dimensions. Whether the user is trading the intra-
day tic-by-tic changes for day trading purposes or trend trading the
intermediate trend, the same principles apply. A time dimension
often overlooked is longer range technical forecasting. The opinion
expressed in some quarters that charting is useful only in the
short term is simply not true. It has been suggested by some that
fundamental analysis should be used for long term forecasting
with technical factors limited to short term timing. The fact is
that longer range forecasting, using weekly and monthly charts
going back several years, has proven to be an extremely useful
application of these techniques.


10 Chapter 1

Once the technical principles discussed in this book are thor-
oughly understood, they will provide the user with tremendous flex-
ibility as to how they can be applied, both from the standpoint of
the medium to be analyzed and the time dimension to be studied.

ECONOMIC FORECASTING

Technical analysis can play a role in economic forecasting. For
example, the direction of commodity prices tells us something
about the direction of inflation. They also give us clues about the
strength or weakness of the economy. Rising commodity prices
generally hint at a stronger economy and rising inflationary pres-
sure. Falling commodity prices usually warn that the economy is
slowing along with inflation. The direction of interest rates is affect-
ed by the trend of commodities. As a result, charts of commodity
markets like gold and oil, along with Treasury Bonds, can tell us a
lot about the strength or weakness of the economy and inflation-
ary expectations. The direction of the U.S. dollar and foreign cur-
rency futures also provide early guidance about the strength or
weakness of the respective global economies. Even more impressive
is the fact that trends in these futures markets usually show up long
before they are reflected in traditional economic indicators that are
released on a monthly or quarterly basis, and usually tell us what
has already happened. As their name implies, futures markets usu-
ally give us insights into the future. The S&P 500 stock market
index has long been counted as an official leading economic indi-
cator. A book by one of the country’s top experts on the business
cycle, Leading Indicators for the 1990s (Moore), makes a compelling
case for the importance of commodity, bond, and stock trends as
economic indicators. All three markets can be studied employing
technical analysis. We'll have more to say on this subject in
Chapter 17, “The Link Between Stocks and Futures.”

TECHNICIAN OR CHARTIST?

There are several different titles applied to practitioners of the
technical approach: technical analyst, chartist, market analyst,


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 11

and visual analyst. Up until recently, they all meant pretty much
the same thing. However, with increased specialization in the
field, it has become necessary to make some further distinctions
and define the terms a bit more carefully. Because virtually all
technical analysis was based on the use of charts up until the last
decade, the terms “technician” and “chartist” meant the same
thing. This is no longer necessarily true.

The broader area of technical analysis is being increas-
ingly divided into two types of practitioners, the traditional
chartist and, for want of a better term, statistical technicians.
Admittedly, there is a lot of overlap here and most technicians
combine both areas to some extent. As in the case of the tech-
nician versus the fundamentalist, most seem to fall into one cat-
egory or the other.

Whether or not the traditional chartist uses quantitative
work to supplement his or her analysis, charts remain the prima-
ry working tool. Everything else is secondary. Charting, of neces-
sity, remains somewhat subjective. The success of the approach
depends, for the most part, on the skill of the individual chartist.
The term “art charting” has been applied to this approach because
chart reading is largely an art.

By contrast, the statistical, or quantitative, analyst takes
these subjective principles, quantifies, tests, and optimizes them
for the purpose of developing mechanical trading systems. These
systems, or trading models, are then programmed into a com-
puter that generates mechanical “buy” and “sell” signals. These
systems range from the simple to the very complex. However, the
intent is to reduce or completely eliminate the subjective human
element in trading, to make it more scientific. These statisticians
may or may not use price charts in their work, but they are con-
sidered technicians as long as their work is limited to the study
of market action.

Even computer technicians can be subdivided further into
those who favor mechanical systems, or the “black box”
approach, and those who use computer technology to develop
better technical indicators. The latter group maintains control
over the interpretation of those indicators and also the decision
making process.


12 Chapter 1

One way of distinguishing between the chartist and the
statistician is to say that all chartists are technicians, but not all
technicians are chartists. Although these terms are used inter-
changeably throughout this book, it should be remembered that
charting represents only one area in the broader subject of tech-
nical analysis.

A BRIEF COMPARISON OF
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS IN
STOCKS AND FUTURES

A question often asked is whether technical analysis as applied to
futures is the same as the stock market. The answer is both yes and
no. The basic principles are the same, but there are some significant
differences. The principles of technical analysis were first applied to
stock market forecasting and only later adapted to futures. Most of
the basic tools—bar charts, point and figure charts, price patterns,
volume, trendlines, moving averages, and oscillators, for example—
are used in both areas. Anyone who has learned these concepts in
either stocks or futures wouldn’t have too much trouble making the
adjustment to the other side. However, there are some general areas
of difference having more to do with the different nature of stocks
and futures than with the actual tools themselves.

Pricing Structure

The pricing structure in futures is much more complicated than in
stocks. Each commodity is quoted in different units and incre-
ments. Grain markets, for example, are quoted in cents per bushel,
livestock markets in cents per pound, gold and silver in dollars per
ounce, and interest rates in basis points. The trader must learn the
contract details of each market: which exchange it is traded on,
how each contract is quoted, what the minimum and maximum
price increments are, and what these price increments are worth.

Limited Life Span

Unlike stocks, futures contracts have expiration dates. A March
1999 Treasury Bond contract, for example, expires in March of


Philosophy of Technical Analysis 13

1999. The typical futures contract trades for about a year and a
half before expiration. Therefore, at any one time, at least a half
dozen different contract months are trading in the same com-
modity at the same time. The trader must know which contracts
to trade and which ones to avoid. (This is explained later in this
book.) This limited life feature causes some problems for longer
range price forecasting. It necessitates the continuing need for
obtaining new charts once old contracts stop trading. The chart of
an expired contract isn’t of much use. New charts must be
obtained for the newer contracts along with their own technical
indicators. This constant rotation makes the maintenance of an
ongoing chart library a good deal more difficult. For computer
users, it also entails greater time and expense by making it neces-
sary to be constantly obtaining new historical data as old con-
tracts expire.

Lower Margin Requirements

This is probably the most important difference between stocks
and futures. All futures are traded on margin, which is usually less
than 10% of the value of the contract. The result of these low mar-
gin requirements is tremendous leverage. Relatively small price
moves in either direction tend to become magnified in their
impact on overall trading results. For this reason, it is possible to
make or lose large sums of money very quickly in futures. Because
a trader puts up only 10% of the value of the contract as margin,
then a 10% move in either direction will either double the trad-
er’s money or wipe it out. By magnifying the impact of even
minor market moves, the high leverage factor sometimes makes
the futures markets seem more volatile than they actually are.
When someone says, for example, that he or she was “wiped out”
in the futures market, remember that he or she only committed
10% in the first place.
