
The fact is that lower returns harshly magnify the
relentless arithmetic of excessive mutual fund costs,
even ignoring all those unnecessary taxes. Why? While
costs of 2.5 percentage points would consume “only”
16 percent of a 15 percent return and “only” 25 percent of a 10 percent return, such costs would consume
nearly 40 percent of a 7 percent nominal return and (I
hope you’re sitting down) nearly 60 percent of the 4.5
real return on stocks that rational expectations suggest. Unless the fund industry begins to change—by
reducing management fees, operating expenses, sales

W H E N T H E G O O D T I M E S N O LO N G E R RO L L

[75]

charges, and portfolio turnover, with its attendant
costs—the typical actively managed fund appears to be
a singularly unfortunate choice for investors.
The 1.2 percent expected annual real return that the
average equity fund might deliver is unacceptable. What
can equity fund investors do to avoid being trapped by these
relentless rules of arithmetic, so devastating when applied
to future returns that are likely to be well below long-term
norms? There are at least five options for improving on it:
(1) Select winning funds on the basis of their long-term past
records. (2) Select winning funds on the basis of their recent short-term performance. (3) Get some professional advice in selecting funds that are likely to outpace the market.
(4) Select funds with rock-bottom costs, minimal portfolio
turnover, and no sales loads. Or (5) Select a low-cost index
fund that simply holds the stock market portfolio.
In Chapters 8 through 12, we’ll examine each of these
options.
Don’t Take My Word for It
Financial advisers seem to agree with my appraisal of
future returns. In the latter part of 2006, in a speech
before these professionals at their Chicago convention, I polled the audience. The clear consensus:
stock returns of 6.5 percent over the coming decade.
(continued)

[76]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Investment bankers are of a similar mind. When
Henry McVey, market strategist for Morgan Stanley, polled the chief financial officers of the 100
largest corporations in the United States, they expected a future return on stocks of 6.6 percent. (One
wonders how these executives can justify their implicit
assumption that the stocks in their companies’ pension plans will return 11 percent per year.)
Other highly regarded investment strategists also
share my general view that we are facing a new era of
subdued investment returns. Gary P. Brinson, CFA,
former president of UBS Investment Management, is
one whose assessment about future returns echoes my
own. “Today’s investment market fundamentals and financial variables clearly suggest that future real returns
from a mixed portfolio of stocks, bonds, and other assets (such as real estate) are unlikely to be greater than
4.5 to 5.0 percent. With an inflation assumption of
2.5 percent, nominal returns greater than 7.0 to 7.5
percent for these portfolios are unrealistic. What cannot be explained is why people are willing to pay the
considerable fees (involved). Perhaps they are paying
for historical returns, for hope, or out of desperation...
“For the markets in total, the amount of value
added, or alpha, must sum to zero. One person’s
positive alpha is someone else’s negative alpha.
Collectively, for the institutional, mutual fund,
and private banking arenas, the aggregate alpha re-

W H E N T H E G O O D T I M E S N O LO N G E R RO L L

turn will be zero or negative after transaction
costs. Aggregate fees for the active managers
should thus be, at most, the fees associated withpassive management. Yet, these fees are several
times larger than fees that would be associated
with passive management. This illogical conundrum will ultimately have to end.”
Or consider these words by Richard M. Ennis,
CFA, Ennis Knupp + Associates, and editor of the
Financial Analysts Journal: “Today, with interest
rates near 4 percent and stocks yielding less than
2 percent, few among us expect double-digit investment returns for any extended period in the near
future. Yet, we live with a legacy of that era: historically high fee structures brought on by trillions
upon trillions of dollars seeking growth during the
boom and shelter in its aftermath. Second, facing
the dual challenge of market efficiency and high
costs, investors will continue to shift assets from
active to passive management. And third, some of
active management’s true believers will shift assets
from expensive products to more reasonably priced
products. Impetus for this move will be the growing
realization that high fees sap the performance potential of even skillful managers.”

[77]

te r Ei g

h

t

ap
Ch

Selecting Long-Term
Winners


Don’t Look for the Needle—
Buy the Hays tack.

SELECTING WINNING FUNDS in advance is more difficult than it looks. Sure, there are always some winners
that survive over the years. And if we pore over records
of past performance, it is easy to find them. The mutual
funds we hear the most about are those that have lit up
the skies with their glow of past success. We don’t hear
much about those that did well for a while—even for a
long while—and then faltered. And when they falter, they
often go out of business, consigned to the dustbin of mutual fund history. But easy as it is to identify past winners,

S E L E C T I N G LO N G - T E R M W I N N E R S

[79]

there is little evidence that such performance persists in
the future.
Let’s begin by considering the records of funds that have
won over the long term. Exhibit 8.1 goes back to 1970 and
shows the 36-year records of the 355 equity funds that existed at the start of that period. The first and most obvious
surprise awaits you: fully 223 of those funds—almost twothirds—have gone out of business. If your fund doesn’t last
for the long term, how can you invest for the long term?
You can safely assume it was not the best performers
that have gone to their well-earned demise; it was the laggards that disappeared. Sometimes their managers
EXHIBIT 8.1
250

Winners, Losers, and Failures: Long-Term Returns
of Mutual Funds, 1970 –2005
Number of
Equity Funds

223

200

1970: 355
2005: 132

Non-Survivors
150
100
50
0

6

6

−4%
or
less

−3%

20

28

−2%

−1%

60 Losers

27

0 to
−1%

21

15

7

0

2

0 to
1%

1%

2%

3%

4%
or
more

48 Market
Equivalent

24 Winners

[80]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

moved on. (The average fund portfolio manager, in fact,
lasts just five years.) Sometimes giant financial conglomerates acquired their management companies, and the
new owners decided to “clean up the product line.”
(These conglomerates, truth told, are in business primarily to earn a return on their capital, not on the fund
investor’s capital.) Funds with lagging performance saw
their investors flee, and they became a drag on their
managers’ profits. There are many reasons that funds
disappear, few of them good.

A death in the family.

Even funds with solid long-term records go out of
business. Often, their management companies are acquired by marketing companies whose ambitious executives conclude that, however good the funds’ early records,
they are not exciting enough to draw huge amounts of capital from new investors. The funds have simply outlived
their usefulness. In other cases, a few years of faltering
performance does the job. Sadly, the second oldest fund in
the entire mutual fund industry was a recent victim of
these attitudes, put out of business by a new owner of its
management company. After surviving all the tempestuous
markets of the past 80 years: State Street Investment
Trust, 1925–2005, R.I.P. As one of the longest-serving

S E L E C T I N G LO N G - T E R M W I N N E R S

[81]

participants in the fund industry, who clearly remembers
the classy record of this fund over so many years, I regard
the loss of State Street as a death in the family.
In any event, 223 of the equity funds of 1970 are
gone, mostly the poor performers. Another 60 remain,
yet significantly underperformed the S&P 500 by more
than 1 percentage point per year. Together, then, 283
funds—nearly 80 percent of the funds among those original 355—have, one way or another, failed to distinguish
themselves. Another 48 funds provided returns within
one percentage point, plus or minus, of the return of the
S&P 500—market-matchers, as it were.
That leaves just 24 mutual funds—only one out of
e very 14—that outpaced the market by more than one
percentage point per year. Let’s face it: those are terrible
odds! What’s more, the margin of superiority of 15 of
those 24 funds over the S&P 500 was less than 2 percentage points per year, a superiority that may be due as much
to luck as to skill.
That still leaves us with nine solid long-term winners.
It is a tremendous accomplishment to outpace the market
by 2 percentage points or more of annual return over 35
years. Make no mistake about that. But, here a curious—
perhaps almost obvious—fact emerges (Exhibit 8.2). Six
of those nine winners achieved their superiority many
years ago, often when they were of small size.

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

[82]

Exhibit 8.2

Now, About Those Nine Winners

Annual Performance vs. S&P 500 Since Fund’s Peak
0
N/A

N/A

N/A

−0.4

7

8

9

1983

2005

1982

Percent

−0.8
−2

−1.7

−1.9
−2.8

−4

−3.9

−6
1

2

3

4

5

6

Fund
1991

1983

1993

2005 1993 2005
Year of Peak

When the accomplishments of these nine successful
mutual funds were noticed by investors, cash poured in,
and they got large. But, as Warren Buffett reminds us, “a
fat wallet is the enemy of superior returns.” And so it was.
As they grew, the records of six of them turned lackluster.
One fund reached its performance peak way back in 1982,
24 long years ago. On balance, it has lagged ever since.
Two others peaked in 1983. The remaining three peaked
no more recently than 1993, more than a decade ago.
(One of these was Peter Lynch’s legendary Fidelity Magellan Fund, which has now been struggling for 13 years.)
That leaves just three funds. Only three out of the
355 equity funds that started the race in 1970—only 8⁄10 of

S E L E C T I N G LO N G - T E R M W I N N E R S

[83]

1 percent—have both survived and mounted a record of
sustained excellence. Identified in Exhibit 8.2 as funds 4,
6, and 8, I now salute them by name: Davis New York
Venture, Fidelity Contrafund, and Franklin Mutual
Shares. Hail to the victors!

Only three out of the 355 equity funds that
started the race in 1970—8⁄10 of 1 percent—
have survived and mounted a record
of sustained excellence.

Significantly, while the portfolio managers for these
three funds have changed over the years, the changes have
been infrequent. Succeeding his father Shelby C. Davis,
Chris Davis has managed the Davis Fund since 1991
(since 1996, with Kenneth Feinberg). Will Danoff has
been the lead manager of Fidelity Contrafund since 1990,
and Michael Price managed Franklin until 1997, followed
by a successor who ran the fund until 2005.
But before you rush out to invest in these three funds
with such truly remarkable long-term records, think about
the next 35 years. Think about the odds that they will continue to outperform. Think about their present size.
Think about the fact that within that time frame they are
all virtually certain to have at least several new managers.
Think, too, about the odds that these funds will even exist

[84]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

35 years hence. It is a changing and competitive world out
there in mutual fund land, and no one knows what the future holds. But I wish these managers and the shareholders of the funds they run the very best of luck.

Before you rush out to invest in these three funds
with such truly remarkable long-term records,
think about the next 35 years.

Conspicuous by its absence from this list of winning
funds is Legg Mason Value Trust, managed since its 1982
inception by legendary investment professional supreme,
Bill Miller. Since the fund did not begin operations until
1982, it is not on my list. But it provides several lessons
about fund performance. Miller, something of a contrarian, is the only manager in the past four decades to outperform the S&P 500 for a truly remarkable 15
consecutive years (1991 to 2005, inclusive). Despite his
great ability, the ever-humble Miller would be, I think, the
first to agree with the late Harvard University paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould’s tenet that “long streaks are extraordinary luck imposed on great skill.”
Just like Joe DiMaggio’s remarkable 56-game hitting
streak in baseball, the longer Miller’s streak extended,
the more attention it got, and the more investor dollars
flowed into the fund. But in 2006, his streak came to an

S E L E C T I N G LO N G - T E R M W I N N E R S

[85]

end, even as did the streak of the Yankee Clipper years
earlier. With the S&P 500 up 15.8 percent in 2006, Legg
Mason Value was up only 5.8 percent, trailing the index
by 10.0 percentage points, putting something of a dent in
the long-term record.
Through 2005, the fund’s annual rate of return had
averaged 15.3 percent per year, compared with 12.9 percent for the S&P 500, a nice annual edge of 2.4 percentage points. But by 2006, the gap had shrunk to 1.9
percentage points, with an annual time-weighted return
averaging 14.9 percent, compared with 13.0 percent for
the index. Unsurprisingly, the major inflows of investor
capital did not begin until 1997, the seventh year of the
streak. So the actual return earned by Legg Mason
Value’s shareholders was a sharply lower 10.3 percent, far
below its reported return. Is Miller’s reversion toward and
then below the market mean temporary or enduring? Will
the fund be afflicted with the same malaise that attacked
six of those nine long-term winners just discussed? Or is it
merely a brief interval of bad luck. Who can know?
Whatever the case, the odds in favor of owning a consistently successful equity fund are less than one out of a
hundred. However one slices and dices the data, there can
be no question that funds with long-serving portfolio managers and records of consistent excellence are the exception rather than the rule in the mutual fund industry. The

[86]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

simple fact is that selecting a mutual fund that will outpace
the stock market over the long term is, using Cervantes’
wonderful observation, like “looking for a needle in the
haystack.” So I offer you Bogle’s corollary: “Don’t look
for the needle in the hays tack. Just buy the hays tack!”

Funds with long-serving portfolio managers and
records of consistent excellence are the exception
rather than the rule in the mutual fund industry.

The haystack, of course, is the entire stock market
portfolio, readily available through a low-cost index fund.
The return of such a fund would have roughly matched or
exceeded the returns of 346 of the 355 funds that began the
35-year competition described earlier in this chapter. And I
see no reason that the same fund cannot achieve a roughly
commensurate achievement in the years to come—not
through any legerdemain, but merely through the relentless
rules of arithmetic that you now must know so well.
We know that the index fund will deliver substantially
all of the stock market’s return. But with all the fund manager changes that will inevitably be forthcoming for actively managed funds; with all the funds that will die; with
the successful funds drawing capital in amounts that will
preclude their future success; and with our inability to be
certain how much of a fund’s performance is based on luck

S E L E C T I N G LO N G - T E R M W I N N E R S

[87]

and how much on skill, there is simply no way to assure
success by picking the funds that will beat the market,
even by looking to their past performance over the long
term. In fund performance, the past is rarely prologue.

Don’t Take My Word for It
Need more advice? With his customary wisdom,
Paul Samuelson sums up the difficulty of selecting
superior managers in this parable. “Suppose it was
demonstrated that one out of twenty alcoholics
could learn to become a moderate social drinker.
The experienced clinician would answer, ‘Even if
true, act as if it were false, for you will never identify
that one in twenty, and in the attempt five in twenty
will be ruined.’ Investors should forsake the search for
such tiny needles in huge haystacks.”
In the Wall Street Journal, long-time “Getting
Going” columnist Jonathan Clements asks, “Can
you pick the winners?” The answer: “Even fans of
actively managed funds often concede that most
other investors would be better off in index funds.
But buoyed by abundant self-confidence, these
folks aren’t about to give up on actively managed
funds themselves. A tad delusional? I think so.
Picking the best-performing funds is ‘like trying to
predict the dice before you roll them down the craps
(continued)

[88]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

table,’ says an investment adviser in Boca Raton,
FL. ‘I can’t do it. The public can’t do it.’
“Still, I figure we shouldn’t discourage fans of
actively managed funds. With all their buying and
selling, active investors ensure the market is reasonably efficient. That makes it possible for the rest of
us to do the sensible thing, which is to index. Want
to join me in this parasitic behavior? To build a
well-diversified portfolio, you might stash 70 percent of your stock portfolio into a (Dow Jones)
Wilshire 5000-index fund and the remaining 30
percent in an international-index fund.”
If these comments don’t persuade you about the
hazards of focusing on past returns of mutual funds,
just believe what fund organizations tell you. Every
single firm in the fund industry acknowledges my
conclusion that past fund performance is of no help
in projecting the future returns of mutual funds. In
every mutual fund prospectus, in every sales promotional folder, and in every mutual fund advertisement (albeit in print almost too small to read), the
following warning appears: “Past performance is no
guarantee of future results.” Believe it!

ap
Ch

t e r N in

e

Yesterday’s Winners,
Tomorrow’s Losers


Fooled by Randomness*

IN SELECTING MUTUAL FUNDS, most fund investors seem
to rely, not on sustained performance over the long term, but
on exciting performance over the short term. (Exhibits 5.2
and 5.3 in Chapter 5 reinforce this point.) Studies show that
95 percent of all investor dollars flow to funds rated four or
five stars by Morningstar, the statistical service most broadly
used by investors in evaluating fund returns.
These “star ratings” are based on a composite of a
fund’s record over the previous 3-, 5-, and 10-year periods. (For younger funds, the ratings may cover as few as
* The title of a provocative book by Nassim Nicholas Taleb.

[90]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

three years.) As a result, the previous two years’ performance alone accounts for 35 percent of the rating of a
fund with 10 years of history and 66 percent for a fund in
business from three to five years, a heavy bias in favor of
recent short-term returns.
How successful are fund choices based on the number of stars awarded for such short-term achievements?
Not very! According to investment analyst Mark Hulbert, a mutual fund portfolio continuously adjusted to
hold only Morningstar’s five-star funds earned an annual
return of just 6.9 percent between 1994 and 2004, nearly
40 percent below the 11.0 percent return on the Total
Stock Market Index.* To make matters worse, according
to Hulbert, these highly rated funds were assuming even
more risk than the market (average monthly volatility in
asset value: 16 percent for the funds compared with 15
percent for the stock market).
Sadly, the orientation of fund investors toward recent
short-term returns works worst in strong bull markets.
Exhibit 9.1 shows the top 10 performers among the 851
equity funds in operation during the great “new economy” market bubble of 1997 to 1999. A wondrous group
* In fairness, in 2002 Morningstar changed the basis for its rating system to
reflect performance versus peers with similar objectives, rather than funds
as a group. The relative performance of the four- and five-star funds has
improved since then.

Y E S T E R DAY ’ S W I N N E R S , T O M O R R OW ’ S L O S E R S
EXHIBIT 9.1

[91]

Picking the Short-Term Winners: Annual Returns,
1997–2002
1997–1999

2000 –2002

Rank*

TimeWeighted

1. Rydex OTC
2. RS Emerging Growth
3. MorganStanley Capital Op
4. Janus Olympus
5. Janus Twenty
6. Managers Capital Appreciation
7. Janus Mercury
8. Fidelity Aggressive Growth
9. Van Wagoner Emerging Growth
10. WM Growth
Average

65.8%
62.5
59.5
58.5
54.8
53.3
51.5
51.5
50.0
49.7
55%

Rank*
841.
832.
845.
791.
801.
798.
790.
843.
851.
793.

TimeWeighted
−37.1%
−31.2
−40.7
−27.4
−28.6
−28.2
−27.2
−39.1
−51.7
−27.9
-34%

* Based on 851 funds with more than $100 million of assets.

they were! Focused on Internet, telecom, and technology
stocks, these funds generated an average return of 55 percent per year during the upswing—a cumulative return of
279 percent for the full three years. Remarkable!

“The first shall be last.” And they were.

Well, you can guess what came next. The bubble burst,
and, one by one, just as the Good Book warns, “The first
shall be last.” Over the next three years (2000 to 2002 inclusive), every one of the original top 10 funds plummeted into
the bottom 60, with not a single fund in the original top 10

[92]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

ranked higher than 790. Fund 9 on the upside actually was
last—851 on the downside. Fund 1 dropped in rank to 841;
fund 2 dropped to 832, and fund 3 tumbled to 845. On average, the one-time 10 top funds in the bull market were outperformed by 95 percent of their peers in the bear market
that followed. For investors who believed that the past would
be prologue, it was not a pretty result.
Please remember that even a single annual gain of 55
percent followed by a loss of 34 percent doesn’t leave the
investor with a 21 percent gain. More like 2 percent. (Do
the arithmetic.) And with 3 years of average annual gains
of 55 percent on the upside and annual losses averaging 34
percent on the downside (Exhibit 9.2), it was much worse.
These aggressive new-economy funds ended up with a cumulative positive return averaging 13 percent for the full 6year period, a far cry from the S&P 500’s cumulative gain
of 30 percent. Yet while that return was not particularly
satisfactory in terms of the traditional returns reported by
the average equity fund, it was hardly a disaster.
But for the shareholders of the funds, it was a disaster. By investing after seeing those mouth-watering cumulative returns that had averaged almost 280 percent,
achieved in a soaring bull market, nearly all the buyers of
these funds had missed the upside. Then, not a moment
too soon, they caught the full force of the downside.
Their funds tumbled by an astonishing average of 70 per-
