In Figure 9.9, we compare bitcoin, ether, and dash’s volatility since the end
of 2015. Bitcoin has the lowest volatility because its markets are the most liquid
and it has the greatest diversity of support from different exchanges and asset
trading pairs. While bitcoin has sustained its low volatility, ether has come
down significantly, and dash has varied widely. We included dash because we
posit that it will continue to have problems with volatility over time. While it
is gaining in acceptance, which should decrease its volatility, its software architecture creates a liquidity problem by requiring masternodes (entities similar
to miners, but unique to Dash’s architecture) to lock up a large amount of the
dash outstanding. Such a requirement impedes the liquidity of dash’s markets,
thereby making the markets more prone to volatility.
ETH

DASH

BTC

18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
Mar-17

Feb-17

Jan-17

Dec-16

Nov-16

Oct-16

Sep-16

Aug-16

Jul-16

Jun-16

May-16

Apr-16

Mar-16

Feb-16

Jan-16

Dec-15

Nov-15

0%

Figure 9.9 n Daily volatility of bitcoin, dash, and ether
Data sourced from CryptoCompare

Interestingly, just because an asset has a rapid price increase doesn’t mean
it must do so in a volatile manner. For example, through 2016, bitcoin more
than doubled in price but decreased in volatility. Its daily gains and occasional
losses were close enough to the mean not to register as overly volatile. Such
behavior can indicate big traders are taking positions in an asset; often they
gauge how much they are moving the price of an asset and make sure not to do
so above a certain percentage point. In this way, they minimize volatility and
slowly ease into a big position over a series of days, weeks, or months.
As these assets mature and their volatility decreases, recall that this can help
boost the Sharpe ratio. Recall that since the Sharpe ratio is absolute returns13

Burniske 02.indd 131

9/9/17 1:46 PM

132 CRYPTOASSETS

divided by volatility, if volatility comes down, then the returns don’t have to be
as stupendously good for the Sharpe ratio to still be a standout.

MARKETPLACE BEHAVIOR: CORRELATIONS
As an asset class is first emerging, it will be uncorrelated with the broader
capital markets because there is not much overlap between the early adopters
of that asset and the broader capital market investors. This is exactly what we
saw with bitcoin when it was first invented and was only known to a small core
group of developers and adopters (see Figure 9.10).

Capital Markets

Cryptoassets

Figure 9.10 n Cryptoassets as an emerging asset class

At that time, with minimal overlap between bitcoin and capital market
investors, bitcoin’s correlation with other common asset classes was close to
zero; events that made the broader capital markets move had no effect on bitcoin, and vice versa (see Figure 9.11).
As bitcoin’s use grew, so too did its fame. It is now routinely discussed in
publications such as the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, and Forbes
on a near-weekly basis. As a result, not only has it become part of the conversation, it’s also becoming an investment vehicle for a larger audience within
the broader capital markets.14 A graphical depiction of the increased reach of
cryptoassets can be seen in Figure 9.12.
Bitcoin’s increased acceptance among capital market investors explains
why it has surged on news that could be detrimental to other markets, such as
Brexit, the surprise Trump election win, and the devaluation of the Chinese

Burniske 02.indd 132

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Evolution of Cryptoasset Market Behavior

133

1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.0

–0.04

0.02

0.00

–0.02

0.00

S&P 500

Gold

US Real Estate

Oil

US Bonds

–0.20
–0.40
–0.60
–0.80
–1.00

Figure 9.11 n Bitcoin’s average 30-day rolling correlation with other major assets
from January 2011 to January 2017
Data sourced from Bloomberg and CoinDesk

Capital Markets

Cryptoassets

Figure 9.12 n Cryptoassets as a mature asset class

yuan.15 Despite the many PBoC interventions, Chinese citizens used bitcoin
to protect themselves against the erosion in value of their national currency.
Figure 9.13 holds the key to inferring such behavior. On the left side of the
figure, the y-axis shows the number of Chinese yuan needed to buy one dollar.
As this number increases, the value of the Chinese yuan decreases, because
more yuan are needed to buy one dollar. On the right side of the figure, the

Burniske 02.indd 133

9/9/17 1:46 PM

134 CRYPTOASSETS

USD/CNY

Bitcoin

6.9

900

6.8

800

500

6.5

400

6.4

300

11/9/16

10/9/16

9/9/16

8/9/16

7/9/16

6/9/16

5/9/16

0
4/9/16

6.1
3/9/16

100
2/9/16

6.2

1/9/16

200

12/9/15

6.3

11/9/15

USD/CNY

600

6.6

Bitcoin (USD)

700

6.7

Figure 9.13 n Bitcoin’s price history in relation to the devaluation of the Chinese yuan
Source: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/01/03/
why-bitcoin-just-had-an-amazing-year/?utm_term=.64a6cfdf7398

price of bitcoin is shown. As the yuan decreases in value, the price of bitcoin
increases. Such a correlation implies that people are likely buying bitcoin to
protect themselves from further devaluation of the yuan.
While we expect to see bitcoin become increasingly correlated—either positively or negatively—with other broadly used asset classes, as new cryptoassets
are born, they will likely have a low to zero correlation with the broader capital
markets. At best, what they will show is some form of correlation with bitcoin,
as it is of the same asset class. It should be expected that examples within an
asset class will move together in some fashion. For example, leading up to the
decision on the Winklevoss bitcoin ETF on March 10, 2017, bitcoin became
increasingly correlated with ether and monero, and increasingly negatively
correlated with litecoin (see Figure 9.14).
Since litecoin is such a close derivative of bitcoin, investors likely became
concerned that people would rotate out of litecoin and move into bitcoin if
the bitcoin ETF was approved. Ether and monero, on the other hand, are significantly different cryptoassets and therefore are held as complementary to
bitcoin in a crypto portfolio. As bitcoin rose and fell, so too did these assets.
This reinforces the need for the innovative investor to become knowledgeable
about these assets’ specific characteristics and recognize where correlations
may or may not occur.

Burniske 02.indd 134

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Evolution of Cryptoasset Market Behavior

Ethereum (ETH)

Litecoin (LTC)

135

Monero (XMR)

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
3/9/17

3/6/17

3/3/17

2/28/17

2/25/17

2/22/17

2/19/17

2/16/17

2/13/17

2/7/17

2/10/17

2/4/17

2/1/17

1/29/17

1/26/17

1/23/17

1/20/17

1/17/17

1/14/17

1/11/17

–0.2

1/8/17

1/5/17

0

–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1

Figure 9.14 n Bitcoin’s correlation with ether, litecoin, and monero, leading up to the
SEC’s rejection of the Winklevoss ETF
Data sourced from CryptoCompare

We expect to see more of this correlation trend play out. At best, newer
cryptoassets will show some behavior tied to bitcoin and its siblings, either
positively or negatively. Then as the cryptoasset grows, so too will its capital
pool, and soon enough this will overlap with more traditional assets, strengthening its price relationship with the broader capital markets.
Although we’re seeing maturation of these assets and greater overlaps with
others, it’s fair to consider bitcoin and cryptoassets to be in their early stages.
There is still a lack of understanding by most investors. Innovative investors
may be more educated on this topic than most, but they will encounter those
who see cryptoassets as speculative pump-and-dump vehicles or worse. The
next two chapters will address these arguments by putting cryptoassets in the
context of the history of past investment bubbles, scams, and speculation.

Burniske 02.indd 135

9/9/17 1:46 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 02.indd 136

9/9/17 1:46 PM

Chapter 10
The Speculation of Crowds and
“This Time Is Different” Thinking

O

n its path to maturity, bitcoin’s price has experienced euphoric rises and
harrowing drops, as have many cryptoassets. One of the most common complaints among bitcoin and cryptoasset naysayers is that these
fluctuations are driven by the Wild West nature of the markets, implying that
crypto­assets are a strange new breed that can’t be trusted. While each crypto­
asset and its associated markets are at varying levels of maturity, associating
Wild West behavior as unique to cryptoasset markets is misleading at best.
Equities, which many consider to be transacted on the most transparent,
efficient, and fair markets in the world, had a rocky first couple of centuries.
Yes, centuries. Not only were these markets prone to mass speculation, as people raced to buy and sell based on mostly fabricated rags-to-riches stories, but
many times the markets were rigged against participants. Misleading prospectuses, manipulation of share prices, false accounting, and issuance of forged
paper shares all led to losses.1 The reality is that some of the most trusted markets in the world today also had Wild West beginnings.
By examining the most famous examples of markets gone wrong, specifically the sequence of events, the innovative investor is better informed by
history to protect present and future wealth. When patterns reappear, it’s
a good time to exit right, or at least reassess one’s investment strategy. This
thinking is prudent with regard to any investment, including a venture into
cryptoassets.

137

Burniske 02.indd 137

9/9/17 1:46 PM

138 CRYPTOASSETS

These examples also show that cryptoassets are not going through bizarre
growing pains unique to them. Instead, they are experiencing the same evolutionary process that new asset classes over hundreds of years have had to go
through as they matured. For those interested in a thorough history of such
events, we highly recommend Edward Chancellor’s Devil Take the Hindmost:
A History of Financial Speculation.
While the way in which markets become dangerous to investors changes
over time, and often becomes less insidious the more the asset and its associated markets mature, the potential for markets to destabilize never disappears.
Much of the world learned that lesson during the financial crisis of 2008.
Broadly, we categorize five main patterns that lead to markets destabilizing:
•
•
•
•
•

The speculation of crowds
“This time is different”
Ponzi schemes
Misleading information from asset issuers
Cornering

The first two will be detailed in this chapter, while the latter three we reserve for
the next chapter. In addition to historical examples from decades past, we also
give examples of how these patterns have manifested in cryptoasset markets.

THE SPECULATION OF CROWDS
While often given a bad name, speculation in and of itself is not a bad thing.
For millennia, speculation has been integral to markets and trading, with
some of the earliest evidence coming from second-century BC Rome.2 The
root of the word speculate comes from the Latin specular, which means “to
spy out, watch, observe, examine, explore.”3 Speculators are keenly focused
on the movement of the market, observing its swings and taking action
accordingly.
Speculators, generally, differ from investors in the duration they intend to
hold assets. They do not buy an asset with the intent to hold it for years. Rather,
they buy the asset for an abbreviated period before selling it likely to the next
speculator. Sometimes they do this to capitalize on short-term information
they believe will move the market, other times they do it because they expect
to ride the momentum of the market, regardless of its fundamentals. In short,
they try to profit within the roller-coaster ride.

Burniske 02.indd 138

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

139

In comparison, the innovative investor diligently investigates the fundamentals of value for investing, and exits that investment when the markets no
longer appear rational.
In our view, no matter the investment, it’s important to discern when one
is investing and when one is speculating. Benjamin Graham and David Dodd
attempted to define the difference between investing and speculation in their
book Security Analysis 4: “An investment operation is one which, upon thorough
analysis, promises safety of principal and a satisfactory return. Operations not
meeting these requirements are speculative.”
In his book The Intelligent Investor,5 Graham recognized that speculation
would always be present in the investing world, but he saw a need to distinguish between “good” and “bad” speculation.6 He wrote, “There is intelligent
speculation as there is intelligent investing. But there are many ways in which
speculation may be unintelligent.”
While speculators have often been scorned, they were perhaps most
famously denigrated by Franklin D. Roosevelt in his inaugural address on
March 4, 1933. As America was struggling through the Great Depression,
which many pinned on the stock market crash of 1929, there was strong
resentment against speculators. Every crisis loves a scapegoat. In his speech,
Roosevelt called them “money changers” to invoke religious judgment:
Primarily this is because rulers of the exchange of mankind’s
goods have failed through their own stubbornness and their own
incompetence, have admitted their failure, and have abdicated.
Practices of the unscrupulous money changers stand indicted
in the court of public opinion, rejected by the hearts and minds
of men.
True they have tried, but their efforts have been cast in the
pattern of an outworn tradition. Faced by failure of credit they
have proposed only the lending of more money. Stripped of the
lure of profit by which to induce our people to follow their false
leadership, they have resorted to exhortations, pleading tearfully
for restored confidence. They know only the rules of a generation
of self-seekers. They have no vision, and when there is no vision
the people perish.
The money changers have fled from their high seats in the
temple of our civilization. We may now restore that temple to the

Burniske 02.indd 139

9/9/17 1:46 PM

140 CRYPTOASSETS
ancient truths. The measure of the restoration lies in the extent
to which we apply social values more noble than mere monetary
profit.7

While Roosevelt’s judgment is understandable, market realities show that
speculation has its place in the investment world. Speculators often jump on
opportunities more quickly than does a typical investor, which begins the process of pricing new information into the value of an asset. In seeking to profit
from opportunity, speculators help drive the search between buyers and sellers
for a mutually agreed upon price. When a shortage of an asset is on the horizon, whether it be energy commodities or electronic hardware, speculators
will quickly bid up the price of that good. As a result, more suppliers are drawn
to the market, accelerating the alleviation of the shortage in classic supply and
demand economics.
When it comes to innovation, such as the introduction of railroads, automobiles, or the Internet, speculation served to allocate money to the rapid
buildout of the infrastructures necessary to support these sweeping innovations. Speculators are the ones who first allocate money because they have
the highest tolerance for risk and are always on the lookout for new information. While speculation typically ends with a supply glut because too much
money eventually pours into the innovation, the glut is often temporary. The
arrival and implementation of copious amounts of capital may lead to an
excess of capacity, but as the innovation gains mass adoption over the following decades, the abundance of infrastructure proves useful. Such was the case
with the rapid buildout of railways in Europe in the mid-1800s and the deployment of fiber optic cables to support the Internet in the 1990s.
Single speculators, or small groups of them, typically do not destabilize
markets. It is when the groups turn into crowds that the negative ramifications
build. In this sense, the vitriol should not be directed so much at speculation,
but instead at crowd behavior that overtakes the capital markets.
Crowd theory was pioneered by Gustave Le Bon, whose most famous work
was The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind. In his later book The Psychology
of Revolution, Le Bon wrote:
Man, as part of a multitude, is a very different being from the
same man as an isolated individual. His conscious individuality vanishes in the unconscious personality of the crowd. . . .

Burniske 02.indd 140

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

141

Among the other characteristics of crowds, we must note their
infinite credulity and exaggerated sensibility, their short-sightedness, and their incapacity to respond to the influences of reason.
Affirmation, contagion, repetition, and prestige constitute almost
the only means of persuading them. Reality and experience have
no effect upon them.8

These characteristics are dangerous in the context of a market. Credulity, or
to be more direct, gullibility, leads the masses to readily believe what they are
told, whether by fellow speculators or the management behind different assets
coming to market.
Credulity is often what draws individual speculators to the crowd, and
once there, the speculator is trapped within groupthink. The four characteristics of persuasion Le Bon mentions only exacerbate the situation:
Affirmation leads the credulous to more strongly believe in their strategies
when the market continues to go up, and that thinking spreads like a contagion. This pattern is repeated, again and again, as the speculators chase
the returns of the most prestigious of assets. Unfortunately, when the market
turns and the prestige is gone, the contagion of terror spreads just as quickly
through the speculative crowd.

Tulipmania
The most famous instance of mass speculation in a commodity happened in
the Dutch Republic in the 1630s. As with most periods of mass speculation,
the time was right. With their merchants fueling trade, the Dutch enjoyed
the highest salaries of any in Europe, financial innovation was in the air, and
money was free-flowing. Shares of the Dutch East India Company had been
rewarding shareholders handsomely for their investments.9 Fueled by enthusiasm, wealthy citizens poured money into properties, leading to a robust
housing market. The ongoing appreciation of asset values created an excess
of wealth to fund further asset purchases, setting up a positively reinforcing
feedback loop into asset bubble territory.10
While the wealthy sowed the grounds for an asset bubble, initially not
everyone could take part. Dutch East India shares were expensive and illiquid,
making them inaccessible to all but the rich, and the same went for prized
properties.

Burniske 02.indd 141

9/9/17 1:46 PM

142 CRYPTOASSETS

A tulip, on the other hand, was much more affordable. Yet due to a quirk
of nature, an affordable tulip had the potential to morph into one that would
make its owner rich. A virus transmitted by aphids turned solid-colored tulips
into a prized variegated variety, with streaks of lighter hues through darker
colors, resembling flames.11 The cause of such variegation was not known at
the time and so lent itself to speculation, as people tried to predict which tulips
would develop the unique coloration.
On the other side of the transformation, however, was death, as the virus
eventually killed the tulip. Speculators, therefore, passed the tulips around like
hot potatoes, hoping they could sell them to the next speculator for a higher
price, until the last person was left with a claim on a dead tulip.
Tulips had promised value since their introduction to Europe in the
mid-1500s, but it was not until 1634 and the spread of the virus that prices
increased exponentially, causing what is commonly referred to as Tulipmania.
What began with small groups of speculators turned into crowds of speculators, as outsiders from other countries were drawn to Dutch tulip markets
upon hearing stories of the immense riches to be gained. Meanwhile, the experienced withdrew from participation or shunned the tulip trade, as explained
by Chancellor:
The wealthy amateur bulb collectors, who had long shown a
readiness to pay vast sums for the rarer varieties, withdrew their
custom as prices began to soar, while the great Amsterdam merchants continued investing their trading profits in town houses,
East India stock, or bills of exchange—for them, tulips remained
merely an expression of wealth, not a means to that end.12

Since much of a tulip’s life is spent as a bulb and not a blossom, it lends itself
to a futures market, which the Dutch called a windhandel, or the wind trade.13
A futures market is where a buyer and a seller agree to the future price of a
good. When that specific time arrives, the buyer must pay the seller the agreed
upon amount.
However, in those days, waiting for that agreed-upon time was not fast
enough for the crowds of speculators. The tulip futures contracts themselves
were traded, sometimes as many as 10 times in a day.14 Considering these
trades were made person to person, 10 trades in a day was representative of a
liquid and frenzied market.

Burniske 02.indd 142

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

143

With the futures market, the value of tulips could be abstracted even more.
People didn’t have to worry about the actual delivery of the tulip—they just
had to make sure they could sell the contract for a higher price than they
themselves had bought it for. While the frenzy over tulips had been building
for a few years, the mania peaked during the winter of late 1636 and early
1637, when the tulip bulbs were still dormant in the ground. Therefore, the
period of greatest speculation during Tulipmania was not accompanied by a
single blossoming tulip changing hands.15
Two factors made the crowd speculation even worse. According to a study
in The Economist, government officials were in on the action themselves and
moved to change the futures contracts to options. The result was that:
Investors who had bought the right to buy tulips in the future
were no longer obliged to buy them. If the market price was not
high enough for investors’ liking, they could pay a small fine and
cancel the contract. The balance between risk and reward in the
tulip market was skewed massively in investors’ favour. The inevitable result was a huge increase in tulip options prices.16
