
The lag of a simple moving average can be reduced while maintaining the same degree of smoothing by using a linearly weighted moving
average. As pointed out by Ehlers 16 the lag of a linearly weighted moving
average with a look-back span of n days is
1)/3 compared with
1)/2 for a simple moving average. Thus, a linearly weighted moving average with a span of 10 days will have a lag of 3 days whereas a simple
moving average with the same span will have a lag of 4.5 days. The linear-weighting scheme applies a weight of n to the most recent data
point, where n is the number of days in the moving average look-back
span, and then the weight is decreased by one for each prior day. The
sum of the weights becomes the divisor. This is illustrated in the following equation:

en -

en -

Linear Weighted Moving Average
Weights
r-"---..,...-"----,

~

(n) x Pt + (n-l ) x Pt-l + ... + (n-(t-n+ 1» x Pt-n+ 1
WMAt

n + n-l + ... + n-(t-n-l )
.....

----------_/

Sum of Weights
Where:
Pt = Price at time t
WMA t = Weighted moving average at time t
n = Number of days used to compute moving average

The case study used a four-day linearly weighted moving average to
smooth indicators used in rules that signal when the indicator crosses
above or below a critical threshold. Smoothing mitigates the problem of
excessive signals that an unsmoothed version of the indicator wiggling
back and forth across the threshold would produce. The calculation of a

401

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

four-day linearly weighted moving average is illustrated in the following
equation:

Four Day Linear Weighted Moving Average
Weights
,-..A--,

,-..A--,

,-..A--,

,-..A--,

(4)xPtO + (3) xPt-] + (2)xPt-2 + (1 )XPt-3

WMAt

10
'-v--J

Sum of Weights
Where:
Pt = Price at time t

WMAt = Weighted moving average at time t

n = Number of days used to compute moving average

Channel- ormaJization Operator

(Stochastics): C
The channel-normalization operator (CN) removes the trend in a time
series, thus clarifying short-term fluctuations around the trend. Channel
normalization detrends the time series by measuring its current position within a moving channel. The channel is defined by the maximum
and minimum values of the time series over a specified look-back span.
In this way it is similar to the channel breakout operator discussed
earlier.
The channel normalized version of a time series is scaled to the range
o to 100. When the raw time series is at its maximum value within the
look-back span, CN assumes the value of 100. When the series is at the
minimum value within the look-back span the CN is equal to zero. A value
of 50 indicates the series is currently midway between its maximum and
minimum values.

402

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

The calculation of CN is illustrated in the following equation:

Channel Normalization Operator

CNt

I
=l

St - Smin-n
Smax-n - Smin-n

l

100

Where:
CNt = n day channel normalized value on day t
St = Value of time series at time t
Smin-n = Minimum value of time series, last n days
Smax-n = Maximum value of time series, last n days
n = Channel look-back span in days
An example of the calculation is illustrated in Figure 8.6.

In terms of its filtering properties, the CN operator functions as a
high-pass filter. In contrast to the moving average, a low-pass filter, CN expresses the short-period (high-frequency) oscillations in its output while
filtering out the long-period fluctuations or trend. This is illustrated in Figure 8.7. Note that the input series has a distinct upward trend, but the output series has no trend.
Input
Series

Look-Back Span

Current

7S

Channel Minimum: 60

Time

Channel Normalized Value = (75 - 60)/(83-60) = 0.65
FIGURE 8.6 Channel normalization.

403

Case Study of Rule Data Mining foy the S&P 500

Input:
Time Series

Output:
Time Series

eN
Operator

Time

Time

FIGURE 8.7 Channel normalization operator: a high-pass filter.

The CN operator has been known in TA at least as far back as 1965
when Heiby l7 used it to formulate divergence rules. He measured divergences by comparing the channel normalized value of the S&P 500 with
the channel normalized value of a market breadth indicator. According to
Heiby, a divergence occurred when one series was in the upper quartile of
its 50-day range (CN > 74) while the other series was in the lower quartile
of its range (CN <26). Sometime in the early 1970s, a virtually identical operator was described by George Lane,18 who dubbed it stochastic. Unfortunately, the name is a misnomer. In reality, stochastic is a mathematical
term that refers to the evolution of a random variable through time. There
is nothing random about the C operator, which is a completely deterministic data transformation. This text uses the term channel normalization
(CN) rather than Lane's term, because it accurately describes what the operator does. Most TA writings continue use the tem1 stochastics. The case
study utilizes the CN operator for two types of rules: (1) extremes and
transitions and (2) divergences. They are discussed in following sections.

Indicator Scripting
As discussed earlier, the tin1e series that are used as inputs to the rules

may either be in raw form, just as they comes from the market, or in the
form of indicators-times series that have been created by applying one
or more mathematical, logical, or time-series operators to one or more
raw time series. The specification of an indicator may require the application of several operators. For example, the raw time series might first be
smoothed with a moving average and then channel normalization is applied to the smoothed version. When the creation of an indicator involves
multiple steps, it is convenient to express it in terms of an indicator
scripting language (ISL). An ISL expression succinctly depicts the set of
transformations used to create the indicator from raw time series.

404

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

My first exposure to an ISL was Gener, which was developed in 1983
for Raden Research Group by friend and colleague Professor John Wolberg. Today, ISLs are common. All rule back-testing platforms,19 such as
TradeStation, Wealth-Lab, Neuro-Shell, Financial Data Calculator, and so
forth have an ISL. Though each ISL has features unique to it, they share
similar syntaxes. The most basic ISL statement is a time-series operator
followed by a set of parentheses that contain the arguments of the operator. The arguments are the items that must be defined for the operator to
do its thing. Operators differ in terms of the number of arguments required. For example, the moving-average operator requires two arguments: a data series to which the operator will be applied and the number
of periods in the look-back span. Thus a moving-average indicator would
be specified by a statement such as this:
Moving Average Indicator = MA (input series, N)
Where:
MA is the moving average operator
N is the number of days in the moving average.

The general form of an indicator expression in scripting language is:
Indicator = Operator (Argument l , Argument z' ... , Argument j )
Where:
i is the number of arguments required by the operator.

Figure 8.8 shows the ISL syntax for the operators defined thus far:
channel breakout, moving average, and channel normalization.
A key benefit of ISL is the ability to define complex indicators by nesting operators. In nesting, the output of one operator becomes an argument for a second operator and so on. For example, if one wanted to
define an indicator that is the 60-day channel normalization of another
time series that is a lO-day moving average of the Dow Jones Transportation Index, the expression for the indicator in ISL would look something
like this:
Indicator = eN [MA(DJTA, 10), 60]

Case Study of Rule Data Mining faY the S&P 500

405

Channel-Breakout Operator (CBO)
Number of Arguments = 2:

Indicator = CBO (Time Series, n)

Moving-Average Operator (MA) or Linear Weighted MA (LMA)
Number of Arguments = 2:

Indicator = MA or LMA (Time Series, n)

Channel-Normalization Operator (CN)
Number of Arguments = 2:

Indicator = CN (Time Series, n)
FIGUKI~ 8.8

Indicator scripting language for three TA operators.

I PUT SERIES TO RULES: RAW TIME SERIES
AND INDICA1'ORS
This section describes the 24 raw time series used in the case study as
well as the 39 time series that were ultimately used as rule inputs. Ten of
the 39 inputs were in the fOffil of raw unprocessed time series: S&P 500
closing price, Dow Jones Transportations Index closing price, NASDAQ
Composite Index closing price, and so forth. The additional rule 29 inputs
were indicators derived from one or more raw time series.
Raw Time Series

The 24 raw time series used in the case study came from two sources:
Ultra Financial Systems 20 and Market Timing Reports. 21 They are shown
in Table 8.1.
Indicators

Twenty-nine of the 39 rule inputs were indicators derived by transforming one or more raw time series with various mathematical, logical, and

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P sao INDEX

406
'rABLE 8.1
Number

Raw Time Series
Raw Data Series

Abbreviation

Source

S&P SOO Daily Close

SPX

Ultra 8

2

S&P SOO Open

SPO

Ultra 8

3

DjlA High

DjH

Ultra 8

4

DjlA low

Djl

Ultra 8

5

DjlA Close

OJ(

Ultra 8

6

S&P Industrials

SPIA

Market Timing Reports

7

Dow jones Transports

DjTA

Market Timing Reports

8

Dow jones Utilities

DjUA

Market Timing Reports

9

NYSE Financial Index

NYFA

Market Timing Reports

10

Dow jones 20 Bonds

DjB

Ultra 8

11

NASDAQ Composite Close

OTC

Ultra 8

12

Value Line Geometric Close

VL

Ultra 8

13

NYSE Advancing Issues

ADV

Ultra 8

14

NYSE Declining Issues

DEC

Ultra 8

15

NYSE Unchanged Issues

UNC

Ultra 8

16

NYSE New S2-Week Highs

NH

Ultra 8

17

NYSE New 52-Week Lows

NL

Ultra 8

18

NYSE Total Volume

TVOL

Ultra 8

19

NYSE Upside Volume

UVOl

Ultra 8

20

NYSE Downside Volume

DVOl

Ultra 8

21

3-Month T-Bill Yields

T3M

Market Timing Reports

22

1O-Year T-Bond Yields

Tl0Y

Market Timing Reports

23

AAA Bond Yields

AAA

Market Timing Reports

24

BAA Bond Yields

BAA

Market Timing Reports

time-series operators. This section describes the transformations used to
produce these indicators.
The indicators are presented in four categories: (1) price and volume
functions, (2) market-breadth indicators, (3) prices-of-debt instruments,
and (4) interest-rate-spread indicators.
Price & Volume Functions. Fifteen (15) indicators were functions
that combine price and volume information. A number of studies have

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

407

shown that trading volume contains useful infomlation both on its
own and when used in conjunction with price. 22 Technical analysis
practitioners have suggested a number of price and volume functions:
on-balance volume, accumulation distribution volume, money flow,
negative volume, and positive volume. Each of these functions is described below.
The price-volume functions were used to create two types of indicators: (1) cumulative sums and (2) moving averages. An indicator defined
as a cumulative sum is the algebraic sum of all prior daily values of the
price-volume function. The daily value of a price-volume function can either be a positive or negative quantity. Thus, an indicator defined as the
cumulative sum of the on-balance volume, at a given point in time, is equal
to the sum of all prior values of the daily on-balance-volume quantity. An
indicator defined as a cumulative sum will display long-term trends similar to those observed in the levels of asset prices and interest rates. In
other words, these indicators are nonstationary time series.
In contrast, a moving average of a price-volume function will be a stationary time series. In other words, it will not display trends. This is explained by the fact that a moving average only considers the observations
within the look-back span. Since price and volume functions can assume
both positive or negative values, a moving average will tend to remain
within a relatively confined range near zero. See Figure 8.9.

Cumulative Sum
Price-Volume Function

Time

Moving Average
Price-Volume Function

b

f"v\ f\
o I~V V

1\V\JJ
rv\
[\ f\ J.
\TV

Time

FIGURE 8.9 Cumulative sum versus moving average of price-volume functions.

408

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

Cumulative On-Balance Volume. Perhaps the first invented price &
volume function was the cumulative on-balance-volume indicator,
which is attributed to Joseph Granville and Woods and Vignolia. 23 It is a
cumulative sum of signed (+ or -) total market volume. The algebraic
sign of the volume for any given day is determined by the sign of the
change in a market index for the current day, week, or whatever time
interval is being used. The case study used daily market changes in the
S&P 500 to determine the appropriate sign for the volume. If the price
of the index rose on a given day, that day's entire NYSE volume was assigned a positive value and the number of shares traded was added to
the prior cumulative sum. On days when the price declined, the NYSE
volume was assigned a negative value and added to the prior cumulative sum (Le., subtracted).
The computation for the cumulative on-balance volume is shown in
the following equation: 24

Cumulative On-Balance Volume (COBV)
COBVt = COBVt-l + (ftVt)

ft = 1.0
ft = -1.0
ft = 0

if PCt > PCt-l
if PCt < PCt-l
if PCt = PCt-l

Where:
OBVt = (ftVt) = On-Balance Volume for day t
COBVt = Cumulative On-Balance Volume for day t
Vt = NYSE volume for day t
PCt = Closing price S&P 500 for day t

Moving Averages of On-Balance Volume. In addition to the cumulative on-balance volume, two moving averages of daily on-balance vol-

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

409

ume were considered: for 10 and 30 days (OBVlO, OBV30). In ISL they
would be:
OBVl O=MA(OBV, 10)
OBV30=MA(OBV,30)

where OBV represents the on-balance volume for a given day.

Cumulative Accumulation-Distribution Volume (CADV). Another
price-volume function, accumulation distribution volume, is
attributed to Marc Chaiken. 25 However, there are several similar functions including: Intra-day Intensity developed by David Bostian and
Variable Accumulation Distribution developed by Larry Williams.
These transformations attempt to overcome a perceived limitation in
on-balance volume, which treats the entire day's volume as positive
(negative) even if the market index had a miniscule positive (negative)
price change. It was felt that minor price changes should not be treated
the same as large price changes. The proposed modifications to onbalance volume sought to ameliorate on-balance volume's all-or-none
approach.
Chaiken proposed that a day's price activity could be more accurately characterized by quantifying the position of the closing price
within the high-low range. Specifically, his calculation takes the difference between the closing price and the midpoint of the daily range and
divides the difference by the size of the range. The assumption is that,
when the market closes above the midpoint of its daily range, bullish or
accumulation activity dominated the day's trading activity (accumulation) and should predict higher prices. Conversely when the market
closes below the midpoint of its daily range, the day is said to be dominated by bearish or distribution activity and should predict lower
prices. Only if the index closed at the low of the day or the high of the
day is the entire day's volume assigned a negative (distribution) or positive (accumulation) value. More typically, the close is somewhere
within the day's range resulting in some fraction of the volume being assigned to accumulation (positive volume) or to distribution (negative
volume). The range factor, which is defined below, quantifies the position of the closing price within the day's range. The range factor is
multiplied by the daily volume, and this figure is accumulated to produce the cumulative sum. The calculation is shown in the following
equation. 26

410

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

Cumulative Accumulation/Distribution Volume
CADVt = CADVt-l + (Vt x Rft)
Range Factor (Rft) =

(PCt - Pit) - (Ph t - PCt)
(Ph t - Pit)

Where:
ADVt =Vt x Rft = Accumulation/Distribution Volume for day t
CADVt = Cumulative Accumulation/Distribution Volume for day t
Vt = NYSE volume for day t
Rft = Range factor for day t
PCt = Closing price Dow Jones Industrials for day t
Pit = Low price Dow Jones Industrials for day t
Ph t = High price Dow Jones Industrials for day t

The case study used data for Dow Jones Industrials for the calculation of the accumulation-distribution function rather than the S&P 500 because daily high and low prices were not available for it. I assumed that
the closing position of the Dow Industrials within its range would be similar to the closing position of the S&P 500 within its range.

Moving Averages of Accumulation Distribution Volume. Moving
averages of daily accumulation/distribution values were constructed for
10- and 30-day periods. In ISL they are:
ADVI O=MA(ADV, 10)
ADV30=MA(ADV,30)

Cumulative Money Flow (CMF). Cumulative money flow (CMF) is
similar to CADY with the exception that the product of volume and
range factor is further multiplied by the price level in dollars of the S&P
500 Index. This is intended to measure the monetary value of the volume. The price level used is an average of the daily high, low, and closing prices. The computation is shown in the following equation: 27

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

411

Cumulative Money Flow
CMFt = CMFt-l + (Vt x APt x Rft)
Range Factor (Rft)

=

(PCt - Pit) - (Pht - PCt)
(Ph t - Pit)

Where:
MFt = (Vt x APt x Rft) = Money Flow for day t
CMFt = Cumulative Money Flow for day t
APt = Average price S&P 500 for day t: (Hi + La + Close)/3
Vt = NYSE volume for day t
Rft = Range Factor for day t
PCt = Closing price Dow Jones Industrials for day t
Pit = Low price Dow Jones Industrials for day t
Ph t = High price Dow Jones Industrials for day t

Moving Averages of Money Flow. Moving averages of money flow
were constructed for 10- and 30-day periods. In ISL they are:
MFI O=MA(MF, 10)
MF30=MA(MF,30)
Cumulative Negative Volume Index (CNV). Cumulative negative
volume is an accumulation of price changes on days of lower trading volume. In other words, it is a continuous algebraic sum of daily percentage
changes in a stock market index on days when volume is less than the
prior day. When volume is equal to or greater than a prior day, the CNV remains unchanged.
The inventor of CNV is unclear. Several sources attribute it to Norman Fosback28 but several sources, including Fosback, attribute the
idea to Paul Dysart. 29 However, it seems clear that it was Fosback who
developed objective signal rules for CNV and evaluated their predictive
power. 30
The notion of negative volume is based on the conjecture that "trading by unsophisticated investors occurs predominately on days of exuberantly rising volume, whereas informed buying and selling (Le.,

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P sao INDEX

412

smart-money activity) usually occurs during quieter periods of declining volume. Therefore, the direction that the market assumes on days of
negative volume purportedly reflects accumulation (buying) or distribution (selling) of stock by those who are in the know."31
The computation of the index is as shown in the following equation:

Cumulative Negative Volume Index (CNV)
CNVt = CNVt-l + ft
ft = [(Pctl PCt-l )-1] x 100

if Vt < Vt-l

ft = a

if Vt> or = Vt-l

Where:
NVt = ft = Negative Volume Index for day t
CNVt = Cumulative Negative Volume Index for day t
Vt = NYSE volume for day t
PCt = Closing price S&P 500 for day t

Moving Averages of Negative Volume Index. Moving averages of the
daily value of negative volume index (i.e., index's percentage change on
lower volume days) were constructed for 10- and 3D-day periods. In ISL:
NV1 O=MA(NV, 10)
NV30=MA(NV,30)

Cumulative Positive Volume Index (CPV). Cumulative positive volume (CPV) is the opposite of CNV. It is an algebraic accumulation of market index changes for days when volume is greater than the prior day.
Positive volume index is variously attributed to Fosback32 and to Dysart.
The calculation is presented in the equation that follows. It seems as if
Dysart proposed the positive volume index and suggested ways of inter-

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

413

preting it in a subjective manner, whereas Fosback defined objective rules
and formally tested them:

Cumulative Positive Volume Index (CPV)
CPVt = CPVt-l + ft

ft = [(Pctl PCt-l )-1 ] x 100

if Vt> Vt-l

ft = 0

if Vt < or = Vt-l

Where:
PVt = ft = Positive Volume Index for day t
CPVt = Cumulative Positive Volume Index for day t
Vt = NYSE volume for day t
PCt = Closing price S&P 500 for day t

Moving Averages of Positive Volume. Moving averages of daily values of the positive volume index were constructed for 10- and 30-day periods (PVIO and PV30). In ISL:

PV1 O=MA(PV, 10)
PV30=MA(PV,30)
Market breadth refers to the spread or
difference between the number of stocks advancing and the number declining on a given day, week, or other defined time interval. Breadth has
been measured in a variety of ways, and they are reviewed in a scholarly
study by Harlow. 33 For purposes of the case study, breadth is defined as
the daily advance-decline ratio; that is, it is the difference between a day's
advancing and declining issues divided by the total number of issues
traded. The data is based on all issues traded on the NYSE rather than an
alternative version that is restricted to NYSE common stocks. The series
restricted to common stocks, which some have claimed is superior because it excludes closed-end stock and bond funds and preferred stocks,
was not available in computer-readable form for the time period required.

Market Breadth Indicators.

414

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

The case study's breadth indicators are of two forms: cumulative
sums of daily figures and moving averages of daily figures. For reasons
previously explained, the breadth indicators that are cumulative sums display long-term trends, whereas moving-average breadth indicators tend to
have reasonably stable mean values and fluctuation ranges.
Cumulative Advance-Decline Ratio (CADR). The cumulative advance decline ratio or CADR is a cumulative sum of the daily advancedecline ratio:
