
EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

excellent tools at hand to analyze skillfully any chart that they scrutinized in the
light of the tenets of Technical Analysis.
As fine and comprehensive as the Edwards and Magee work is, a careful reading
of the introduction and similar statements on the book’s cover reveals their debt to
Mr Schabacker. Their candor and honesty is to be admired for they freely state that
they did not develop or create the many facets of Technical Analysis which they
were passing on to a new generation. What their excellent work did accomplish was
to save for posterity the vital creative and developmental work of their guiding light
who had passed away some ten years earlier, and in so doing they educated many
thousands in this new-to-them art of chart analysis. This takes us to a name now
unknown to almost all Technical Analysis devotees and cognoscenti around the
globe, the mentor of Edwards and Magee, Richard W. Schabacker. For it was from
Schabacker’s “pioneering research,” as pointed out by Edwards, that the monumental concepts and ideas which emerged in this book Technical Analysis and Stock
Market Profits: A Course in Forecasting came, and have proven to be the foundation of
modern Technical Analysis. It is certainly this writer’s opinion that this Course by
Schabacker represents the finest work ever produced on conventional Technical
Analysis. The qualifying word “conventional” is inserted because it must be used in
comparison to the work of William D. Gann who was equally as great, but more in
terms of the “unconventional” technical approach with which he is associated.
It seems almost unbelievable that such remarkable writings could have remained
unknown to the investment public for so long. Other than Edwards in his introduction to Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, we know of no other reference to it. Market
students should be aware of how this happened, as it is a too familiar story that
equally applies to a great number of other superb technical works that also remain
almost unknown today; an unwelcome fate that leaves the Technical Analysis fraternity much the poorer. However, before going into the historical reasons and
developments that resulted in the dearth of classical Technical Analysis writings
that has haunted the field for many years, it would be well to take a closer look at
this classical work by Schabacker which remains an example of the highest order of
analytical quality and incisive technical thought, and should serve as an ideal to
technical students everywhere.
The Schabacker stock market story centers around the time of his financial editorship activities with Forbes Magazine and later as editor for the Annalist weekly
publication that accompanied the New York Times. In 1930 Mr Schabacker wrote his
first book Stock Market Theory and Practice, a task that then firmly established his
investment literary credentials. It was an odd book in its own way. For a start it was
quite a thick book, some 800 plus pages long. Two-thirds of these pages were
involved with describing such pedantic subjects as to the functions of stockbrokers
in the market place, the paths the buy and sells orders take to reach the various
– xiii –

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

exchanges, details about these many exchanges, how orders are handled when they
come in and so on. Certainly these are not very exciting subjects, and for us today,
even less exciting, as the computer has changed many of the mechanical aspects of
buying and selling that the brokerage offices and exchanges used to rely on to
accomplish their tasks. It is the remaining third of the book that was destined to
greatly heighten our interest. For it is here that the author for the first time in memory presented Technical Analysis as a totally organized subject wherein he comprehensively laid out the various important patterns, formations, trends, support and
resistance areas, and associated supporting technical detail.
Just two years later, in 1932, came the publication of the first edition of this work.
We can only surmise why the author felt he had to publish a second work of a similar nature to the one he had written two years earlier. We have to think that while
he must have felt the earlier book with its 250-plus pages devoted to technical subjects gave good coverage of what he wanted to say, he had come to the conclusion
that there was a great deal more he could expound on to advance Technical Analysis as a serious analytical approach in investment thinking, a more comprehensive
presentation worthy of the subject. The end result was this Course and masterpiece
that we now can say was well in keeping with his later recognition as “the father of
modern Technical Analysis.” Nevertheless, most technical analysts today still
remain unaware of Mr Schabacker’s place in the order of things or his contributions
to what is now the most popular form of investment analysis, Technical Analysis.
However, with this re-publishing of Schabacker’s finest writings, it is hoped an
awakening appreciation will sweep the cobwebs of anonymity away from this
extremely important contributor to our world of analytical thought and application.
For any trader or investor, from the rankest beginner to the most experienced
institutional fund manager, the most critical point that lies at the heart of any investment position they hold is when they find they have to ask themselves as the trend
evolves whether that position is at a peak with a possible reversal in the offing or, as
the case may be, at a bottom and a possible reversal in that price movement.
Depending on whether they are taking a long-term, a more intermediate-term, or a
short-term view (and they are all relative in respect to time), that change of trend
could make a vital difference to a profit gained or a loss sustained for that position.
This would also hold true for any buying decision or short sale decision being considered as the price action goes through its upside/downside contortions. For this
reason Mr Schabacker chose to make Reversal Patterns the area he would give the
greatest emphasis and attention to in the Course, and in so doing stressed the importance of this knowledge in the education of technical students, who see themselves
as intertwined in the dynamics of the marketplace. (In truth we who see ourselves
as students of the market know we are destined to attend Analysis University for as
long we are market-oriented. With the potential pool of knowledge that is there to
– xiv –

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

be explored, and our time on this planet so relatively limited, there can never be an
end to our learning experience. The only possible graduation ceremony we can
expect from our University has to be when we graduate to those Great Stock and
Commodity Markets in the Sky.)
In surveying the broad range of Reversal Patterns to be covered in the Course, the
initial formation the Author chose and the obvious one to feature was the one that
most exemplified reversal indications, the Head and Shoulders Formation and the
many variations of its basic construction. His first description centers on its idealized construction (as is the case when initially describing patterns and formations to
be seen on the charts. That they have to be “generally” described can be taken for
granted, as any description is normally started with an idealized version first. However, this must of necessity be tempered with the student’s realization that as in
nature, so is it in the reality of any patterned price movement, nothing repeats itself
“exactly.”) Following this introduction to the price formation or action that he is presenting as he typically does throughout the Course, he presents those factors that
can be confidently relied on, and gives equal attention to the blemishes, the weaknesses, and numerous things that can upset the best of analytical forecasts. Certainly
the thinking here was not to make analysis difficult (it always is anyway), but really
to prepare the student’s analytical thinking to see that price is always moving into
the unknown as is its nature, challenging the student’s mind to be more acutely
tuned into looking at other important things that can also give clues to the resultant
move out of the pattern that has been noted. One of the most important things that
the author especially stresses is the paying of close attention to the Volume factor
(too often ignored even by experienced technical analysts, as it is admittedly very
difficult to get a handle on) as to whether it is increasing, decreasing, or standing still
in relation to the rising and falling price movements at the time. In keeping with his
instructive pattern descriptions of the Head and Shoulders, Schabacker similarly
covers the other Reversal Formations to be found described in the text, the Rounding Turn, the Symmetrical, Right-angle, Descending, Ascending, and Inverted Triangles, Broadening Tops, Diamond Formations, Rectangles, Island Reversals, and
the others. Lest it might be thought that all these pattern descriptions are straightforward there is no lack of attention paid to the possibly troublesome deviation
details in the appearance of each formation’s structure.
Following the descriptive details in the chapters on the Reversal Formations, the
next series of patterns demanding attention are the Continuation Formations. When
they live up to their name, which is fairly often, these portray resting places along
the trend where they gather strength to continue upwards or downwards as the
prior trend dictates if it remains intact. They are generally also very recognizable, for
in the patterns found in this group their names are closely related to their shapes like
the Flag, the Pennant, the Rectangle, and again various shapes of Triangles. Since
– xv –

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

Continuation Formations occasionally turn into Reversal Formations, they can at
times be the bane of the chart analyst; however, in any action in the marketplace at
any time, the market is going to do what the market is going to do and it does not
pay to fight it. Or as has been wisely said before, markets will do whatever they have
to do to prove the majority of participants wrong most of the time. Again, the author
puts in all his descriptions those fine points that the trader/investor would do well
to absorb and apply for the kind of help he or she needs when undertaking the fascinating game of price, time and volume analysis.
With the same thorough attention given to the many facets of the Reversal and
Continuation Formations, the following chapters are replete with descriptions of
other technical action on the Break-away, Continuation, Common, and Exhaustion
Gaps, the Horn Formation, the Zig-zag Movement, the Trend, Trendlines, Channels,
Support and Resistance Lines and Levels, and several others. Additionally in Mr
Schabacker’s eyes Volume of sales was vitally associated with much of the action on
the charts (something that many modern technical writers treat much too broadly,
and even more importantly, too lightly.) Adding to his many references throughout
the book to Volume, to give this subject the attention the marketplace demands he
devotes a separate section solely to it, to emphasize its importance in price action
analysis. Another tool that technical analysts have in their armory is the means, at
times, to apply measuring rules to estimate the next probable move in price terms,
definitely rules that should not go unlearned. One problem that seems to plague
technicians over and over again is False Moves and Shake-outs, where it becomes
very difficult at times to distinguish what appears to be from what actually is,
actions guaranteed to see capital lost time after time. Again, Mr Schabacker’s coverage of what can be very scary moves when they turn up is masterly and worthy of
the great technical mind as he explores the subject; even to the extent that he points
out the “bright side of False Moves.”
But should this work really be ranked among the greatest stock and commodity
market technical literature ever, especially as it was written 70 years ago? Have we
not made tremendous advancements in Technical Analysis, especially with computer technology, that surely dwarfs the knowledge of these so-called “great market
minds” of the past? The answer is a resounding “No” in this writer’s opinion and in
the minds of many other students of the market too. Basically markets have not
changed and the people who make up these markets have not changed one iota
either. Share and commodity prices still move either up, down or sideways in their
own ways. Charts from today could be mixed with charts from any time in the past,
and were all name and time indications removed, no one would be able to say which
were which. People today are no different from people of yesterday in their hopes,
their fears, their aspirations, their psychological make-ups and any other way one
wishes to look at them. For this series editor William D. Gann, on the basis of the
– xvi –

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

knowledge he has passed down to us, was and still is the finest analytical mind that
has ever been produced in speculative markets anywhere. Ever since his passing in
1955 efforts have been made to denigrate his name and his accomplishments (certainly an easy thing to do when his detractors only have the ability to take in the surface meanings of his writings, totally lacking the realization of the depth of meaning
underneath these same writings). He did not make it easy for those who choose to
delve into his work, something he could not do and would not do.
There can be no running away from the realization that the primary purpose of
stock and commodity markets, whether they are those of yesterday, today or tomorrow, is solely buying and selling. Anyone who excelled in their analytics and their
trading in markets past with whatever tools and approaches they successfully used
in their time, they would be equally at home trading and investing today; buying
and selling in speculative markets hasn’t changed one bit making time immaterial.
So it is with the Schabacker Course here. It is as alive, vital, and instructional today
as the day it was written and will be for the foreseeable future. Yet, for practically all
this time it has remained almost totally unknown, except for the short reference to it
in Edwards and Magee. And, this reference was easily passed over, since copies
of the Schabacker work were so rare. The question that always arises is how could
such an important and exceptional work as this one remain so unknown in a field
that attracts a great deal of studying and experimenting, where self-education is
basically the only learning process. A field where those who are serious students
are aware that they have only to look at the works of W. D. Gann, R. N. Elliott,
R. D. Wyckoff, and others from the past for technique and application that is as current as anything available in the Technical Analysis field. The answer to this particular question lies in the physical printing methods available at the time of
publication.
For an explanation we have to look at the tough times of the 1930s in the USA
when financial conditions were difficult. Market books were still printed and
bought, even if in smaller numbers than in the preceding “Roaring Twenties,” and
at prices that reflected the troubled business climate of the time. In the investment
publishing field there was a relatively small market with lucrative prospects that
could be tapped, and where opportunity arose, many authors were prepared to offer
material that a number of traders and investors would buy. This area of opportunity
lay in producing worthy works that promised finer trading systems, methodologies,
analytical thought, and increased forecasting potential, the study of which would
help the reader to reap larger profits in the trading and investment markets. To
attract this business, authors produced large technical courses which they sold
directly to the ultimate purchaser at a premium price, sending one chapter at a fixed
price for a specified time period, say one chapter a month for $25 per chapter, until
the whole course had been received. An embossed cover was usually sent with the
– xvii –

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

last chapter, and the course was complete. The recipient usually had the opportunity
to direct questions later to the author on the course material.
The full title of this book by Mr Schabacker is Technical Analysis and Stock Market
Profits: A Course in Forecasting. We can be certain from the title that it was a course,
and that the author intended to publish and distribute it as mentioned previously.
Obviously, the number of courses that would be sold, especially in the light of the
high premium charged, was going to be relatively small. There was also a physical
reason that limited the numbers printed and sold; the printing method that had to
be used. Before the photocopier became a reality, the normal method of reproducing
text on paper, where printing press production was not economical, was by means
of the mimeograph process (known by other names in countries outside the USA.)
Here a specially treated plate containing the typewritten text was placed around a
large metal cylinder which in turn was rotated by hand or motor to produce a
printed page. The printed pages would then be collated into chapters and the chapters sent out to the purchasing students. The one problem that arose in the printing
process was with the plate containing the typewritten text because the pressure on
this plate eventually broke down the letters of the text. This meant that rarely could
more than about 1,000 copies be printed from any plate and still be legible.
We know that there were two editions of this Schabacker Course, one in 1932 and
the other in 1937 (which is this book); and at approximately 1,000 copies each, it is
not hard to see that, with time taking its toll on these original editions over the past
years, only a relative handful have survived. Even in 1948 when Edwards and
Magee produced their fine book, knowledge of the original Schabacker Course must
have been fading. That there were special reasons and conditions which limited its
numbers can be appreciated, and, in turn, it is easy to see why, in the light of a
knowledge of the times and the special market this Course was distributed to, it was
almost inevitable that the odds were not good that it would survive the years. While
the survival of this Technical Analysis masterpiece could have been in doubt, with
this publication we have to feel that its depth of knowledge on its chosen subject, its
clarity of expression in describing random, undulating price movements, and its
evident excellence of intricate technical evolutionary revelation make the effort to
bring it back to the analytical community worth it. If the coming years lead to a universal acceptance of just how superb this Course is in its field of specialization, then
we will truly be able to say that there is a new “bible of Technical Analysis” –
Richard W. Schabacker’s Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits.
DONALD MACK
Series Editor

– xviii –

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
The preparation of this Course in twelve lessons, or studies, on the technical
approach to successful trading in stocks, comes in answer to a definite and insistent
demand from many students for assistance in stock chart work and market analysis.
Some of these students are new to the game, beginners who wish seriously to prepare themselves for an active market career, or who want to study it thoroughly
before deciding to enter it actively. Another large group is made up of those who
have had more or less experience in the market, trading on either their own
“hunches” or the advice and tips of others, and have come to realize that a great deal
of money can be made in the market but not by hit-or-miss methods, and certainly
not by following blindly the lead of others.
A third group consists of experienced and often very successful traders and
investors who know the importance of correctly evaluating the technical side of the
market in order to time their operations for maximum profits.
And, finally, there are always those individuals who are seeking an easy key, a
magic formula that will take them to riches without effort.
For the class last named this Course is definitely not intended. There is no “magic
key” to stock market profits. The founder of the Schabacker methods of technical
forecasting in his many years of research, with the facilities of large financial and
investigative organizations, tested literally hundreds of “systems” and formulas –
not only on paper but in actual market operations – and found no dependable short
cuts, no systems that can take the place of careful, constant application of the principles of technical analysis.
(It may well be said at this point, however, that research along promising lines has
never stopped and never will. This science is not static, though the fundamental law
of supply and demand which it seeks to interpret can never be repealed. This Course
today incorporates several amplifications and refinements which have come
through the “acid test” since it was first organized.)
So, to the hopeful seeker for an easy answer, we can say only this: You will get out
of this study only what you are willing to put into it and continue to put into it for
as long as you trade in the security markets.
But the earnest student of the science need have no misgivings. Every effort has
been made – with reasonable success, we believe – to make each point and each
method taught herein clear to understand and thoroughly practicable. Complicating
and, in some cases, highly publicized theories which exhaustive tests have shown to
offer results not commensurate with the time and expense their practice entails,
– xix –

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION

have been avoided. Instead, the effort has been to explore and to teach the basic principles and the methods which any man can apply in his spare time, and without the
necessity of paying to others a continuing toll for statistical or advisory services.
In brief, this Course is organized to serve the average man who can devote only
an hour or so a day, and perhaps only a few hundred dollars, to his market operations, as well as the professional full-time trader.
Also, it has been our endeavor to make the student independent in thought. For
it is unquestionably true that no man has ever, over any period of time, made and
kept stock market profits unless he has developed the qualities of independent judgment and action. This course of study is designed to enable you to see the opportunities for yourself, to decide the questions of “what” and “when” for yourself, and
then to act with confidence.
The average man of intelligence who brings sober study and application to his
market analyses can – as we have ample proof – find dependable profits in the stock
market, year in and year out, through bear markets as well as bull. He will not suffer the crippling losses that came to thousands, incredibly enough, even in the wild
bull market of 1928–29. And he will discover the interesting truth that trading in
stocks is the one and only business activity in which money can be made just as well
in times of general business decline as during boom periods.
