
CONTINUATION PATTERNS
FLAGS AND PENNANTS
Flags and pennants are usually short-term continuation patterns that indicate a small consolidation of the markets before a resumption of the previous move. This consolidation has to be preceded by a steep advance or
decline with heavy volume and strength and commonly marks a midpoint
of the overall move.
The first part of the move is called the flagpole, and it represents the
distance from the first break of a resistance or a support to the highest high
or lowest low of the flag or pennant. The previous breakout is one of the
conditions necessary for this pattern to be considered valid.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

193

The subsequent flag will be a small rectangle pattern whose direction
slopes against the trend of the preceding move or flagpole. The price usually will be located between two parallel lines.
In the case of a pennant, you will have a small symmetric triangle instead
of a rectangle that will converge proportionally as the pattern reaches its
maturity. There is no significant slope, and the prices will be located between
the converging trendlines.
These patterns are usually of a short-term duration. A break above the
resistance formed by the high of a flagpole will signal that the previous rise
is resuming. In the case of a bearish flag or pennant, a break below the support formed by the low of the flagpole will signal a resumption of the previous move down.
The subsequent estimation of the distance that can be targeted in the
second advance or decline is made by applying the length of the flagpole as
a projection starting from the break after the consolidation period. The credibility and probability of success with this pattern are strongly determined
by the presence of a strong advance or decline, with confirmation being
made by a high volume on that initial move or flagpole; then the consolidation and further break will add to the strength of the completed pattern.

194

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

TRIANGLES

Symmetric
A symmetric triangle commonly is formed as a continuation pattern along
the evolution of a trend. It must have at least two lower highs and two higher
lows. When you connect those points, the lines will converge to form a symmetric triangle. Price range is wider at the beginning and goes on contracting near the end point. There are also some conditions in which symmetric
triangles indicate an important trend reversal. The direction of the next move
will be determined only after there has been a breakout of the converging
range. The volume will be decreasing progressively as the triangle extends
in a tight consolidation. This is a medium- to long-term pattern.
The breakout of the tightening range usually happens midway or near
the 75 percent point of triangle development. The time duration will be
evaluated from the point where both upper and lower lines converge back
to the start of the lower trendline base. If the break occurs much earlier than
the 50 percent point, the signal may be a weak or nonvalid one. Volume
should be increasing as well, particularly in the case of breakouts on the
long side. Confirmation of the validity of the move will be given by a retest
and hold of the convergence point that was previously broken, the resistance becoming support or vice versa, and a resumption in the direction of
the breakout.
You can estimate the potential target of the breakout move by measuring the widest side of the triangle and adding it to or subtracting it from the
level of the breakout point. Another way of calculating a possible target is
to draw a parallel trendline to the pattern in the direction of the breakout
that passes through the opposite point on the widest part of the triangle (the
higher price if the breakout was to the upside, the lower price if the breakout was down). The distance to this trendline will give you the potential
scope of the move.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

195

Ascending
An ascending triangle is a bullish pattern that usually develops during an
uptrend. It is a continuation pattern. These formations indicate a gradual
accumulation. The shape is that of a right-angle triangle. There is a horizontal line at the top built off at least two equal highs; the higher lows go building up the ascending slope, which converges toward the horizontal line.
There has to be an ongoing trend for this pattern to be validated as a
continuation signal. The highs that form the horizontal upper line should be
quite near one from the other, with a reaction low between them. The
ascending slope has to contain at least two reaction lows that are progressively higher. If any reaction low is equal to or lower than the previous one,
the validity of the ascending triangle is canceled.
The volume goes on contracting as the pattern evolves and then expands
as soon as the breakout occurs. This will confirm the pattern, and the breakout level should be retested for a more solid confirmation. The price projection to determine the scope of the move after the price has broken the
resistance is calculated by measuring the widest distance of the triangle and
adding it to the price level at the breakout.
The ascending triangle has already been showing a bullish tendency
before a breakout occurs. The reaction lows are continually rising, even if
the horizontal line is signaling a level of supply, and prices cannot move
forward for a while. The continuous ascension of the lows indicates an
increase in the buying pressure and qualifies this pattern as bullish.
Descending
Descending triangles usually are formed in a downtrend and are continuation patterns. On a few occasions, they can signify a reversal, but the most
common behavior is bearish. They signal distribution after accumulation.
Inversely to ascending triangles, the pattern is composed of two or
more equal lows that form a horizontal line at the bottom of the moves. The
descending trendline has a series of two or more successively decreasing
peaks that converge with the horizontal line. If one of the peaks in the
downslope goes above the previous high, the pattern will lose its validity.
The volume, as in ascending triangles, goes on contracting as the pattern evolves. An expansion of volume would occur just before the breakout
of the end point of the triangle. The broken support line then will be retested,
turning into resistance, which will confirm the pattern. The projected target
of the breakout move can be measured relative to the widest range of the pattern, which then will be subtracted from the level of support.

196

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

In a descending triangle, the horizontal line forms because there is a
volume of demand that impedes the price from going past that level; volume accumulates, though, and the series of lower highs indicates that there
is a selling pressure that sooner or later will break and drive the prices
much lower.

RECTANGLES
The rectangle is a consolidation and continuation pattern. It signals a pause
in the current trend and is formed from two equal or equivalent lows and
two equal or equivalent highs that can be connected, making the top and
bottom of a rectangle. There is congestion in prices, and a consolidation of
the levels is reached

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

197

The rectangle can be compared with a symmetric triangle. Most commonly, this will be a continuation pattern, but it also could signal a top or
bottom on a particular trend. The confirmation and validity of this pattern
will occur when a breakout happens. As with previous formations, confirmation of the breakout is given when there has been a retest of the broken
support or resistance.

The rectangle usually forms a very tight range contained in the four
point boundaries. The volume is quite low, and the price tends to bounce
alternatively between support and resistance. The increase in volume
occurs near the breakout point and can be an indication of the direction that
the prices will take after surpassing the support or resistance level.
The longer the duration of the pattern, the stronger the impulse the
breakout will show. The level will be retested afterwards, providing a confirmation if it holds.

198

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

As in other similar patterns that lead to a breakout, the moment of the
retest and bounce is a good opportunity to enter the trend, but waiting for
this pullback and bounce after a break is a safer strategy. The profit target
scope of the subsequent move can be measured relative to the height of
the rectangle and subtracted from or added to the price level of the breakout point.
The trading range inside the rectangle represents the struggle and decision making of bulls versus bears, which both seem to “protect” each other
on their own side of the price levels. When the price approaches the support,
buyers enter the picture again and drive the price higher; as soon as it reaches
the resistance, sellers counteract and force the price to go lower. The struggle
ends when one of the sides wins, and the breakout occurs. The pattern in itself
is neutral and a point of conflict and decision making of the markets.

PRICE CHANNELS
Price channels are patterns that usually determine a continuation of a trend.
They are delimited by an upper and lower trendline that serves as a boundary where prices are contained, the upper trendline being a resistance and
the lower trendline being a support.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

199

A price channel can be bullish or bearish depending on whether its
slope is negative or positive, going down or up. The main trendline needs
two points to be drawn; if it is bullish, those points will be two higher lows,
and the trendline will be drawn in the bottom of the channel. If it is bearish,
it will use the lower highs and will be drawn at the top of the channel. A
parallel line from this trendline will be projected and aligned with the
opposite highs or lows to get the whole channel. In the figure above, you
can see four different channels evolving in different directions and at different angles. Number 1 is a bullish channel and contains number 2, which
is bearish and represents the prices pulling back to the lower trendline;
number 3 is a steeper bearish move inside number 2; and number 4 is a
again a bullish leg going toward the upper trendline for continuation of the
overall trend.
In a bullish price channel, as long as the prices are contained between
the upper and lower trendline boundaries, the trend is in force. As soon as
the prices fall through the lower trendline, the trend can be considered to be
broken, and new lines should be drawn after the move to evaluate if the
trend is continuing in the same global direction or if a reversal is taking
place. In the same way, the prices evolving inside the limits of a bearish
channel will confirm continuation of the downtrend until a break above the
upper line indicates that there might be an acceleration of the bullish sentiment and thus a probable change in trend.
In both cases, you can have an early signal of those changes when the
prices fail to reach the respective support or resistance in one of the inside
swing moves. When using channeling swing trading strategies, traders usually look for a short position when the prices reach the upper trendline
resistance and look to buy when the prices have reached the lower trendline
support. In itself, the channel can’t be taken as a sole reference; other technical analysis tools should be used to confirm that there is a continuation of
the actual trend.

CUP WITH HANDLE
The cup-with-handle pattern was described by William O’Neil in 1988 in
his book, How to Make Money in Stocks. It usually is an indication of a
bullish continuation of the trend that signals a period of consolidation,
which is then followed by a breakout.
This pattern consists of two parts: the cup, which will look like a bowl
or a round bottom, and the handle, which is a small pullback on the right
side of the pattern, a downtrending range that develops after the form of the
cup has been completed. A breakout of this small range is needed to confirm resumption of the bullish trend.

200

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

The form of the cup ideally should be smooth and rounded, ensuring that
this is indeed a consolidation pattern going through several periods and forming the support at the bottom. In a perfect shape, both highs on the sides of the
cup would be equal, but this is not always the case; the pattern will be valid if
a handle range is formed afterwards, independent of whether the highs of the
cup match or not. The usual retracement marked by the depth of the cup is
one-third or one-half the previous rising move. The handle is similar to a flag
or pennant with a downward slope, although it can be shorter sometimes. It is
a final consolidation that takes place before a strong breakout. The smaller
this retracement is, the stronger the bullish sentiment of the formation. It is
recommended that you wait for the break above the resistance line formed by
the highs of the cup to confirm the validity of this pattern. Also, there should
be a significant increase in volume when this breakout occurs.
The projected scope of the subsequent breakout move can be measured
with respect to the distance in points from the bottom of the cup to the right
high of the cup before the handle.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

201

MEASURED MOVES: BULLISH AND BEARISH
A measured move consists of three definite parts and usually begins as a
reversal pattern and ends as a continuation of the preceding reversal. A bullish measured move will consist of a reversal rise, a correction or consolidation of prices, and a continuation of the advancing move. A bearish measured
move will consist of a reversal fall, a retracement or consolidation of prices,
and a continuation of the descending move. Both moves cannot be identified
properly until after the correction, retracement, or consolidation period has
resumed. Thus these are categorized as continuation patterns. They are usually long term and form over several periods.

First Part: Advance or Decline
The first move usually begins near the established lows (bullish) or highs
(bearish) of the previous direction and extends for several periods. The initial trend change sometimes can be signaled by a reversal pattern or is
established by the formation of new highs or lows or a break above resistance or below support. Usually the initial move is made of regular alternating moves that could form a price channel.

202

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Second Part: Consolidation/Correction
A retracement in the opposite direction of the first move takes place. You
can find further patterns that will determine which kind of corrective move
it is, for example, a rectangle or an ascending or descending triangle in the
case of a consolidation, a flag with a downward slope, or a falling wedge. In
the case of a retracement, you could expect a pullback of one- to two-thirds
of the previous move. The bigger the move in the first phase, the bigger the
correction move will be.
Third Part: Continuation
The scope of the continuation after the correction move can be calculated by
applying the length of the first-phase move to the level that marks the end of
the second phase. For example, in a bullish move, if the length of the first
move was from a price level ending at 40 to a price level of 70 (30 points)
and the subsequent consolidation or correction pulled back to the 50 level,
the target of the third continuation phase would be 80 (adding the 30 points
to the end level of the correction). In the case of a bearish move, if the first

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

203

phase showed a fall from 70 to 40 (same 30 points) and the correction
brought the price to 50, the target would be set at 20, which is the end point
of the correction at 50 minus the 30 points of the first fall.
Volumes
The volume ideally increases at the beginning of the first phase, diminishes
in the second phase, especially at the end, and rises again at the beginning
of the third or continuation phase. Volume confirmation is more important
in bullish than in bearish patterns.
Both bullish and bearish measured moves can contain a series of different patterns. You can find double bottoms or double tops at the start,
price channels during the reversal consolidation or correction, ascending or
descending triangles at the end of the consolidation or retracement, and
again price channels in the continuation phase.

ELLIOTT WAVES
HISTORY
The Elliott wave theory was developed by Ralph Nelson Elliott in the late
1920s when he discovered the existence of a repetitive and cyclic behavior
in the stock markets that formerly was considered to be mostly random and
chaotic, a behavior that depends on the reactions of investors at a particular
moment and thus is a result of mass psychology. Elliott studied the structure of those repetitive patterns that show up as waves within waves and can
repeat themselves indefinitely, showing two specific characteristics,
impulse and correction, and applied this to market prediction.

COUNTING WAVES
Elliott wave theory is interpreted as follows:
●
●

●
●

●

Every action is followed by a reaction.
Five impulsive waves move in the direction of the main trend and are
followed by three corrective waves (a 5–3 move).
A 5–3 move signals completion of a cycle.
This 5–3 move then becomes two subdivisions of the next higher
5–3 wave.
The underlying 5–3 pattern remains constant, independent of the time
scale you are using.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

204

5
B

3
4
1

A
C

2

In the figure above, you can see that the three waves that go in the
direction of the trend are impulses, so these waves also will have five waves
within them. The waves against the trend are corrections and are made up
of three waves.
Elliott wave theory assigns a series of categories to the waves from
largest to smallest. These are grand supercycle, supercycle, cycle, primary,
intermediate, minor, minute, minuette, and subminuette.

FIBONACCI
In mathematics, Fibonacci numbers are a sequence of numbers in which
the first number is 0, the second number is 1, and each subsequent number
is the result of the sum of the previous two numbers. The Fibonacci
sequence of numbers is as follows: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144,
etc. Each term in this sequence is simply the sum of the two preceding
terms, and the sequence continues infinitely. Each subsequent number in
this series has a common relationship with the others in that they all are
approximately 1.618 times greater than the preceding number, which also
corresponds to the golden ratio value.
The key Fibonacci ratio of 61.8 percent—also referred to as the golden
ratio or the golden mean—is found by dividing one number in the series by
the number that follows it. For example, 8/13 ⫽ 0.6153, and 55/89 ⫽ 0.6179.
The 38.2 percent ratio is found by dividing one number in the series by the
number that is found two places to the right; for example: 55/144 ⫽ 0.3819.
The 23.6 percent ratio is found by dividing one number in the series by the
number that is three places to the right, for example, 8/34 ⫽ 0.2352.
The sequence was named after Leonardo of Pisa, known as Fibonacci
(a contraction of filius Bonaccio, “son of Bonaccio”), who introduced the

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

205

concept to western European mathematics in the year 1202 in his book
Liber Abaci. The sequence was already known, though, having been
described earlier in Indian mathematics.
The different Fibonacci patterns, especially retracement, are used commonly by traders to identify the scope of a reversal or correction of prices
after a continued leg or wave of a trend. These ratios have been shown to
have an important recurrence in nature as well as in the financial markets.
The direction of the current trend usually resumes to one of the ratios after
the retracement.
In addition to the proper ratios based on the sequence, another retracement level to 50 percent of the move is usually added, although it is not a
Fibonacci ratio in itself. The reason for this is that the most common tendency for a price is to make a correction to the mean point after a move and
continue in the previous direction after this retracement to 50 percent has
been completed.

RETRACEMENTS
It has been observed that currency pairs or stocks exhibit a recurrent behavior, pulling back or retracing a certain percentage of the last move before
resuming the trend. These are the Fibonacci levels, which usually occur
most often at three levels—38.2, 50, and 61.8 percent; 50 percent is not a
Fibonacci number but represents the tendency of prices to go back to the
mean and reverse after having retraced half the move.

206

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

This figure is a graphic representation of the reversal points for the
AUS/USD currency pair in a downtrend. The pattern is reversed for currency pairs that are in an uptrend. The Fibonacci retracement tool can be
found in practically all the charting packages.
To calculate this manually, first of all, you would have to plot the range
between the last swing high and swing low as soon as the price starts to
retrace and calculate the relative percentages of that range that are shown on
the chart: 23.6, 38.2, 50, 61.8, and 76.4 percent are the most basic retracement levels; those are the most probable areas of support and resistance and
a useful mark when setting a target profit point.
Fibonacci extensions are simply derived ratios that go beyond the standard 100 percent retracement range and can be used as a projection of
possible targets outside that range on both sides. The most common projections are 127, 138.2, and 161.8 percent of the range and larger extensions to 261.8 and 423.6 percent for longer-term predictions.

EXPANSION

Fibonacci expansion is calculated by taking three swing points (two highs
and one low or two lows and one high). It is built on two consecutive waves.
It is similar to the retracement but is usually employed to indicate the end
of the third wave. The height of the first wave is considered as a unit interval, and the resulting lines are equivalent to 61.8, 100, and 161.8 percent of
that range. This tool is used mostly along with wave-based analysis such as
Elliott waves or Wolfe waves.

CHAPTER 11

TECHNICAL PATTERNS

207

CHANNELS

Fibonacci channels are a diagonally represented variation of the Fibonacci
retracement pattern. They are used in the same way as horizontal price patterns—to evaluate possible areas of support and resistance. Both horizontal
and diagonal representations can be used together or in combination with
other support/resistance indicators to define those areas more accurately.
