
99

Understanding Price Aaion
to mention, such reasoning is defensible only when the odds for follow­
through are indeed excellent at the point of entry.
Note: At a later stage, you may want to spice up your range of entry

techniques with a little more aggression. If so, consider the short below
bar 7, an M-pattern middle-part break. For a bullish example, check
the break of bar 1 0 in Figure 3 . 2 in Chapter 3. These sharper entries
can be very effective, but are deemed more aggressive because they are
taken in front of a bigger pattern breakout. Apply with care.

I Fig 5.71

_.ProRealTIme.com

03:00

eur/usd 5-minute

04:00

1 .375

06:00

07:00

00:00

Figure 5.7 A little after 07:00, prices had broken out of a thin Asian

range in what can be considered a tease break variant (T) . Bulls had
shown little interest, though, in countering this break, or in defending
the round number a little below it. This had prices slowly trailing south
into the EU Open at 08:00.
The first few bars in the Open favored the bull side (2-3), but with the
box extension and the 2 5ema blocking the path, bears had little trouble
curbing the incoming demand. Note the five consecutive topping tails
in pullback 2-3.
It is very common for a smaller pattern to form itself outside of a
broken bigger pattern. If it is a very fat, blocky cluster of bars that
rebelliously hangs below a broken box, this usually indicates strong re­
sistance to the bearish implications of the breakout. Much less so when
this smaller pattern is a relatively gentle, angular pullback. In fact, we
could look upon progression 2-3 as a bear-flag hanging from the pole
1 -2 (a continuation pattern in technical terms).

100

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Pullback

Within its 5-minute span, bar 3 had bullishly penetrated the box
barrier from below, only to collapse and finish as a bearish doji away
from the box. This already had all the makings of a pattern break pull­
back setup. But before any bar deserves signal bar status, we should
always check first whether the surrounding conditions are supportive
of the venture.
What were the hints and clues available? How about: (a) pullback
2-3 had retraced about 50 percent of breakout swing 1-2; (b) bar 3 set
up as a reversal doji in the top of a pullback; (c) the bar had perforated
the 25ema but closed below it; (d) the break below bar 3 allowed for an
entry favorably close to the box barrier extension and the 25ema (no
adverse magnets); (e) the entry on this short pleasantly coincided with
the break of a pullback line.
Against all this, bulls had little to bring to the table except maybe for
a thin sliver of hope that the round number of 1 .37 would still hold up.
From all that was offered, though, it was fair to deduce that the odds
favored the short side way more than the buy side. Hence the pattern
break pullback short below bar 3 .
Note: I n a pattern break pullback situation, it i s highly preferable

for the signal bar to set up not only in the broken barrier area but in
the 25ema as well (bar 3); many times, both coincide. Should we spot
a turnaround bar in a pUllback before the average is reached, in most
cases it will be wise to wait for a stronger setup. Chances are, the cor­
rection has not run its full course yet.
After taking the short to target in a matter of just two bars, prices
reversed with similar prowess (4-5). Upon arrival in the box barrier ex­
tension, resistance kicked in once again, as is evident by the bearish
close of bar 5. This basically set up another signal bar, but there is a
dissonant in this picture that was not present in the situation on the
left. It is the powerful V-shape response of pullback 4-5.
Although we will take up the particulars in more detail in our section
on the pullback reversal later in this chapter, the attentive reader may
have noticed that next to the length of the pullback, the strength of it is
also an important element to monitor. As a rule of thumb, the stronger
the pullback presents itself, the more fighting (buildup) necessary to

101

Understanding Price Action
force its turn. In fact, some pullbacks can be so powerful in appear­
ance that we best abandon the idea of a reversal setup altogether. (See
Chapter 7.)
In a more borderline event, it can sometimes hinge on a tiny detail
whether the scale is tipped in favor of skipping or trading a break. I be­
lieve this was the case also with the short below bar 6 .
First off, progression 4-5 had retraced about 100 percent of swing
3-4 and had done so quite aggressively (three bullish powerbars) ; this
alone already put the potential reversal in the less desirable corner. A
favorable element, though, was to see bar 5 trapped between resistance
of the box extension and support of the pullback line (squeeze variant) .
When the pullback line was then broken by bar 6, the low of bar 5 was
not. Instead, bar 6 formed an inside bar with an identical low. This set
up a potential double-bar break.
Before we go there, let us imagine the low of bar 5 to have been
broken by bar 6 straightaway. With now only one bar in the turn of a
pretty aggressive pullback (5), this would have offered a weaker entry
for a sell-side bet, and perhaps one better skipped. In the actual situa­
tion, with bar 6 setting up as an inside bar to bar 5 , the tension in·the
turn had doubled, and this considerably improved the odds for follow­
through on the bear break. Can one bar really make such difference?
Depending on the situation, very much so.
A turnaround bar followed by an inside bar at a crucial spot in the
price action can be a very potent setup. We will look into this more
closely in the coming section on the pattern break combi. But let us
explore some more pattern break pullback examples first.

102

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Pullback

Chapter 5

IFig 5.81

www. ProRealTime.com

eur/usd 5-minute

1.35

1 .345

1 .34
01:00

02:00

04:00

05:00

07:00

Figure 5.8 A strong uptrend that manages to keep all bars well above
the 25ema is not something to be taken lightly, not even by powerful
parties with bearish views on the bigger picture. But even when the
overall pressure is unmistakably one-sided and all signs point in favor
of continuation, it still takes careful planning to hop along for the ride,
especially when working with tight stops.
When aiming for continuation, the principle of harmony between
trend and pullback is a crucial element to examine and this will be
taken up in more detail in the section on our fourth setup, the pullback
reversal. For now, as a simple rule of thumb, and this basically regards
all our breakout ventures, we should avoid to enter well away from the
25ema. Since the average often acts like a magnet too, we have much
less to fear from these habitual corrections when trading from its "base"
(for lack of a better word). The bull breaks above bar 1 and 3, for ex­
ample, were both set in line with dominance and not devoid of buildup
either. But both entries suffered strong risk of the adverse 25ema mag­
net, and went up against the adverse pull of the round number as well.
Despite the need for caution, there is one undeniable advantage of
the trend and that is that it clearly tells us which side of the market to
shun. Either we wait for a setup to trade in line with the trending pres­
sure, or we do nothing at all. This is a vital concept to grasp and we can
only hope that the unfortunate bears who got caught in the false break
below the dotted line will have taken note (4) . Of course, it were not only
bears who got trapped in that false downward break. Some bulls, too,
will have been tricked: either into exiting their profitable longs, or when

103

Understanding Price Action
forced protect themselves from further loss on whatever they bought
higher up.
It may seem contradictory that there can be danger in trading a
break when the opponent is likely to be forced out on it, since this
implies a double-pressure situation. But that is hardly a guarantee
for follow-through. Particularly when the break is set straight into a
trending 25ema, as was the case below the dotted line, double pressure

against dominance can be very short-lived, if forthcoming at all (mind

the contrarians!). In other words, while a bull can be forgiven to have

exited his long, this was certainly no place for a bear to play short.
Recalling the principle of false highs and lows, a failed break on one
side of the market could be a harbinger of a successful break on the
other, especially when the latter is set in line with dominance. With this
in mind, it is hardly surprising to see new bulls come in when bar 4 was
broken topside. Earlier on, we referred to this technique as trading a
break forfailure (see Figure 5.5). In a favorable chart, this can be a very
lucrative practice, but is best explored with solid breakout experience
under the belt. (More on this in Chapter 7.) For now, the break of bar
4 can be rightfully skipped in anticipation of some more pulling and
pushing in the round number area.
Whenever a pattern boundary gets broken (2-5), traders need to
make up their minds on the validity of the event, in essence, whether to
hop along, counter, or let the situation pass. When consensus appears
divided, but the break itself is not undone, not seldom this leads to the
forming of a smaller pattern outside the broken bigger one (5-7) .
In contrast with the foregoing pattern break pullback examples, pro­
gression 5-7 was much less angular, almost flat, and quite nondescript;
but it was a pullback nonetheless and its purpose was to test the va­
lidity of the bigger pattern breakout. Well supported by a bullish triple
(round number, barrier extension and 25ema) , the first bullish bar in
this mini flag could already present itself as a signal bar for another
breakout. So attention is key.
The first bar to be taken out on the upside was the one at 6. Al­
though small as a bar can be, this was a valid signal bar. It originated
in the lows of the pullback and in the presence of the bullish triple as

104

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Pullback

mentioned. Furthermore, bar 6 was a miniature false low with its neigh­
bor on the left, a feat that was technically confirmed when the next bar
(our entry bar) came to take out its high (first arrow).
Once again prices were reluctant to move out, but they .did not re­
trace much either. When caught in a noncompliant trade right after
entry, always stay calm, trust your stop, and give the market a fair
chance to work things out. As a rule of thumb: at least for as long as
the 25ema holds up in line with your trade, the odds to see prices take
off favorably are very good still. And in this stalling phase, tension can
only build up. In many such scenario, at some point we may even be
able to anticipate the exact spot for the market to resolve the situation;
for example, when bar 7 showed up, there really was no more space left
in the squeeze between the overhanging flag line and the 25ema. Some­
thing had to give then and there.
In retrospect, an entry above bar 7 is probably superior to the one
above bar 6; after all, the buildup was now extended with two more
bars and there was a flag line perforation to help the bull break along.
Needless to say, there is never any way of knowing that a few bars down
the line a "better" setup will show up. But then again, if good is good
enough (and it is), that is irrelevant also. Standard operating tactics
dictate that we have to accept the first valid offer to come along.
Shortly after the small' flag was broken, bar 8 briefly tested back
the breakout, which was also a touch on the round number magnet. If
for some reason not yet in position, a bull could make use of this mini
correction to quickly buy himself in, without waiting for another bar to
be taken out first. Since this practice overrules standard procedure, it
is to be used sparingly and as a last resort only; we could look upon it
as a belated entry on a break that was somehow missed just moments
before; it is definitely not recommended as a clever way to cheapskate
on a fill , for example by deliberately skipping a valid break in the hopes
of finding a more economical entry on a slight pullback reaction. Even
though this "trick" may work out here and there, saving yourself a pip
or so each time you get away with it, you only need to miss an entry
once on what could have been a pleasurable 20 pip ride and you can
start all over again being smart.

105

Understanding Price Action
Note: A continuation trade in the highs or lows of a rally can be a

tricky proposition, but need not be shunned by default. Whenever a
pullback fails to materialize in price, a correction in time could set up
a valid offer as well. Generally speaking, the lengthier such action the
better, which is why it is much advised to at least wait for prices to meet
up with the average.

I

Fig 5.9 1

www. PrnRe.lTime.com

eu,fusd 5·minute

1 .38

o ProRetliTIme.com

02:00

03:00

04:00

06:00

01:00

08:00

Figure 5.9 Apart from the price action itself, the degree of slope of any

pattern line is largely a function of how the chart is set up both horizon­
tally and vertically. For visual guidance, it is highly recommended to set
up the ratio between both axes as default. By always looking at the same
setting, your eyes will become more easily accustomed to the beat and
drum of your chosen instrument and it will be much easier also to tell a
pattern line from a trendline (usually steeper and stronger). This implies
that there is a certain threshold regarding a line's angle beyond which
a break would no longer meet the requirements of tradability. Unfortu­
nately, there are no hard-and-fast rules on this matter, but if you set up
the ratio between the time and price axis as a constant, regardless even
of the actual setting, this can only benefit the way you gauge the action
on your instruments and time frames of choice. Personally, my advice
would be to sooner squeeze down the charts vertically and stretch them
out horizontally than the other way around-pretty much as depicted
in this guide. Anyway, always keep in mind that the steeper the pattern
line (in relation to the average slope) , the stronger the market and the
bigger the chance this dominance will prove resilient when attacked.

106

Chapter 5 ,

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Pullback

Even though there may appear to be plenty of "room" in the chart for
prices to correct, it remains to be seen how well a tight stop would hold
up in a breakout wager that is likely to attract some tenacious defend­
ers. All of this is dependent, of course, on the situation at hand and on
how flexible a trader is when it comes to his entry and exit techniques.
There is certainly no law that says you always have to trade your breaks
with a 10 pip stop and a 20 pip target.
Figure 5.9 shows a multiple-arch formation on top of a respectable
pattern line (arch 1 -2-3 followed by head-and-shoulders 3-7). Progres­
sion 4-7 was the flattest arch in the range so far; in the top of it there
resided a small series of topping tail dojis, a clear token of resistance
(5-6) . Maybe it was too early to already think short, but it was evident
that bulls had run into strong opposition. Bar 7 certainly didn't change
their situation for the better.
This chart example shows a third application of the pattern break
pullback setup. In the first version, we covered the angular pullback
to the broken pattern line (Figures 5.6 and 5.7). In the second, we saw
prices stagnate a little outside of a broken pattern (Figure 5.8). In this
final version, we now have prices stalling in the breakout level itself,
with the pattern line running straight through the buildup. This could
be the result of a line being plotted slightly off, but is a regular occur­
rence also even when deaii'ng with a nondebatable slope. As to the line
in question, it looks okay the way it is drawn (overruling the low of 3 in
favor of more touches further up) .
Bar 7 left little to the imagination as to the bears' intentions, but the
lack of buildup on the pattern line rendered the bar invalid as a signal
bar. The low of this bar held up anyway, since bulls immediately retali­
ated with a counterattack in bar 8. While deserving credit for curbing
the initial breakout, bulls now faced the resistance of the 5-6 bear block
above; this left them quite exposed and in need of assistance.
Right in the opening bell of the EU morning (08:00), help did arrive
and for a brief moment in time bar 9 must have shown a brave and vic­
torious bullish body. But alas, five minutes turned out to be too long for
this bar to preserve its bullish features.
By forcing bar 9 not only to retreat, but to close below the pattern

107

Understanding Price Action
line as well, bears again hit hard on the bullish morale. It then took a
mere break of this bar to bring capitulation about.
Isn't it nice that we can watch all this unfold from the pleasant safety
of the sidelines. By letting the other parties do the fighting first (build­
up) , all we have to do is time the entry on the break, should one come
forth in tradable fashion (enter short below bar 9).
Note also the favorable position of the 50-level magnet. Provided en­
try is taken away from buildup, a round number about 20 pip out can
be a very powerful ally in the total concept of a trade (it surely isn't
counterproductive). Of course, round numbers can make for nasty op­
ponents as well (3). It's all a matter of perspective.

Pattern Break Combi

The pattern break combi harbors many features of both the regular
pattern break setup and the pattern break pullback variant. The suffix
combi is referring to a two-bar pattern, a powerbar followed by an inside
bar. The possible combinations that make up this duo are plenty, but
the message is essentially the same in all: the powerbar displays direc­
tional pressure, the inside bar builds up tension next to it. In conditions
that favor the direction of the powerbar, it is the inside bar that func­
tions as our signal bar.
Even though a combi breakout is often acted on in relative isolation
(inside bar tactics), the follow-through response is generally the stron­
gest when the combi is part of a bigger breakout of sorts. Hence the
pattern break combi.
Figure 5. 1 0 shows a number of standalone combi setups; the first
three are bullish, the last three bearish. Note that the last example
shows a reversed combi, meaning the inside bar came before the pow­
erbar; interestingly, this doesn't have to affect the implications of the
pattern itself. To see why, imagine the taller doji on the right to be
broken at the bottom by a third bar: that would technically confirm a
false high (bull break followed by a bear break), which harbors bearish
implications of its own.

108

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Combi

Figure 5.10 Typical combi setup examples.

Less common, but no less powerful, is for a combi to contain two tall
dojis standing next to each other, both closing in the same direction
away from their center. Yet another version is to see the small inside bar
replaced by a powerful doji.
Preferably, the color of the inside bar's body, if not a neutral dash,
is the same as that of the powerbar. Favorable also is when both bars
share the same high or low at the breaking end (double-bar break) . But
these features are not a specific requirement for a combi pattern to earn
setup status. For example, it doesn't have to be a deal-breaker to see a
bearish inside bar alongside a bullish powerbar, as long as the inside
bar is still situated in the higher region of the powerbar.
And lastly, should a second inside bar pop up next to the first, this
can only add to the tension; therefore, all else equal, the implications
of a three-bar combi are the same as those of a regular two-bar combi
(perhaps even stronger).
In the majority of combi breakouts, position can be taken on the
break of the inside bar, but on occasion it may be an option to postpone
entry until the powerbar is taken out also. Whether this would indeed
provide a "stronger" signal is up to the assessment of the situation at
hand. Always keep in mind, though, that the presence of a combi pat­
tern by itself is never a reason to think long or short. It is just a tool with
which to time an entry in a breakout situation.

109

Understanding Price Action
1Fig 5.1 11

www.PfoRoalTimo. com

oUf/usd S-minuto

· 1.38

Figure 5.11 When it comes to the eurjusd instrument, the first few
hours of the Asian session may show some decent price swings still,
but it usually doesn't take long for prices to enter into a stale, lackluster
phase that can last all the way to the European Open. Caution is always
recommended when volume visibly dries up. In Figure 5. 1 1 , the phase
between 05:00 and 06:30 shows the classic features of a market lying
dead in the water. It is very important not to mistake this kind of price
action for bUildup. Whereas a little cluster of sideways bars in an active
environment can already build up tension fairly well, a lengthy phase in
a dead market is often no more than a pointless set of price bars trading
into nothingness. Not surprisingly, such a climate sits much better with
the contrarian game than that of the breakout trader.
On the good side, no price action is ever lost on the careful observer
and even a stale Asian session can provide valuable hints and clues
that can be of help later on. Let us therefore establish an overview on
Figure 5. 1 1 first before zooming in on the details of the pattern break
combi setup in the ellipse.
Telling by the slope of the 25ema on the far left, bears were the
dominant party in the early Asian session. In the sideways hours that
followed, bulls repeatedly tried to make a stand, but they weren't very
convincing and never really made it past the 25ema defense.
The fact that the bulls could not reclaim possession of the 25ema
was a strong bearish clue to obtain. After all , how on earth were these
bulls to topple the bears if they couldn't even stay on top of the average.
Great markers of bullish failure were the false highs at 1 , 2 , 3 and 4:

1 10

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Combi

instead of triggering follow-through on the upside, these breaks invited
bears to play short.
Since we have no way of knowing how exactly our breaks will come
about, if at all, it is best not to entertain any preset notions or prefer­
ences on the event itself. With mUltiple setups at our disposal, we can
simply sit back and see what the market has in store. For visual guid­
ance, maybe we can put in a pattern line or a box, but most of the work
is done by simply watching the bars get printed in a buildup area of
interest.
By putting in a powerful doji in pattern line support (5) , right in the
EU Open at 08:00, bulls had given it one last shot, but to little avail it
