
Opening an account
After you’ve settled on a broker, you need to decide what kind of account you
want to open. You have several options, depending on whether you plan to
 Borrow money to trade from your broker
 Trade futures or options
 Place the account in your name alone or in the name of your spouse as well
 Designate the account as a retirement account or traditional brokerage
account
The next two sections help you answer these questions (save the spouse
question . . . that’s a discussion you need to have with your significant other —
sorry, I’m not that great at relationship advice).

Cash account versus margin account
After selecting your broker, you need to choose between opening a cash account
and opening a margin account. Cash accounts restrict your investable assets to
the cash available in your account. Margin accounts allow you to borrow money
from your broker to execute trades; they’re also necessary if you want to trade
options. A swing trader with $50,000 in cash sitting in a margin account can
usually borrow $50,000 to trade.
Borrowing is a double-edged sword: It magnifies potential returns but also
magnifies potential losses. If you borrow 100 percent of your assets and
invest the entire amount (for example, you deposit $50,000 into your brokerage account and trade $100,000 in securities), a 10 percent loss is magnified
to a 20 percent loss. Not pretty.
Margin accounts can cause you to be more reckless in your trades. Money that’s
not yours (but that you have trading discretion over) is easier to gamble with
than money that is yours. Margin accounts may lead you to get in over your
head. If you’re new to swing trading, stick to a cash account — trading only with
your own assets is less potentially damaging to your overall portfolio.

45

46

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things
Traditional brokerage accounts versus retirement accounts
Another question to ask yourself is whether you want to open a traditional
brokerage account or a retirement account. Traditional brokerage accounts
offer you easy access to your money. However, you must report your profits
on these accounts to the IRS as taxable income, unless the IRS classifies you
as a full-time trader, in which case you can convert capital gains and losses
into ordinary gains and losses. Why is that important? Because you can
deduct ordinary gains and losses against other income. If you’re not classified as a full-time trader, the maximum amount of losses that you can deduct
annually from pre-tax income is $3,000 (as of the date of this writing).
A retirement account, of course, solves the problem of taxes because it’s a
tax-deferred account. Unfortunately, the government limits how much you
can contribute to an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) in a single year
($5,000 in 2008 if you’re age 49 or younger). The government also limits when
you can withdraw the money without penalties (usually in the year you turn
59 1⁄2 ). So swing trading in a tax-deferred account is preferable if you want to
avoid the taxes that result from high turnover, but it isn’t preferable if you
plan to live off your profits.

Selecting Service Providers
No man (or woman) is an island, and no swing trader can trade without service
providers. But not all service providers are created equal. (Okay, okay . . . enough
with the clichés!)
Service providers differ in terms of the quality, timeliness, and breadth of the
data they supply, among other items. What you want in a provider is some
type of service — charting or access to a database of fundamental data, for
instance — that you can use for your benefit. In the following pages, I tell you
what to look for and what to avoid.

Providers to do business with
Data providers simply provide you with the tools for finding and charting securities and increasing your market intelligence. These tools should be flexible
enough to allow you to change inputs, such as what indicators to use for a chart
or what criteria to screen for in a database. I classify service providers broadly
into those that supply technical data and those that supply fundamental data.

Chapter 3: Get ting Started with Administrative Tasks
Technical software providers
Every swing trader must have a strong charting system. That charting system
must incorporate real-time charting and quotes (charts and quotes that reflect
live market data and aren’t delayed) if you plan on trading intraday. If you enter
orders after the markets close, you don’t need a real-time charting service.
The marketplace has many charting providers. Most discount brokers catering to the active trader club offer charting systems, and order entry is often
integrated with the charting functions (that is, you can program automatic
buys or sells when a certain action occurs in the chart).
Some of the popular charting programs in the marketplace include:
 TradeStation (www.tradestation.com; the charts used in this book
are primarily taken from TradeStation)
 MetaStock (www.equis.com)
 Active Trader Pro (www.fidelity.com)
 eSignal (www.esignal.com)
 E*Trade Pro (www.etrade.com)
 High Growth Stock Investor (www.highgrowthstock.com)
Several of these charting systems are integrated with brokers to allow for
easy order entry.
Which charting system is right for you depends on your needs. For example,
if you like to develop new indicators, you need a charting system with that
option. You must also consider the system’s ease of use and whether the
charts are appealing. A charting system should also have a wide array of indicators that you can plot (the most popular indicators are covered in Chapter 5).
You should read independent reviews of charting systems to assist you in
your selection if you don’t already use a charting program regularly. I recommend reviewing the rankings published by Technical Analysis of Stocks &
Commodities in its annual Reader’s Choice Awards.
I use two charting systems: the one provided by my broker and another one
in which I conduct much of my own research.

Fundamental analysis software providers
Swing traders who opt to use fundamental analysis in their investment process
need to subscribe to data providers that can assist them in their research.
Fortunately, much of the fundamental data on a company —historical earnings,
returns on capital, expected growth, and the like — is available for free on
the Internet. I’m amazed at how much data is free for the taking online (am I
dating myself?).

47

48

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things
Yahoo! Finance, Google Finance, and Reuters can address many of your fundamental data needs. And all three services provide fundamental data for
free. Following are a few more details on all three services:
 Yahoo! Finance (finance.yahoo.com): I often begin my fundamental
data search at Yahoo! Finance. The Web site offers basic charting; headlines on a selected security; a company profile; competitor information;
analysts’ estimates (and historical earnings surprises); and financial
data from a company’s balance sheet, income statement, and cash flow
statement. But beware: Yahoo! Finance also has message boards that
you should avoid.
 Google Finance (finance.google.com): Google is a newcomer to
the financial data distribution business. Google doesn’t provide as many
financial data fields as Yahoo! Finance, but it offers more data on international firms. I visit Google often when Yahoo! Finance doesn’t have
the data I’m looking for. Google calls its message boards “Discussions,”
which sounds harmless enough — but not everything is what it seems.
 Reuters (www.reuters.com/finance/stocks): Yahoo! Finance and
Google simply present data taken from other providers, but Reuters
supplies its own data. The main data categories are Stock Overview,
Financial Highlights, Ratios, Estimates, Officers & Directors, Financial
Statements, Recommendations, and Analyst Research. My favorite
category is Ratios, shown in Figure 3-1. At a glance, Reuters provides
data on a company versus its peers and the overall market, so you can
quickly discern whether a company is priced at a premium or discount,
and whether that price is justified based on other ratios, like return on
equity or expected earnings growth rates.
In addition to these free research services, a few paid subscriptions are
worth your money:
 Investor’s Business Daily: This daily newspaper provides fundamental
data on thousands of stocks. Each security is assigned an earnings rank
number and other fundamental data rankings.
 High Growth Stock Investor: This software program, also known
as HGS Investor, provides top-down and bottom-up data services,
combining fundamental and technical data. The software is ideal for
fundamentals-based traders who screen sectors or the overall market
for trading candidates.
 Zacks Investor Software: Yahoo! Finance, MSN, and Morningstar —
among others — offer stock screening services, but I consider Zacks
the leader in the business. Many of Zacks’s screening tools are available
online for free at www.zacks.com/screening/custom. Certain data
fields are available only to subscribers, but you can build effective
screens without a subscription. However, if you want to backtest a screen
to see how it would’ve performed historically, you must subscribe to
Zacks Research Wizard service.

Chapter 3: Get ting Started with Administrative Tasks

Figure 3-1:
The Ratios
page on
the Reuters
Web site
provides a
wealth of
data.
Source: Reuters Finance

49

50

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things

Providers to avoid
If a service provider is charging exorbitant fees for its services, beware. You
can usually purchase top-quality charting programs for a small monthly fee,
and sometimes you can get them for free from your broker (assuming you
trade often enough with that broker). You can select stocks with software that
costs $600 per month, so be wary of high-priced services.
In general, avoid any type of service that tries to do the work for you. For
example, a service provider may tell you that ABC is overvalued or XYZ is
undervalued. Or it may tell you when to buy and when to sell. But think about
it: If that service really was exceptional at predicting when to buy and sell,
wouldn’t the providers of that service use it for their own profit? Why sell the
service? If I developed some model that accurately forecasted when to buy
and sell securities, I sure wouldn’t sell it to others!
Two types of specific services you should never consult are message boards
and newsletters or software programs that issue specific buy or sell recommendations. Both of these services effectively delegate some thinking on
the part of the swing trader to someone else. But these services are popular
enough that I spend the rest of this section going into more detail.

Message boards: The kiss of death
If you find yourself browsing a message board, you may as well wear a
sign on your back that reads, “I’m lost.” My advice: Avoid message boards
because they won’t give you good intelligence and are likely to mislead you.
Here’s why:
 The information on message boards isn’t objective. Generally, the sentiment on message boards is bullish. The majority of people posting are
excited about a company’s prospects and rave about how the widget
the company makes will revolutionize the world. Some people list their
target prices and how they recently picked up “another” $10,000 worth
of said stock. I’m sure they wouldn’t deceive us. (For an example of this
sometimes irrationally bullish outlook, see Figure 3-2.)
 You can’t distinguish between competent and incompetent participants.
No credentials are required to post on the board except a pulse.
Although message boards do have intelligent posters mixed in with
masses of people who have too much time on their hands, you simply
can’t read them in the hopes of getting the opinions of the one or two
people who actually know what they’re talking about.
 They’re annoying. You’ll get profanity (dressed up in numbers, of
course, to get by the Web site’s technical censors) and messages that
show that some posters are apparently unaware that a keyboard’s caps
lock can be turned OFF.

Chapter 3: Get ting Started with Administrative Tasks
Message boards are flooded with rumors and inaccuracies. Don’t waste your
time (or money) on them.

Figure 3-2:
Sigma
Designs
shares
declined
60 percent
over a
few weeks
in early
2008, yet
message
board
posters
remained
bullish as
ever.

51

52

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things
Newsletters and software programs that issue buy/sell
recommendations: The not-so-harmless pack leaders
Many intelligent market experts out there write financial newsletters.
Newsletters tend to be of a higher caliber than message boards. Whereas
message boards are free to post to, newsletter writers depend on subscribers to continue their service. Hence, it’s tougher to make up things when you
may lose business as a result.
What I have a problem with are newsletters that recommend you buy or sell
this or that stock. As a swing trader, you must be independent. You aren’t
supposed to rely on anyone else’s expertise. Newsletters that stick to the
macro picture or industry group analysis are fine. You learn by reading those
newsletters.
But don’t think for a second that you have an edge in the market if you’re simply
replicating the buys and sells that a newsletter recommends. Even when the
newsletter has a good track record, you shouldn’t follow the recommendations
blindly. You’d be better off giving your money to a professional manager.
One software tool I suggest you shy away from is VectorVest. The service allows
you to type in most any publicly traded company and be told what the fundamental and technical picture looks like. It even tells you whether to buy or
sell that security. How wonderful. You don’t even need to think. VectorVest is
a quantitative model. It combines quantitative and qualitative factors to determine whether a security is a buy or sell. But what’s important is that it’s not
your model — it’s someone else’s. And anyone who subscribes to that service
is going to get the same recommendations as you would if you were to subscribe. So how can you stay ahead of the pack when you’re running with it?

Starting a Trading Journal
Any system needs some type of feedback loop to improve itself. For example,
employees of most companies must complete annual performance reviews,
when their boss sits them down and tells them what they’ve done well (something? anything?) and what they can improve on.
Your progress as a swing trader is no different. A feedback loop is crucial so
you can make adjustments and improvements. Insanity was once defined as
doing the same thing over and over and expecting a different outcome each
time. If you trade securities without a feedback loop, I view that as a type of
insanity.
Your feedback loop should take the form of a trading journal in which you
record all your trades. The journal entries should be short and combine text

Chapter 3: Get ting Started with Administrative Tasks
that outlines the basics of the trade (like how you found it and what triggered
the entry) and charts that show what you saw before entering the trade
(which help you spot the readings of technical indicators, where resistance
and support levels were, and so on).
After a position closes (meaning you exit for a profit or loss), you can return
to the journal entry to discover what you did right or wrong. You may be
surprised at what you uncover. You may find that you should let profits ride
longer, for example, or take losses faster. Or you may realize that the nineday moving average isn’t such a great tool for signaling the beginning of an
uptrend.
Look for commonalities between your winners and losers after you’ve kept
your journal for a few months. If you’re like me, you may learn more from
your losses than you do from your gains. When you suffer a large loss, it can
be helpful to know whether the problem was due to the system itself or your
failure to follow the system. Then, if warranted, you can alter your trading
plan to improve the odds of success.
Your trading journal should include the following elements:
 An explanation of how you found each trading opportunity
 The positions you trade and whether they’re long or short
 A chart of each security with any relevant indicators to assist in analyzing
the conditions of the market at the time you executed the trade
 A miscellaneous section to record any additional information that may
be relevant at time of entry, such as concerns you had about executing
the position
 A description of what triggered the entry
 A post-mortem chart of the security with an explanation of what triggered the exit
 A rate of return after your exit
A trading journal can, of course, include a lot more information than what I’ve
presented here. For example, I don’t include certain items in a journal entry,
such as position size, that you can easily obtain from your broker. You can also
plot the industry group of the security, if applicable, or a chart of the overall
market. But the problem I’ve found with including too much information is that
you may fail to update the journal in a timely manner.
You must strike a balance between including too little information — to the
point where the journal isn’t useful — and including too much information —
to the point where the journal becomes a daunting task you fail to maintain. I
believe that if you use the criteria I list, you can achieve that balance. I provide
examples of trading journal entries in Figures 3-3 and 3-4.

53

54

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things

Figure 3-3:
A sample
excerpt
from a
trading
journal.

Chapter 3: Get ting Started with Administrative Tasks

Figure 3-4:
A sample
excerpt
from a
trading
journal.

55

56

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things

Creating a Winning Mindset
The final element you need to get started is a winning mindset. When I first
heard this rule of thumb, I thought it was too touchy-feely. But experience
and research studies have shown that there’s something to it. Fitness experts
often focus on a person’s mindset because they know that beliefs are translated into action. When your mind believes something, it works to make that
belief a reality.
Bill Phillips, in his book Body for Life, recounts an intriguing story about
beliefs and goal-setting. He refers to a Harvard University study that showed
that only 3 percent of the students graduating in 1953 actually wrote down
their specific career goals. Twenty years later, the study’s researchers interviewed the class of 1953 and discovered that those 3 percent who had written down their goals were worth more than the other 97 percent combined.
Successful swing traders believe they’ll succeed. They don’t dwell on their
past failures but on their past successes. They write down their goals and
their trades. They view losses as a normal part of the business of swing trading. They don’t become arrogant and overconfident when their trades generate large profits.
It helps to set specific goals, like “I will return 15 percent this year.” Write
down your goal and read it often. Yes, I know it sounds corny, but I’ve seen
this advice time and time again in investment books, physical fitness books,
and other places. And I’ve seen it work.
So begin swing trading with a winning mindset. Know that you’re going to achieve
your goals. Be optimistic. Take losses in stride and stay as unemotional as
you can. You’ll find that a winning mindset helps you become a successful
swing trader.

Part II

Determining Your
Entry and Exit
Points: Technical
Analysis

T

In this part . . .

echnical analysis is the time-honored tradition of
analyzing markets based on price and volume. Here,
you discover the ins and outs of reading price charts and
applying technical indicators. But with technical analysis,
you should note that more isn’t necessarily better. All
indicators are based on price and volume, so the more
indicators you apply, the more noise you hear.

Chapter 4

Charting the Market
In This Chapter
 Understanding the roles of price, volume, and the security cycle of life

in the charting world
 Getting up close and personal with four standard charting methods
 Making sense of well-known chart patterns
 Simplifying security analysis with candlesticks
 Using trendlines to guide your swing trading path

A

picture’s worth a thousand words, or so I’ve heard. The stock chart
is, perhaps, the best proof of this old cliché. For centuries, charts have
assisted traders in profiting from buying and selling an underlying contract.
Candlestick charting, for example, was developed by the Japanese in the
1700s to profit from changes in the price of rice.
Over time, investors became more sophisticated in understanding charts and
the information contained within them. In fact, they became so much more
sophisticated that they started identifying certain chart patterns and giving
them funny names. Would you believe that head and shoulders is more than
just a shampoo brand, or that cup and handle applies to finances and not
just your favorite coffee container? Sure, these patterns may be the result
of investors and traders staring too long at charts. After all, I sometimes see
funny formations in clouds if I stare long enough. But they are useful tools for
your swing trading ventures.
In this chapter, I share how you can predict the likely direction of a security —
be it sideways, upward, or downward — by understanding the basic cycle of
securities and the specific roles price and volume play in what you see on a
chart. I also introduce you to several charting patterns every swing trader
needs for success. The patterns are presented in order of complexity, so
go ahead and skip straight to what you need based on your familiarity with
charting. All set? Then chart away, my friend!

60

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Nailing Down the Concepts: The Roles
of Price and Volume in Charting
All charts come down to basically two inputs: price and volume. The majority of this chapter focuses on price, because patterns within price are more
meaningful than patterns within volume. You’re rewarded or punished for
being right on price, not volume. But I don’t want to gloss over volume. It’s a
major tool in your swing trading kit and is worth close examination.
Volume communicates conviction on the part of buyers or sellers:
 A price rise on light volume may signal an absence of sellers, not the
presence of buyers.
 Heavy volume, on the other hand, signals that bulls or bears are
committed to the calling.
Look to buy securities on heavy volume (exiting’s a different matter). If you’re
swing trading trends — regardless of the chart pattern you observe — insist
on seeing heavy volume. But what is heavy volume? My general rule of thumb
is that volume 1.5 times the average daily volume over the past 50 days is considered heavy. (Yahoo! Finance and most charting programs report average
daily volume statistics.) Volume can also help you determine when to exit. A
decline on heavy volume, for example, may signal that the security has farther
to fall. If you’re swing trading ranges, you want to see light volume, which indicates a lack of interest by bulls and bears.
An old saying on Wall Street notes that amateurs trade at the open and professionals trade at the close. If a security closes higher than it opened, it represents a victory of sorts for the bulls. They were able to overwhelm sellers
during the day. On the other hand, if a security closes lower than it opened,
that represents a win for the bears, who were able to overwhelm buyers
during the day. If a security closes at the same price it opened at, bulls and
bears are at a stalemate.
Major institutions that control billions of dollars are in the markets day in and day
out. They account for the majority of volume on exchanges. Security prices move
when institutions allocate parts of their portfolios to one security or another. So
you want to read how they’re investing their dollars and ride the inevitable wave
that follows as more institutions get into the bathtub. One investment wizard
I learned from — Ian Woodward — explained volume in these terms: An institution getting into a security is like an elephant getting into a tub of water.
You know the water’s going to overflow. Similarly, volume overflows when
institutions buy into or sell out of a security.
