
28

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

In a real sense, Munger is the active embodiment of Fisher’s qualitative theories. From the start, Charlie had a keen appreciation of the
value of a better business, and the wisdom of paying a reasonable price
for it. Through their years together, Charlie has continued to preach
the wisdom of paying up for a good business.
In one important respect, however, Munger is also the present-day
echo of Ben Graham. Years earlier, Graham had taught Buffett the twofold significance of emotion in investing—the mistakes it triggers for
those who base irrational decisions on it, and the opportunities it thus
creates for those who can avoid falling into the same traps. Munger,
through his readings in psychology, has continued to develop that theme.
He calls it the “psychology of misjudgment,” a notion we look at more
fully in Chapter 11; and through persistent emphasis, he keeps it an integral part of Berkshire’s decision making. It is one of his most important
contributions.


Buffett’s dedication to Ben Graham, Phil Fisher, John Burr Williams,
and Charlie Munger is understandable. Graham gave Buffett the intellectual basis for investing, the margin of safety, and helped Buffett learn
how to master his emotions to take advantage of market f luctuations.
Fisher gave Buffett an updated, workable methodology that enabled him
to identify good long-term investments and manage a portfolio over the
long term, and taught the value of focusing on just a few good companies. Williams gave him a mathematical model for calculating true
value. Munger helped Buffett appreciate the economic returns that come
from buying and owning great businesses. The frequent confusion surrounding Buffett’s investment actions is easily understood when we acknowledge that Buffett is the synthesis of all four men.
“It is not enough to have good intelligence,” Descartes wrote; “the
principal thing is to apply it well.” It is the application that separates
Buffett from other investment managers. Many of his peers are highly
intelligent, disciplined, and dedicated. Buffett stands above them all because of his formidable ability to integrate the strategies of the four
wise men into a single cohesive approach.

3
“Our Main Business
Is Insurance”
The Early Days of
Berkshire Hathaway

W

hen the Buffett Partnership took control of Berkshire Hathaway
in 1965, stockholders’ equity had dropped by half and loss from
operations exceeded $10 million. Buffett and Ken Chace, who
managed the textile group, labored intensely to turn the textile mills
around. Results were disappointing; returns on equity struggled to reach
double digits.
Amid the gloom, there was one bright spot, a sign of things to
come: Buffett’s deft handling of the company’s common stock portfolio. When Buffett took over, the corporation had $2.9 million in marketable securities. By the end of the first year, Buffett had enlarged the
securities account to $5.4 million. In 1967, the dollar return from investing was three times the return of the entire textile division, which
had ten times the equity base.
Nonetheless, over the next decade Buffett had to come to grips
with certain realities. First, the very nature of the textile business
made high returns on equity improbable. Textiles are commodities
29

30

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

and commodities by definition have a difficult time differentiating
their products from those of competitors. Foreign competition, which
employed a cheaper labor force, was squeezing profit margins. Second,
to stay competitive, the textile mills would require significant capital
improvements—a prospect that is frightening in an inf lationary environment and disastrous if the business returns are anemic.
Buffett made no attempt to hide the difficulties, but on several
occasions he explained his thinking: The textile mills were the largest
employer in the area; the work force was an older age group with relatively nontransferable skills; management had shown a high degree of
enthusiasm; the unions were being reasonable; and lastly, he believed
that the textile business could attain some profits.
However, Buffett made it clear that he expected the textile group
to earn positive returns on modest capital expenditures. “I won’t close
down a business of subnormal profitability merely to add a fraction of a
point to our corporate returns,” said Buffett. “I also feel it inappropriate for even an exceptionally profitable company to fund an operation
once it appears to have unending losses in prospect. Adam Smith would
disagree with my first proposition and Karl Marx would disagree with
my second; the middle ground,” he explained “is the only position that
leaves me comfortable.”1
In 1980, the annual report revealed ominous clues for the future
of the textile group. That year, the group lost its prestigious lead-off
position in the Chairman’s Letter. By the next year, textiles were not
discussed in the letter at all. Then, the inevitable: In July 1985, Buffett
closed the books on the textile group, thus ending a business that had
started some one hundred years earlier.
The experience was not a complete failure. First, Buffett learned a
valuable lesson about corporate turnarounds: They seldom succeed. Second, the textile group generated enough capital in the earlier years to
buy an insurance company and that is a much brighter story.

THE INSURANCE BUSINESS
In March 1967, Berkshire Hathaway purchased, for $8.6 million, the
outstanding stock of two insurance companies headquartered in Omaha:

“Our Main Business Is Insurance”

31

National Indemnity Company and National Fire & Marine Insurance
Company. It was the beginning of a phenomenal success story. Berkshire
Hathaway the textile company would not long survive, but Berkshire
Hathaway the investment company that encompassed it was about to
take off.
To appreciate the phenomenon, we must recognize the true value of
owning an insurance company. Sometimes insurance companies are good
investments, sometimes not. They are, however, always terrific investment vehicles. Policyholders, by paying their premiums, provide a constant stream of cash, known as the f loat. Insurance companies set aside
some of this cash (called the reserve) to pay claims each year, based on
their best estimates, and invest the rest. To give themselves a high degree
of liquidity, since it is seldom possible to know exactly when claim payments will need to be paid, most opt to invest in marketable securities—
primarily stocks and bonds. Thus Warren Buffett had acquired not only
two modestly healthy companies, but a cast-iron vehicle for managing
investments.
For a seasoned stock picker like Buffett, it was a perfect match. In
just two years, he increased the combined stocks and bonds portfolio of
the two companies from $31.9 million to nearly $42 million. At the
same time, the insurance businesses themselves were doing quite well.
In just one year, the net income of National Indemnity rose from $1.6
million to $2.2 million.
Buffett’s early success in insurance led him to expand aggressively
into this group. Over the next decade, he purchased three additional
insurance companies and organized five more. And he has not slowed
down. As of 2004, Berkshire owns 38 insurance companies, including
two giants, the Government Employees Insurance Company (GEICO)
and General Re, each of which has several subsidiaries.

Government Employees Insurance Company
Warren Buffett first became acquainted with GEICO while a student
at Columbia because his mentor, Ben Graham, was a chairman of
its board of directors. A favorite part of the Buffett lore is the nowfamiliar story of the young student visiting the company’s offices on a
Saturday morning and pounding on the door until a janitor let him in.

32

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Buffett then spent five hours getting an education in the insurance
business from the only person working that day: Lorimer Davidson, an
investment officer who eventually became the company’s CEO. What
he learned intrigued him.
GEICO had been founded on a couple of simple but fairly revolutionary concepts: If you insure only people with good driving records,
you’ll have fewer claims; and if you sell direct to customers, without
agents, you keep overhead costs down.
Back home in Omaha and working for his father’s brokerage firm, a
very young Warren Buffett wrote a report of GEICO for a financial
journal in which he noted, in what may be the understatement of that
decade, “There is reason to believe the major portion of growth lies
ahead.”2 Buffett put $10,282 in the company, then sold it the next year at
50 percent profit. But he always kept track of the company.
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, GEICO prospered. But then it
began to stumble. For several years, the company had tried to expand its
customer base by underpricing and relaxing its eligibility requirements,
and two years in a row it seriously miscalculated the amount needed
for reserves (out of which claims are paid). The combined effect of these
mistakes was that, by the mid-1970s, the once-bright company was near
bankruptcy.
When the stock price dropped from $61 to $2 a share in 1976,
Warren Buffett started buying. Over a period of five years, with an unshakable belief that it was a strong company with its basic competitive
advantages unchanged, he invested $45.7 million in GEICO.
The very next year, 1977, the company was profitable again. Over
the next two decades, GEICO had positive underwriting ratios—meaning that it took in more in premiums than it paid out in claims—in every
year but one. In the industry, where negative ratios are the rule rather
than the exception, that kind of record is almost unheard of. And that
excess f loat gives GEICO tremendous resources for investments, brilliantly managed by a remarkable man named Lou Simpson.
By 1991, Berkshire owned nearly half (48 percent) of GEICO. The
insurance company’s impressive performance, and Buffett’s interest in
the company, continued to climb. In 1994, serious discussions began
about Berkshire’s buying the entire company, and a year later the final
deal was announced. At that point, Berkshire owned 51 percent of
GEICO, and agreed to purchase the rest for $2.3 billion. This at a time

“Our Main Business Is Insurance”

33

when most of the insurance industry struggled with profitability and
most investors stayed away in droves. By the time all the paperwork was
done, it was early 1996. At that point, GEICO officially became a
wholly owned unit of Berkshire Hathaway, managed independently
from Berkshire’s other insurance holdings.
Despite a rough spot or two, Buffett’s trust in the basic concept of
GEICO has been handsomely rewarded. From 1996 to 2003, the
company increased its share of market from 2.7 to 5 percent. The
biggest rough spot was the year 2000, when many policyholders
switched to other insurers, and a very large, very expensive advertising campaign ($260 million) failed to produce as much new business
as projected.
Things began to stabilize in 2001, and by 2002, GEICO was solidly
back on track, with substantial growth in market share and in profits.
That year, GEICO took in $6.9 billion in premiums, a huge jump from
the $2.9 billion booked in 1996, the year Berkshire took full ownership.
In April 2003, the company hit a major milestone when it added its
five-millionth policyholder. By year-end 2003, those five million policyholders had sent in premiums totaling $8.1 billion.
Because its profit margins increase the longer policyholders stay with
the company, GEICO focuses on building long-term relationships with
customers. When Buffett took over the company in 1996, he put in a
new incentive system that rewards this focus. Half the bonuses and profit
sharing are based on policies that are at least one year old, the other half
on policyholder growth.
The average GEICO customer has more than one vehicle insured,
pays premiums of approximately $1,100 year after year, but maintains
an excellent driving record. As Buffett once pointed out, the economics
of that formula are simple: “Cash is pouring in rather than going out.”3
From the early bargain days of $2 a share in 1976, Buffett paid
close to $70 a share for the rest of the company in 1996. He makes no
apologies. He considers GEICO a unique company with unlimited potential, something worth paying a hefty price for. In this perspective—
if you want the very best companies, you have to be willing to pay up
when they become available—Buffett’s partner, Charlie Munger, has
been a profound inf luence.
Knowing their close working relationship, it’s a fair bet that Munger
had a lot to say about Berkshire’s other big insurance decision.

34

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

General Re Corporation
In 1996 Buffett paid $2.3 billion to buy the half of GEICO he didn’t already own. Two years later, he paid seven times that amount—about $16
billion in Berkshire Hathaway stock—to acquire a reinsurance company
called General Re.4 It was his biggest acquisition by far; some have called
it the single biggest event in Berkshire history.5
Reinsurance is a sector of the insurance industry not well known to
the general public, for it doesn’t deal in the familiar products of life,
homeowner’s, or auto insurance. In simplest terms, reinsurers insure
other insurance companies. Through a contract that spells out how the
premiums and the losses are to be apportioned, a reinsurer takes on some
percentage of the original company’s risk. This allows the primary insurer to assume a higher level of risk, reduces its needs for operating capital, and moderates loss ratios.
For its part, the reinsurer receives a share of premiums earned, to invest as it sees fit. At General Re, that investment had been primarily in
bonds. This, in fact, was a key part of Buffett’s strategy in buying the
company.
When Buffett acquired it, General Re owned approximately $19
billion in bonds, $5 billion in stocks, and $15 billion in f loat. By using
Berkshire stock to buy the company and its heavy bond portfolio, Buffett in one neat step shifted the balance of Berkshire’s overall holdings
from 80 percent stocks to 60 percent. When the IRS ruled late in 1998
that the merger involved no capital gains, that meant he had managed to
“sell” almost 20 percent of Berkshire’s equity holdings, thus deftly sidestepping the worst of price volatility, essentially tax free.
The only significant staff change that followed the merger was the
elimination of General Re’s investment unit. Some 150 people had been
in charge of deciding where to invest the company’s funds; they were replaced with just one individual—Warren Buffett.
Just after Berkshire bought General Re, the company had one of
its worst years. In 1999, GenRe, as it is known, paid claims resulting
from natural disasters (a major hailstorm in Australia, earthquakes in
Turkey, and a devastating series of storms in Europe), from the largest
house fire in history, and from high-profile movie f lops (the company
had insured box-office receipts). To make matters worse, GenRe was
part of a grouping of several insurers and reinsurers that became ensnarled
in a workers’ compensation tangle that ended in multiple litigation and a

“Our Main Business Is Insurance”

35

loss exposure of approximately $275 million for two years running
(1998 and 1999).
The problem, it later became apparent, was that GenRe was underpricing its product. Premiums coming in, remember, will ultimately be
paid to policyholders who have claims. When more is paid out than
comes in, the result is an underwriting loss. The ratio of that loss to the
premiums received in any given year is known as the cost of f loat for that
year. When the two parts of the formula are even, the cost of f loat is
zero—which is a good thing. Even better is less than zero, or negative
f loat cost, which is what happens when premiums outstrip loss payments,
producing an underwriting profit. This is referred to as negative cost of
f loat, but it is actually a positive: The insurer is literally being paid to
hold the capital.
Float is a wonderful thing, Buffett has often commented, unless it
comes at too high a cost. Premiums that are too low or losses that are unexpectedly high adversely affect the cost of f loat; when both occur simultaneously, the cost of f loat skyrockets.
And that is just what happened with GenRe, although it wasn’t
completely obvious at first. Buffett had realized as early as 1999 that
the policies were underpriced, and he began working to correct it. The
effects of such changes are not felt overnight, however, and in 2000,
General Re experienced an underwriting loss of $1.6 billion, producing a f loat cost of 6 percent. Still, Buffett felt able to report in his 2000
letter to shareholders that the situation was improving and he expected
the upward trend to continue. Then, in a moment of terrible, unintentional foreshadowing, he added, “Absent a mega-catastrophe, we expect
our f loat cost to fall in 2001.”6 Some six months later, on September
11, the nation had an enormous hole torn in its soul by a megacatastrophe we had never imagined possible.
In a letter to shareholders that was sent out with the third quarter
2001 report, Buffett wrote, “A mega-catastrophe is no surprise. One
will occur from time to time, and this will not be our last. We did
not, however, price for manmade mega-cats, and we were foolish in
not doing so.”7
Buffett estimated that Berkshire’s underwriting losses from the terrorist attacks on September 11 totaled $2.275 billion, of which $1.7 billion fell to General Re. That level of loss galvanized a change at GenRe.
More aggressive steps were taken to make sure the policies were priced
correctly, and that sufficient reserves were in place to pay claims. These

36

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

corrective maneuvers were successful. In 2002, after five years of losses,
GenRe reported its first underwriting profit, prompting Buffett to announce at the 2002 annual meeting, “We’re back.”


Warren Buffett, as is well known, takes the long view. He is the first
to admit, with his trademark candor, that he had not seen the problems at GenRe. That in itself is interesting, and oddly ironic, to Buffett’s observers. That such an experienced hand as Buffett could miss
the problems demonstrates the complexity of the insurance industry.
Had those problems been apparent, I have no doubt Buffett would not
have paid the price he did for GenRe. I’m also reasonably certain he
would have proceeded, however, because his line of sight goes to the
long term.
The reinsurance industry offers huge potential, and a well-run
reinsurance business can create enormous value for shareholders. Buffett
knows that better than most. So, even though GenRe’s pricing errors
created problems in the short run, and even though he bought those
problems along with the company, this does not negate his basic conclusion that a well-managed reinsurance company could create great
value for Berkshire. In a situation such as this, Buffett’s instinct is to fix
the problems, not unload the company.
As he usually does, Buffett credits the company’s managers with
restoring underwriting discipline by setting rational prices for the policies and setting up sufficient reserves. Under their leadership, he wrote
in the 2003 letter to shareholders, General Re “will be a powerful engine driving Berkshire’s future profitability.”8
At this writing, General Re is one of only two major global reinsurers with a AAA rating. The other is also a Berkshire company: the
National Indemnity reinsurance operation.

Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group
The National Indemnity insurance operation inside Berkshire today is a
far cry from the company that Buffett purchased in 1967. Different,
that is, in operation and scope, but not in underlying philosophy.
One aspect of National Indemnity that did not exist under its
founder, Jack Ringwalt, is the reinsurance division. Today, this division,

“Our Main Business Is Insurance”

37

run from National Indemnity’s office in Stamford, Connecticut, contributes powerfully to Berkshire’s revenues.
The reinsurance group is headed by Ajit Jain, born in India and educated at the Indian Institute of Technology and at Harvard. He recently joked that when he joined Berkshire in 1982, he didn’t even
know how to spell reinsurance, yet Jain has built a tremendously profitable operation that earns Buffett’s highest praise year in and year out.9
Working on the foundation of Berkshire’s financial strength, the
reinsurance group is able to write policies that other companies, even
other reinsurers, would shy away from. Some of them stand out because
they are so unusual: a policy insuring against injury to superstar shortstop Alex Rodrigez for the Texas Rangers baseball team, or against a $1
billion payout by an Internet lottery. Commenting on the latter, a vice
president in the reinsurance division noted, “As long as the premium is
higher than the odds, we’re comfortable.”10
The bulk of underwriting at the reinsurance group is not quite so
f lashy. It is, however, extremely profitable. Significant revenue increases occurred in 2002 and 2003. In the aftermath of September 11,
many companies and individuals increased their insurance coverage,
often significantly, yet there were no catastrophic losses in the two
following years. In 2003, the Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group
brought in $4.43 billion in premiums, bringing its total f loat to just
under $14 billion.
Perhaps more significant, its cost of f loat that year was a negative
3 percent—meaning there was no cost, but rather a profit. (In this
case, remember, “negative” is a positive.) That is because the reinsurance group in 2003 had an underwriting gain (more premiums than
payouts) of more than $1 billion. For comparison, that same year the
GEICO underwriting gain was $452 million, and General Re’s was
$145 million.
It is no wonder Buffett says of Jain, “If you see Ajit at our annual
meeting, bow deeply.”11


Warren Buffett understands the insurance business in a way that few
others do. His success derives in large part from acknowledging the essential commodity nature of the industry and elevating his insurance
companies to the level of a franchise.

38

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY
