
A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

77

many popular books. Notable among these is The Millionaire Next Door: The
Surprising Secrets of America’s Wealthy by Thomas Stanley and William Danko,
which was on the New York Times hardcover best‑seller list for eighty‑eight
weeks after its publication in 1996 and continued on the Times paperback
best‑seller list until May 2001, that is, until after the peak of the stock market.
The book, which extolled the virtues of patience and frugality, sold over a
million copies in its heyday.9
Indeed, such stories of patient investing transcended U.S. borders. In
Germany, the 1999 best‑seller The Road to Financial Freedom: A Millionaire in
Seven Years by Bodo Schäfer set a seven‑year horizon for investors and gave
as the first of ten “golden rules” the dictum that any stock market decline
must soon be reversed. A new edition of this book was issued in 2003, but
this time without the subtitle, A Millionaire in Seven Years, apparently because
four years had gone by and readers were generally a lot less close to becoming
millionaires. Another German book from 1999, No Fear of the Next Crash: Why
Stocks Are Unbeatable as Long‑Term Investments by Bernd Niquet, devoted itself
entirely to the theme that patient investing in stocks always wins.10
In viewing the popular expressions of confidence in the market, whether
from the 1990s or the 1920s, and in trying to understand how people felt about
them at the time, it is important to bear in mind that in most cases the statements of confidence in the stock market that we see are not the focal point of
attention in the contexts in which they appear. Thus, for example, Suze Orman
has built a remarkable reputation for herself by stressing the emotional and
spiritual steps one should take to acquire a fortune. Since the 1990s, Orman
has been a highly successful investment adviser and a best‑selling author,
with books like The 9 Steps to Financial Freedom (1997) and The Courage to Be
Rich: Creating a Life of Material and Spiritual Abundance (1999) and, after 2002,
following the peak of the stock market, with her own cable TV show, The Suze
Orman Show. Her concrete advice is to get out of debt and into stocks, and her
example of the power of compound interest with a rate of return of 10% is
never the focus of attention. Most of her audience is apparently interested in
her spiritual message, and her confronting their difficulty with saving is on
target and attention‑grabbing for them. Her assumption that the market will
surely produce a return of 10% a year is mere background information that
her viewers and readers do not have the time or the inclination to examine.
The repetition that she and others like her give to this assumption nonetheless
promotes it to the status of conventional wisdom.

Survey Evidence about Expectations
In my surveys of U.S. high-income individuals and institutional investors, we
have found some evidence of changes in expectations for the stock market.

78

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

We ask investors, in open‑ended questions, about their expectations for the
Dow for various horizons. We do not ask them to select from categories or
ranges of price increase; they have to come up with a number on their own,
without our suggesting anything. In the 1989 survey of individual investors,
the average expected one‑year‑ahead change in the Dow was 0.0%. In 1996, it
was 4.1%, in 2000 it was 6.7%, and in 2001 it was 8.4%. Thus, average expectations for stock market appreciation rose quite substantially from 1989 to just
after the peak of the stock market in 2000. After that, the individual one-yearahead expectations fell somewhat—to 6.4% in 2004. Institutional investors
did not show this pattern of changing expectations, perhaps because their
greater professionalism inclines them to rely on authoritative analysis for the
expectations they report to others.
Some might be surprised at how modest the average reported expectations
among individuals were, no expectation of an increase at all in 1989, and only
8.4% even just after the peak of the market. This does not fit the usual assumptions about irrational exuberance. But, looking at the individual answers, it
seems obvious why the averages were so low. In 1989, 34% of the individuals
said they thought the market would go down in the next year, and many of
them predicted major declines. The individuals who thought it would not fall
reported average expectations for an increase of 10.0%. The large number of
pessimists brought the average expectation for all respondents down to zero.
In 1996, the percentage of individuals who said they thought that the market
would decline fell somewhat, to 29%. But, among those who said they thought
that the market would not fall, the average one-year expectation was about the
same as in 1989, 9.3%. Fewer pessimists meant that the average expectation
for all respondents rose from 1989.
By 2001, the percentage of individuals who thought that the market would
decline fell much further, to 7.4%. Among those who said they thought that
the market would not fall, the average expectation was still about the same:
10.1%. The sharply reduced number of pessimists caused the average expectation to increase to 8.4%.
By 2004, the percentage of individuals who thought that the market would
decline was even lower than in 2001, at 7.1%. Now, the average expectation
was brought down from its 2001 level by a decline in expectations of those
who thought that the market would not fall, to 7.3%.
It seems that most of the expectations for an increase have stayed roughly
the same, near what experts would say is the historical average return, but
that there has been a major change in the percentage of respondents reporting that they expect declines. What this survey demonstrates is that growing
irrational exuberance until the peak of the market in 2000 just took the form
of declining fears of market drops.

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

79

It is not surprising that few people answered that they expected the market
to go up 20% or 30% in the following year. At a gut level, near the peak of the
market some of them no doubt anticipated such increases. But that was just
not a respectable answer, not something one would expect to see validated
in media accounts of what experts think. The respectable thing to say was
that the market would continue to post the same impressive returns it had
on average over the previous thirty years or more. It was equally respectable
to venture that there could be a correction—one hears that in the media,
too—hence the predictions of a decline by some respondents. Did people in
fact believe the answers they wrote on the questionnaire? Probably most of
them did not know what to believe, and probably they considered their own
answers as good as anything else to believe, but harbored other suspicions
or hopes that are not captured on the surveys.
The UBS Index of Investor Optimism (formerly called the PaineWebber/
Gallup index, before UBS took over PaineWebber in 2000 and then after 2007
replaced the index with the Wells Fargo/Gallup Investor and Retirement
Income Optimism Index) reported much more optimistic average expectations
among individual investors around the peak of the stock market. Their July
1999 surveys showed that these investors expected on average a 15.0% return
on the stock market over the next twelve months. This sounds like quite an
optimistic expectation, much higher than that in our surveys. The difference
in results may have to do with subtle differences in wording. Their question
was: “Thinking about the stock market more generally, what overall rate of
return do you think the stock market will provide investors during the coming
twelve months?” Ours was: “How much of a change in percentage terms do
you expect in the following (use a + before your number to indicate an expected
increase, a – to indicate an expected decrease; leave blanks where you do not
know),” and the questionnaire then provided spaces to give answers for the
Dow for one month, three months, six months, one year, and ten years. Note
the different tone of the two questions. UBS/Gallup asked respondents for a
percentage return. We asked for a percentage change in price. The significant
difference between the two questions is probably more than just that return
includes dividend while price change does not. Asking respondents what
return the market will provide suggests a positive number for an answer.
Our question mentioned the possibility that the answer could be negative.
Answers to survey questions can be sensitive to the wording of the questions. But if the wording is kept unchanged over time on the questionnaires,
the changes in the answers over time should still be indicative of the direction
of changes in expectations. The UBS Index of Investor Optimism confirms the
conclusion from our survey that people were getting more optimistic about
the stock market until its peak, then less optimistic.

80

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

Some Reflections on Investor Expectations and Emotions
Economists usually like to model people as calculating optimally their investment decisions based on expectations of future price changes and estimates
of the risk in alternative investments. However, in fact, the typical investor’s
actual decision about how much to allocate to the stock market overall and
to other asset classes, such as bonds, real estate, or other investments, tends
not to be based on careful calculations. Investors are not often assembling
forecasts for the returns on these different asset classes and weighting these
with estimated probabilities.
Part of the reason they are not is that investors more often feel that experts
have little or no idea what to expect of future price changes for these asset
classes, or how much risk there is in each. After all, experts disagree all the
time, and one might easily conclude that there is no great loss in ignoring
what they are currently saying about the outlook for any given asset class.
Investors must therefore base their judgments on basic principles on which
most experts seem always to agree.
The evidence used by experts to predict the relative returns on broad asset
classes has little immediacy for most people. Experts talk about the potential actions of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, about shifts in the
Phillips curve, or about distortions on aggregate earnings caused by inflation
and conventional accounting procedures. Most individuals have little interest
in such esoterica.
And yet investors must make some decisions. What factors might then enter
into one’s mind when making a decision about how much to put into the stock
market? The feeling that the stock market is “the only game in town,” in some
emotional sense, might play a pivotal role at this point in the decision making.
One knows that the stock market could repeat the performance of recent
years. That possibility seems quite real, just as real as the possibility of a major
correction in the market. But how does one feel about the decision at this point?
How does one feel, for example, when one knows, late at night, that it is time to
fill out the 401(k) allocation form, and one is tired and annoyed by the necessity to make such an important decision based on so little solid information?
How one feels certainly depends on one’s recent experience in investing. If
one has been out of the market and has not participated in the profits that others
have recently enjoyed, one may be feeling a sharp pain of regret. And regret is
an emotion that, psychologists have found, provides considerable motivation.11
Envy of others who may have made more in the stock market than one
earned at work in the past year is a related painful feeling, especially so in
that it diminishes one’s own ego. If these people who made so much in the
market were really smarter and knew better, then one really feels like a laggard. Even if they were not smarter, just lucky—smiled on by God—it may not

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

81

feel much better. One can always seek emotional refuge in the thought that
it was just luck that made others more successful, and bad luck that accounts
for one’s own lack of success. But, as Nassim Taleb argued so eloquently in
his book Fooled by Randomness, our emotions make it difficult for us to benefit
from such rationalizations of our failure, and the envy of others’ successes
just continues to haunt us.12
One may feel that if one can participate in just one more year of an advancing stock market—assuming it advances for another year—that will help
assuage the pain. Of course, one also thinks that the market may well go down.
But how does one weigh the potential emotional expense of such a possible
loss at the time that one is making the asset allocation decision?
Perhaps one feels that the potential loss will not be much more damaging
to one’s ego than the failure to participate has already been. Of course, one
likely realizes that one takes the risk of entering the market just as it begins
a downward turn. But the psychological cost of such a potential future loss
may not be so much greater than the very real regret at having been out of
the market in the past. Therefore, although there are many other ways to deal
with the thought that one is a “loser,” such as rediscovering the importance
of being a good friend, spouse, or parent, or pursuing the simple things in
life, it may well end up that the only truly emotionally satisfying decision to
make now is to get into the stock market.
Of course if one has been in the stock market and is deciding after a boom
has gone on for a while whether to stay in the market, one has a very different
emotional frame of mind. One feels satisfaction and probably some pride in
one’s past successes, and one certainly feels wealthier. One may feel as gamblers do after they have raked in winnings: that one is “playing with the house
money” and therefore has nothing to lose emotionally by wagering again.13
The emotional state of investors when they decide on their investments is
no doubt one of the most important factors behind the bull market. Although
their emotional state may be in part a consequence of the factors described
in the previous chapter, such as the rise of materialistic sentiment and individualism, it is also amplified by the psychological impact of the increasingly
strong uptrend observed in the market.

Public Attention to the Market
The level of public interest in and attention to the market changes significantly
over time, just as the public’s interest jumps from one newsworthy topic to
another. Attention shifts from news stories about Jacqueline Kennedy to
stories about Princess Diana to stories about Kim Kardashian. Interest in the
stock market goes through fads in just the same way, depending on the story
quality of the precipitating events.

82

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

Some writers have indicated that 1929 was a time of dramatically heightened investor attention to the stock market. John Kenneth Galbraith, in his
1961 book The Great Crash: 1929, wrote:
By the summer of 1929 the market not only dominated the news. It also dominated
the culture. That recherché minority which at other times has acknowledged its
interest in Saint Thomas Aquinas, Proust, psychoanalysis and psychosomatic
medicine then spoke of United Corporation, United Founders and Steel. Only the
most aggressive of the eccentrics maintained their detachment from the market
and their interest in autosuggestion or communism. Main Street had always had
one citizen who could speak knowingly about buying or selling stocks. Now he
became an oracle.14

That public attention was focused on the stock market in the late 1920s is
supported by many other such commentaries. One should bear in mind that
Galbraith’s 1961 argument contains some journalistic overstatement that he
no doubt could not have gotten away with had he been writing in the 1920s.
But Galbraith was on the right track in terms of the direction of change over
the 1920s.
If one looks at the Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature year by year
throughout the 1920s, one sees that only a tiny percentage of the articles
in periodicals, always less than 0.1%, were about the stock market in any
given year. People were thinking about plenty of other things besides the
market. However, the percentage of articles concerning the stock market
grew markedly over the course of the decade. There were 29 articles about
the stock market in 1922–24, or 0.025% of all articles listed; 67 articles in
1925–28, or 0.035% of all articles listed; and 182 articles in 1929–32, or 0.093%
of all articles listed. Thus, over the 1920s the percentage of articles about the
stock market almost quadrupled.
We see a similar pattern of changed interest in the stock market from an identical study of the Reader’s Guide in the Millennium Boom market, although the
percentage of articles that were about the stock market was higher throughout
this period than in the 1920s. In 1982, at the bottom of the stock market, there
were 242 articles about the stock market, or 0.194% of all articles. In 1987, the
year of the crash, there were 592 articles, or 0.364% of all articles, almost twice as
many. After the crash, interest waned again, and there were only 255 articles, or
0.171% of all articles, in 1990. Over the 1990s, the number of articles rose again,
somewhat irregularly. There were 451 articles in 2000, or 0.254% of all articles.
After 2000, the peak of the market, the number of articles fell. In 2003, there
were only 327 articles, or 0.175% of all articles, close to the percentage in 1990.
Another source of evidence on investor attention to the market is the number of investment clubs, as reported by the National Association of Investors
Corporation (NAIC), now BetterInvesting. Investment clubs are small social
groups, typically meeting at members’ homes in the evening, that together

A M P L I F I C AT I O N M ECH AN IS MS

83

invest small sums of money for fun and for the purpose of learning about in­­
vestments. The NAIC was founded in 1951 by four investor clubs at the beginning of the 1950s bull market; the number of clubs grew to 953 by 1954, reached
a peak of 14,102 in 1970 (near the top of the market), and fell with the market
to 3,642 in 1980 (near the bottom of the market), a drop of 74%. By 1999, the
number of clubs rose up well beyond its prior peak, to 37,129.15 But by 2004,
the number of clubs fell to 23,360, a drop of 37%. The crude conformity of the
number of investment clubs to the performance of the market is noteworthy,
confirming that investors’ attention is indeed attracted by bull markets and
deflected by bear markets. The drop in the number of clubs after 2000 was
smaller than between 1970 and 1980, suggesting that as of 2004 investor interest
in the market had not yet fallen as far yet, and this fact might be considered
consistent with the smaller decline since 2000 in the price-earnings ratio as well.
Investment clubs did not recover after the Millennium Bubble. Membership
in these clubs have fallen every year since 1998, despite major upswings in the
market in 2003–7 and 2009–14. As of 2013, memberships are down over 90%
from the peak in 1998. This decline suggests that the resurgences of the stock
market in 2003–7 and 2009–14 are fundamentally different, less entertaining
or social, from the Millennium Bubble, just as the real estate boom of 2012–14
appears less so when compared with the huge boom in 1997–2006.16
When people first experience success in any area, there is of course a natural
tendency for them to take new initiatives and develop their skills in hopes
of achieving more such success. In a study of investors who switched from
phone to online trading, comparing them with investors who continued to use
telephones to make their trades, economists Brad Barber and Terrance Odean
found that the switchers on average had been beating the market by over 2%
a year. After they went on line, these switchers traded more speculatively and
actively, and then proceeded to lag the market by more than 3% annually.17
This finding may be interpreted as showing that overconfidence from past
success encourages people to expend the fixed cost of learning about online
trading. Having acquired these capabilities and interests, they are likely to
pay greater attention to the market for a sustained period, measured in years,
in order to see that their skills in investment “pay off.”
Near the peak of the market, around 1999, it seemed that conversations
about the stock market were everywhere. I used to play a game then with my
wife: when we went out to a restaurant to eat, I would predict that someone
at an adjacent table would be talking about the stock market. I did not listen
to others’ conversations, but I developed an ability to hear the word “stock
market.” Usually I was able to catch it. Bringing up the stock market was
seen then as an accepted, even mildly exciting, conversational gambit. The
market was an agreeable topic. Five years later, bringing up the stock market
at a social occasion no longer seemed so appealing; it might have seemed

84

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

like an intrusion, a faux pas, a poorly judged attempt to mix business with
pleasure. By 2004, one was more likely to hear about the housing market. The
difference between 1999 and 2004 is subtle, but nevertheless revelatory of the
fundamental change in investor enthusiasm for the market.

Feedback Theories of Bubbles
In feedback loop theory, initial price increases (caused, for example, by the
kinds of precipitating factors described in the previous chapter) lead to more
price increases as the effects of the initial price increases feed back into yet
higher prices through increased investor demand. This second round of price
increases feeds back again into a third round, and then into a fourth, and so
on. Thus, the initial impact of the precipitating factors is amplified, resulting
in much larger price increases than the factors themselves would have suggested. Such feedback loops may be a factor not only in the historic bull and
bear markets for the aggregate stock market but also, with some differences
in details, in the ups and downs of the housing market and of individual
investments as well.
Feedback is a familiar term for engineers, who are aware of the many occurrences and effects of feedback. A familiar example of feedback occurs when one
brings a microphone (which receives sound and sends the electronically encoded
sound) close to a loudspeaker (which translates the electronically encoded sound
into actual sound). The result can be an eerie whistle, which varies through
time. The whistle occurs because the sound feeds back from microphone to
speaker to microphone to speaker, and on and on in a long sequence of loops.
The variations in the whistle are the natural consequence of feedback systems,
which have inherently complicated dynamics. This feedback operates in the
same way as feedback that produces stock market bubbles, though of course the
loudspeaker-microphone feedback is much faster, occurring in milliseconds,
than that in the stock market, which occurs in days, months, and years.
To better understand feedback, one can try an experiment. If one brings
a microphone before a speaker in total silence, there is no whistle. If there is
no sound to begin with, there is nothing to feed back. But if one claps one’s
hands once, the whistling sound begins, and takes its own course through
time after that. The whistling sound may build up for a while and then die
out. Obviously, all this sound has been the result of the handclap, and yet the
actual sound may have lasted for a substantial time after the handclap. The
ups and downs of the sound were ultimately caused by the precipitating factor, the handclap, but the timing of these ups and downs was caused by the
feedback mechanism itself, not the original sound.
When we observe the variations in feedback output from a loudspeaker in
a normal room setting, with various small noises disturbing equilibrium, we
