
violence, a logistical war of nerves, and a constant struggle to keep the torn Newspaper Guild from striking in
sympathy. People were tackling all sorts of incongruous jobs to get the paper out; Don Graham worked as a
paper handler, pushing huge, heavy rolls of newsprint to the presses.
“She had people telling her, including some of the people she respected most, ‘You’ve got to give in or
you’re going to lose.’ They were afraid, they hated not publishing and seeing the Star gain on the Post.
“So I was the countervailing force. I said to her, ‘I will tell you before the tipping point is reached.’ The
tipping point is the point at which the other guy becomes dominant, and after you go back, he is still
dominant. There are fifty variables involved: the attitude of your employees when you come back, the
impression that you’ve left on the community, the degree to which advertising has gotten better results from
having shifted over. You’re gauging the likelihood of people changing their habits. They couldn’t get our
columnists, or our comics, so the question is, at what point does it become more of a habit for them to buy
the other paper?
“That’s probably what did the most for her. She believed me, and she was right to believe me. All I had
were her interests at heart, and she believed that I knew enough about the business.”
But while “Warren encouraged her, it was her backbone, not his,” stresses George Gillespie.15
Her backbone had to be strong enough to support the whole company. Although nearly all of the Post’s
employees other than the pressmen stayed on the job, the constant threat of violence hung over those who
crossed the picket lines. Their tires were being slashed, and their families were getting threatening phone calls
at home. A striker carried a placard that said “Phil Shot the Wrong Graham.” To keep morale up, Graham
and Buffett and Meg Greenfield rolled papers in the mailroom. Buffett loved it, working circulation once
again.
Two months into the strike, the Post had made a final offer to the pressmen, who rejected it.16 The strike
dragged on, unresolved. Graham began to hire replacement workers, breaking the strike. The pressmen
carried on picketing as if there was a chance of negotiation. But over the next few months, the paper
gradually won back the remaining unions, readers, and advertisers, even though the picketing and bad
publicity continued through the spring.
Just as Graham was slowly rescuing her company,17 Buffett and Munger had finally reached their settlement
with the SEC. Now Buffett invited Munger for a steak dinner down at Johnny’s Café near the stockyards to
finalize their “simplification” plan. He had decided to stop managing money for FMC on the side. Next, Blue
Chip would sell its interest in Source Capital,18 and Berkshire and Diversified would refile their merger plan,
formerly quashed at the beginning of 1975 by the SEC investigation. At Betty Peters’s request, Wesco,
owned only eighty percent by Blue Chip, would remain a public company, and Munger would be chairman of
that. Munger and Buffett deferred merging Blue Chip into Berkshire Hathaway until they could more easily
agree on the relative values of the companies.
With both Berkshire and the Post emerging from the tumultuous times that had consumed his attention for so
long, Buffett’s business routine began to normalize. The Post board meetings lost their edge of emergency,
and Graham began thinking of expanding her empire.
Newspapers at the time were being snapped up left and right. “Kay really wanted to buy newspapers. But
above all, she didn’t want other people to buy them instead of her,” Buffett says. “Tell me what to do,” she
would beg. Buffett had gotten her to stop pleading for help from the rest of the board, but she still pleaded for
help from him. “I would just make her make the damn decision,” he says. He helped her understand that it
was always a mistake to pay too much for something you wanted. Impatience was the enemy. For a long
time, the Post did very little and grew slowly. Buffett taught the Grahams the immense value of buying their
company’s own stock when it was cheap to reduce the shares outstanding. That increased the size of each
slice of the pie. Meanwhile, the Post avoided making expensive mistakes and became much more profitable
as a result.19

Buffett, used to doing the taking, for the first time found himself in the giving role and discovered that, with
Graham, he liked it. “She would talk to me about some business policy and then she’d talk to some other guy
back home, and they’d know how to scare the hell out of her. She knew they were doing it, and she didn’t
like it, but she couldn’t get over it.
“Eventually I told her my job was to get her to see herself in a regular mirror rather than a fun-house
mirror. I really wanted her to feel better about what she was doing. Basically, I enjoyed trying to build her
up. And I had some success, although I started late in life with her.”
Yet, wrote Munger to Graham about Buffett, “I can see damn well whose ways, predominantly, are actually
being mended.”20 Buffett began to be seen out with Graham more and more. She made it her job to try to
give him some polish.
“Kay tried to upgrade me a little. It was just very gradual and not so I would notice. It was very funny. She
worked so hard to sort of remold me, but it didn’t work. She was a hell of a lot more sophisticated than I
was, that’s for sure.” Buffett learned that Graham thought it was uncouth and disgusting to eat out in
restaurants. “Around Washington your cook was a big point of pride. The highest compliment you could pay
somebody at a party was, ‘I’m going to try and hire away your cook,’ or ‘You must have brought your cook
over from France.’ Kay cared about that, like everybody in Washington. So her dinners tended to be quite
fancy, except that she would make exceptions for me.”
Graham’s chef found the restrictions imposed by cooking for Warren a challenge. “Broccoli, asparagus, and
Brussels sprouts look to me like Chinese food crawling around on a plate. Cauliflower almost makes me
sick. I eat carrots reluctantly. I don’t like sweet potatoes. I don’t even want to be close to a rhubarb, it
makes me retch. My idea of a vegetable is green beans, corn, and peas. I like spaghetti and grilled cheese
sandwiches. I’ll eat meat loaf but wouldn’t order it in a restaurant.”
His idea of a feast was a half gallon of chocolate chip ice cream. He ate his foods in sequence, one at a time,
and did not like the individual foods to touch. If a stalk of broccoli brushed his steak, he recoiled in horror. “I
like eating the same thing over and over and over again. I could eat a ham sandwich every day for fifty
days in a row for breakfast. At dinner at her farm retreat, Glen Welby, Kay served lobster. I was attacking
the shellfish through the wrong side, attacking the shell, and not having much luck. She told me to turn it
over.” Confronted with a nine-course dinner—each course accompanied by the appropriate wines and
destined for a dinner table filled with dignitaries and celebrities and journalism’s star reporters—“it threw
him,” says Gladys Kaiser. He never grew accustomed to life on this grand scale.
Yet Buffett became a regular guest at Graham’s famous dinners, which he called her “Kay Parties.” He
enjoyed his status as the hayseed who was flummoxed by a lobster. His childlike tastes conveyed an air of
authenticity and innocence. But his social naiveté was also genuine—mostly because he went around with
blinders on. When “sightseeing” with Graham, he was focused like a laser on who was there, not on which
fork to use. He had no desire to broaden this aspect of his horizons. Graham upgraded his elephant-bumping
skills gradually but was amazed that Buffett continued to eat nothing but hamburgers and ice cream.21
“She always talked to the cook in French, always, totally in French. So I would hear ‘hamburger’ among
the French words and tease her and say, ‘No, no, it’s hambur-zhay.’ Then I would just say, ‘Order me a
hambur-zhay,’ and it would come out of the kitchen very fancy. The chef at Kay’s wanted so much to be
able to make hamburgers and french fries—and I ate them, but they were not even close to as good as you
could get at McDonald’s or Wendy’s. The french fries were always mushy. And he wanted so hard to please.
“But at her big parties, she didn’t make exceptions for me as much.”
At the Kay Parties, Buffett’s role was not to eat but, of course, to talk. As a star investor, he was like a bald
eagle in a town where birds of any kind were scarce. Even the most hidebound of Georgetown “cave
dwellers”—blue bloods who rarely emerged to socialize with anyone except others of their kind, many of
whom were Graham’s friends, such as the columnists Joe and Stewart Alsop, cousins of Eleanor Roosevelt

—enjoyed having the charming Buffett around. Dinner guests pelted him with questions about investments,
and he fell into his most comfortable role: the teacher.
By now he was spending so much time in Washington that he began keeping a spare set of clothes in
Graham’s guest room, just as he once had with the more maternal Anne Gottschaldt in Long Island. Usually
he wore a fraying blue suede jacket and gray flannel slacks that looked like a rumpled bedspread.22 Graham
tried to improve his sartorial sense. “She was appalled by Warren’s clothes,” according to her son Don,
“although my mother just hated the way that I dressed. And at one point she said, referring to her employees,
‘Why am I of all people surrounded by the worst-dressed executive staff of anyone in America?’ Her scorn
for people’s clothes was widespread, and not confined to Warren.”23 She took him to meet Halston, the tony
designer whom she preferred and who had made over her own sense of style. Buffett’s take on Halston: “He
was from Des Moines, you know.”
***
By June 1976, Buffett had occasion to invite Graham to an event of his own: Susie Jr.’s wedding. In every
way this event would be the antithesis of a Kay Party—held in Newport Beach, California, a mix of the
formal and the casual, with a Buffettish zoo of a guest list, to celebrate a marriage that everybody knew was
a mistake from the start.
The spring semester of her senior year of college, Susie Jr. had dropped out of UC Irvine when her roommate
learned that Century 21, a real estate company, was offering high-paying secretarial jobs that didn’t require
typing skills.24 Though they were wise enough not to interfere, both her parents knew that Susie Jr.’s
marriage to Dennis Westergard, the good-looking blond surfer, wasn’t going to work out. On some level,
Susie Jr. herself knew this, but she was caught up in the fantasy.25 Parental reservation notwithstanding, her
wedding was an important affair. Warren had asked that Kay be invited; Big Susie had reserved a special
place for her at St. John’s Lutheran Church, right behind the family. For a few minutes she sat with Dick and
Mary Holland, who had escorted her to the service. Then, not surprisingly, Kay said to them, “I feel
uncomfortable. I don’t know why, but it’d be better if I sat in back.” She removed herself to the rear of the
church, where she sat for the rest of the wedding.26
Buffett had traveled far from the day of his own wedding, when he had to take off his glasses because he was
so nervous that he didn’t want to see. Waiting in the rear of the church to go down the aisle, he said to his
anxious daughter, “Don’t look now, but my fly is open.” The photographer was standing in front of the altar,
waiting to snap a picture. Susie Jr. was so busy trying to stifle her laughter and to keep from looking at her
father’s fly so that the photographer would not capture her staring at his crotch that she forgot to be scared.27
The rest of the traditional ceremony proceeded without incident. Then the reception at the Newport Beach
Marriott turned wild. The Buffetts had let their music-groupie daughter hire any band she liked. Susie Jr.
chose her favorite, Quicksilver Messenger Service, a psychedelic rock band that had been among the groups
launched at San Francisco’s Fillmore Auditorium in the 1960s. Its members looked like any normal rock
band. As the group of twenty-something men with white-boy afros and nipple-length uncombed hair mounted
the stage and tuned up their instruments, Buffett looked on with inner horror. When Quicksilver Messenger
Service hit it with the drums and electric guitars, Susie Jr. danced in ecstasy at her rock-and-roll wedding
while her father managed to keep his composure, even though he was squirming inside. “I was not wild about
their music,” he says in an understatement. “They played awfully loud.” He longed for something like his
wife’s sweet Doris Day style of singing, or Florence Henderson or Sammy Davis Jr. After ninety minutes, the
musicians flabbergasted him again when they stopped playing and put away their instruments. Then their
manager compounded his astonishment by asking Buffett to fork over the staggering sum of $4,000—in
cash.28 Big Susie had told her daughter, “You know, Susan, you can’t go home with the band on your
wedding night.” “Darn!” said Susie Jr. But “some of my friends did,” she says.
Now Susie Jr. had settled permanently in Los Angeles, working for Century21. Howie had already dropped

out of Augustana College after having trouble adjusting and connecting with his roommate. He tried a couple
of other schools, but had lost his support system and never graduated. “I was so close to my mom,” he says,
“and everything in my life revolved around our family and our home. In college I just could not get any
traction.”29 Neither had their father’s ambition, but both had money for the first time. The trust left by
Howard to his grandchildren had distributed a little over six hundred shares of Berkshire Hathaway stock to
them. Warren gave them no advice on what to do with it. He had never sold a share himself; why would they
sell theirs? Susie Jr. sold most of hers to buy a Porsche and a condo. Howie sold some of his to start Buffett
Excavating. In a grown-up version of his childhood love of Tonka Toys, he was now digging basements for a
living.
Peter, just finishing his senior year in high school, had been accepted at Stanford and would be headed to
California in the fall. More and more during the summer of 1976, the house in Omaha was simply empty.
Most days after school Peter went to Arby’s by himself to get something for dinner, then headed to the
darkroom to work on his photography. Even the dog was decamping. Peter’s friends had started calling to
report “Hamilton’s over here.”30
Big Susie, who was rarely home these days, admitted to feeling depressed about the state of her marriage. She
seemed to feel that Kay was an interloper who was pursuing her husband;31 Kay had such a territorial way
with men that it would have been surprising if Susie had felt otherwise. Yet despite—or perhaps because
of—her sadness, Susie herself was “running around like a teenager,” as one person put it, in the hot rush of a
midlife romance. She was angry at Warren and got careless, letting herself be seen around Omaha with John
McCabe, her tennis coach. She still called Milt from time to time as well, and when he agreed to see her they,
too, were spotted out in public. She seemed to be living in different worlds, with no plan to proceed in any
direction. She could not conceive of abandoning Warren. She described him as an “extraordinary man.”32
She clearly looked up to him; however much she joked and nagged about his rigidity and his preoccupation
with money, he gave her things she very much wanted: security, stability, strength. “It mattered to her that he
was honest and had a good value system,” says Doris. “If I ever let down someone who needed me,” Susie
said, that would be the biggest failure she could imagine.33 Susie was not a thinker. She had a natural
confidence in her ability to manage complex relationships with multiple people, using her emotions as her
guide. But somebody would have to be let down eventually.
***
While Susie was off on her various unknown pursuits, and his three children were headed in their respective
directions—Peter taking off for Palo Alto in his little yellow Triumph convertible; Howie driving a backhoe,
gorilla costume in tow; and Susie Jr. embarking on married life with her good-looking surfer—Warren was on
a journey of his own. The man of simple tastes who thought of his life as something out of Leave It to Beaver
was now spending his time at parties on Embassy Row. Katharine Graham was dragging him into elephant
territory as fast as she could.
“She didn’t change my behavior as much as changing what I knew and saw. Everywhere she went, she was
treated just like royalty. I saw a whole lot of interesting things that I wouldn’t have seen in the world. I had
a lot of things explained to me. I picked up a lot around her. Kay knew so damned much about everybody
that she would give me insights on people in the political arena.
“It bothered her that she thought I was teaching her all these things and she wasn’t doing anything for me.
She was constantly laboring in terms of trying to think of something she could do to help me out, whether it
was inviting me to fancy dinners or something else. You could call all these events glamorous or exotic. I
found them quite interesting. I’m not knocking these things. There were probably people who were way
more dying to do them, particularly in her presence, than I would be. But I had a good time doing it, you
know.”
There undoubtedly were people who were “way more dying” to go. Nevertheless, Buffett did go, over and

over again, no matter how ridiculous or awkward for him the events turned out to be.
One night Graham took him to a black-tie state dinner at the Iranian Embassy. She wore a golden gown to
match the embassy’s decor. Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran, was an important U.S. strategic ally and a
charming host. His embassy sat at the apex of the Embassy Row Washington social scene, and its doings
glittered with a fin de siècle magnificence.
After the cocktail hour, Buffett sat down at his assigned table and found himself between one of Empress
Farah Pahlavi’s ladies-in-waiting and Illinois Senator Charles Percy’s wife. He turned toward Loraine Percy
and found her locked in a tête-à-tête with her other dinner partner, Paul Newman. Seeing that it might be a
while before she turned toward him, Buffett revolved toward his right and said something to the empress’s
lady-in-waiting. She smiled politely. He said something else. She smiled again, then went blank. Ted
Kennedy, seated on her other side, leaned over and uttered some bon mot in French. Her face brightened and
they began conversing animatedly in French. Buffett sat stranded in the middle. He turned back to Loraine
Percy and found that she was still engrossed in Paul Newman. He realized with a dull feeling that with Paul
Newman sitting on her left, it might become a very long evening.
Kay had been seated next to the Shah, at another table. Among these circles, she was the most important and
Warren the least important guest there. Kay was the queen and he was some hayseed investor from Nebraska
whom Kay had towed along. Forget Supermoney; this was old money. After a while, Ted Kennedy noticed
his plight and asked, “Don’t you speak any French?” Buffett felt like a poseur. He had landed in Bora-Bora
with only a snowsuit to wear. The meal went on until one o’clock in the morning, and then the band began to
play. To begin the dancing, one of the gentlemen waltzed the empress around the floor. Buffett grabbed
Graham’s hand and escaped.
And yet, if she had asked him again, he would have gone. Because he was for sure not knocking it. The
sightseeing was too good.
As he knew all too well by now, despite the fame from Supermoney and the articles in Forbes, many
prominent people had never heard of him. In May 1976, Buffett was visiting Kay Graham in Washington
when she said, I have someone I want you to meet. Jack Byrne, the person in question, was reluctant,
however. When Graham called to arrange a meeting, he said, “Who’s Buffett?”
“Well, he’s a friend of mine,” Graham said. “He’s just bought a piece of the Washington Post.” Neither
knowing nor caring, Byrne turned down the meeting. Then Buffett’s old friend Lorimer “Davy” Davidson,
who had retired from GEICO in 1970, called Byrne. “God, what kind of ninny are you to pass up a meeting
with Warren Buffett?” he asked.34
***
Byrne had been hired in 1976 to try to pull GEICO—on the brink of bankruptcy—out of the ditch. Once an
insurer only of government employees, GEICO had taken on John Q. Public. “Millions more qualified” was
the tagline. “Growth, growth, growth, the emphasis was all growth,” says a longtime executive.35 Fueled by
growth, growth, growth, GEICO stock had traded as high as $61—far too rich for Buffett, but he had kept an
eye on it anyway. In fact, he had never stopped following it for the past twenty years.
In 1975, “I looked again at GEICO and was startled by what I saw after a few rule-of-thumb calculations
about loss reserves.” As an auto-insurance company grows, grows, grows, so does the number of accidents
its customers have. If a company underestimates the payments for those claims, it has overstated profits by
the same amount. “It was clear in a sixty-second examination that the company was far underreserved and
the situation was getting worse. I went in to see [the CEO] Norm Gidden on one of my Washington Post
trips. I had known and liked Norm for twenty years on a casual basis. He was friendly, but he had no
interest at all in listening to my comments. They were in deep denial. He really sort of hustled me out of the
office and would not respond on the subject.”36

That Buffett, who did not own the stock, was trying to help GEICO’s management says something about how
attached he still was to the company from which Lorimer Davidson had recently retired, the stock that had
been his first really big idea, the investment that had made so much money for his friends and family.
In early 1976, GEICO announced its worst year in history, a $190 million loss from underwriting operations
during 1975.37 The company stopped paying dividends, a move that conveys to shareholders that the till is
empty. Gidden cast about frantically to bolster the mere $25 million in capital that GEICO had in its
coffers.38 That April, at Washington’s Statler Hilton, four hundred angry stockholders stormed the
shareholder meeting, armed with questions and accusations. Shortly afterward, the insurance commissioners
arrived in a squadron at GEICO’s offices. The board realized, a bit belatedly, that it had to fire the
management.39 The board itself was in disarray, several of its members having lost their personal fortunes in
the debacle. Without a capable CEO to steer the company, Sam Butler, a steady-handed lawyer from
Cravath, Swaine & Moore, took charge as the lead board member—in effect, a temporary CEO.
Butler knew that Byrne had quit Travelers on impulse, bitter at having just been passed over for the job of
CEO. A former actuary who became a millionaire at age twenty-nine through a start-up insurance company,
Byrne had been instrumental in turning around the Travelers’ flailing home-and auto-insurance lines two
years earlier. Butler called him in Hartford and played on his ego, explaining that if he took the job at GEICO
it would prevent a national emergency that would throw the whole United States economy into jeopardy. The
unemployed Byrne was easily recruited to audition for CEO.40 He came down to Washington in early May
and pogo-sticked back and forth before the board, tearing through white flip-chart pages, covering them with
marker pen while talking nonstop. “I came in and gave a sort of off-the-cuff five-hour blah, blah, blah, here’s
five points, here’s what we have to do, boom boom boom speech,”41 he says. The desperate board had no
trouble deciding that this ruddy, round-faced cannonball was the right guy.
Byrne’s first task when he took over as CEO was to run straight to the dusty Chinatown offices of the
District of Columbia’s Insurance Superintendent Max Wallach. An old-school German who spoke with a
thick accent, Wallach was “stubborn as hell, and he had this enormous interest in serving the public,” Byrne
recalls. He was disgusted with GEICO’s former management and had refused to deal with them. Byrne
perceived that Wallach was not wild about him either. Nevertheless, the two men began talking daily,
sometimes hourly.42 Wallach insisted that the company put a deal in place by late June to raise money while
simultaneously getting other insurance companies to take over some of its policies—that is, to “reinsure”
GEICO.43 The idea was to increase the resources GEICO had available to pay claims and to cut the risk it
was carrying so that they were more in balance. Thus, Byrne had to sell other insurers on the idea of putting
up money to save a competitor.
Byrne’s prior experience was that he could sell anything. At first he was confident.
“My pitch was that insurance companies take care of themselves,” says Byrne. “We don’t want the
regulators involved.” If GEICO failed, the regulators would just send the bill for GEICO’s unpaid claims to
its competitors. So they would end up bailing it out anyway. But “Ed Rust, Senior, who ran State Farm,” says
Byrne, “he was a cooney old bastard. He concluded—and he was probably pretty smart—‘I’ll pay a hundred
million to cover any of their unpaid claims if it puts GEICO out of business. They have a better mousetrap,
and killing GEICO will save us money in the long run.’” So State Farm backed out of the reinsurance deal.
“In the end,” says Byrne, “a couple of really good friends reneged. The Travelers just said, ‘We’re not going
to help.’ They didn’t have any principled idea behind this. Travelers was just wussy about it.”
Three weeks after he joined GEICO, “I was racing around, thinking I had made the biggest mistake of my
life. My wife, Dorothy, was up in Hartford, crying and crying and crying. We had just moved for the
nineteenth time.” The market was suggesting GEICO might not survive; its stock, so recently trading for $61
a share, had crashed to $2 a share. Somebody who owned, say, twenty-five thousand shares, had just seen
their fortune dwindle by almost ninety-seven percent—from more than $1.5 million to $50,000—from
