Wyckoff believed most strongly that stock prices were determined solely by “supply and
demand.” He had little use for “tips, rumors, news items, earnings analyses, financial reports,
dividend rates, and the myriad of other sources of information” or the “half-baked trading theories expounded in boardrooms and popular books on the stock market” (Wyckoff in Hutson,
1986). He was a true technical analyst, and a very successful one. He believed that the markets

Download at www.wowebook.com

524

Part VII Selection

were influenced mostly by wealthy individuals and informed insiders. Substituting “institutions”
today for these players, we find that the situation has not changed. By understanding what these
capital pools were doing in the markets, one could profit by following them. Their capital moved
the markets, right or wrong, and the small investor could take advantage of this movement by
understanding how to gauge it.
Wyckoff’s tools were many of the methods described in this book. He used bar charts
(called “vertical charts”) and point-and-figure charts (called “figure charts”). He measured relative strength for both long and short positions, used volume as a means of testing the best time to
consider acting, required stop orders be entered with any action order, used trend lines to determine direction, used composite indexes, used group indexes, and believed that timing of entry
and exit was the most important variable in success. Support and resistance, reversal points
(called “danger points”), and horizontal counts from figure charts were important to his method.
In short, he used about everything you have learned so far. He believed that attempting to fit the
market into a formula or specific pattern was futile because no two markets are the same. The
market, he believed, traveled in waves—small ones evolving into larger ones in either direction—and that these waves could be detected and even anticipated, but they followed no certain,
mathematical path. Consequently, although his method had some organization, it required judgment and experience.
Wyckoff’s progression of selecting stocks was as follows:
1. To determine the direction of the entire market, Wyckoff devised an index called the Wyckoff Wave that was a composite of the most widely held and active stocks. This was his
proxy for the market. Preferably, the stocks in the index were the ones that the investor or
trader was interested in trading. His concept of trend was to watch trend lines drawn on the
Wave chart and on charts of the composite market.
2. To select the stocks in harmony with the market, Wyckoff selected stocks that were strong
in upward trends and weak in downward trends. He believed that it was futile to act against
the trend. His calculation of relative price strength used the percentage changes from wave
highs to lows and lows to highs of each stock versus those of the Wyckoff Waves. Those
stocks that consistently outperformed in each Wave in the direction of the longer Wave
trend were the ones to analyze further.
3. To determine the potential of those selected so far, Wyckoff used the point-and-figure horizontal count. At the same time, a stop level was established, and for the stock to be considered further, a three-to-one ratio of potential gain to potential stop loss was necessary.
4. To determine if the stock is ready to move, shorter-term considerations were needed to
analyze the nature of its price action. To do this, Wyckoff relied on volume, range, and to
some extent, short-term momentum. This portion of his method relied heavily on experience and judgment.
5. To time the entry, Wyckoff based his decision on the turning in the overall market. His
basis for this principle was that most stocks move with the market direction, and to time
with the market change just reduces the risk of error.

Download at www.wowebook.com

525

Chapter 21 Selection of Markets and Issues: Trading and Investing

CONCLUSION
Trading is often focused on very few issues because each must be watched very closely and
intently. Selecting the issues most suitable for a trader depends on many factors having to do
with the trader’s time horizon, liquidity, volatility, preferred market, technical methods, operating costs, and risk tolerance. Those traders who look for special opportunities in the market
rather than concentrate on a small number of issues are often swing traders who hold their positions for a few days or weeks. They use screens based principally on technical action such as patterns, gaps, breakouts from prior highs and lows, and changes in volume or volatility to select
issues. Their equipment is able to scan through large numbers of issues looking for such indications of trend change. As might be expected, these methods are not often used by amateurs
because they must be followed each day all day, though swing trading setups can often be recognized at night and orders placed for the next day while the trader is otherwise occupied.
In investment selection, as in fundamental screening for issues in which to invest, technical
screening can begin with the overall picture, the top-down approach, or it can begin right with
the individual issues in the markets that the investor is most interested in, the bottom-up
approach. Of course, rather than analyze economics and company financial data, the technical
analyst regards the price action of the areas of interest. In the top-down approach, the analyst
begins with the long, secular period of economic activity and studies the relative action of the
four basic investment segments—currencies, materials prices, interest rates, and stock markets.
From the results of that analysis, the analyst can then further analyze the sectors of those markets
showing the most promise. At all times, focus is placed on the best-acting areas for investment
because they have consistently been shown to continue with such strength, similar to the behavior of trends on an absolute basis. The bottom-up approach is most often accomplished specifically for the stock markets because they have so many different issues from which to choose.
This analysis is likewise centered around what is called relative strength to determine the best
acting issues over a specified past lookback period, usually around six months, with anticipation
that those selected issues will continue to outperform over the following year. Relative strength
has been widely tested both in academia and in practice and has shown consistent reliability.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the differences among scalping, day trading, and swing trading.
2. A trader should consider a particular instrument’s volatility, liquidity, and volume when
choosing instruments to trade. Explain why each of these three characteristics is an important component of the trader’s decision.
3. Explain the difference between a hard asset market and a soft asset market.
4. Explain the basic premise of secular analysis and its importance to the investor.
5. Explain the basic principle behind cyclical analysis and its importance to the investor.

Download at www.wowebook.com

526

Part VII Selection

6. Lauren inherited $10,000 and immediately invested the money in the stock market. Unfortunately, she lost 30% of her investment. Explain why she will have to have a return greater
than 30% to get back to her initial capital level of $10,000.
7. Explain what is meant by the term relative strength in this chapter and the implications of
a stock’s relative strength for the investor.
8. Andrew has been following the performance of the stock of his favorite company, Back
Country Driving Equipment (BCDE). He has plotted the ratio of BCDE to the S&P 500 for
the past year, and he has found a strongly upward-sloping line. He thought that this meant
that BCDE was a relatively strong stock; however, he noticed that investors in BCDE have
lost money over the past year. He is confused as to how investing in a relatively strong
stock could result in a loss. Explain how this could happen.

Download at www.wowebook.com

P A R T

V I I I

SYSTEM TESTING
AND MANAGEMENT
C HAPTER 22 S YSTEM D ESIGN AND T ESTING
C HAPTER 23 M ONEY AND R ISK M ANAGEMENT

527

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

2 2

SYSTEM DESIGN AND TESTING

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
By the end of this chapter, you should be familiar with

• The importance of using a system for trading or investing
• The difference between a discretionary and a nondiscretionary system
• The mind-set and discipline required to develop and trade with a system
• The basic procedures for designing a system
• The role that risk management plays in system design
• How to test a system
• Standard measures of system profitability and risk
We have covered most of the methods used by technical analysts to analyze the trading markets.
We now enter into the field of how to utilize this knowledge to produce profits and reduce risk.
Any constant and consistent management of assets requires money management, which we cover
in the next chapter, and some type of system. Haphazardly investing or trading on intuition,
rumor, or untested theories is a road to disaster. It is why most amateur traders and investors lose
money.
A fundamental investor may use price-to-earnings, debt ratios, and so forth, whereas a
technical investor will likely use relative strength, price trend, or volatility, and both investors
will believe they are doing the correct analysis. They are not. In both cases, the methods may be
correct, but making money requires a tested system. There are many myths in investing, and
most investors succumb to them without further analysis. To trade or invest successfully, we need
to know not only how profitable a method has been, but also what the risks of capital loss were.
Not having an understanding of tested methods is flying blind in the financial markets. How do
we test these methods? We create a system. The system must include not only the method for
profit but also the means of controlling risk of loss. Both aspects of investing are extremely

529

Download at www.wowebook.com

530

Part VIII System Testing and Management

important. Some would argue that controlling loss is even more important than the profit method,
that by buying and selling at the flip of a coin, one could make a decent return just by controlling
risk of loss.
Let us begin this chapter by looking a little more closely at what a system is. Then, we
focus on what risk is and how to control losses. Once we have these foundations, we can focus on
the mechanics of developing a system and testing investment strategies.

WHY ARE SYSTEMS NECESSARY?
No stock market goes up forever. Indeed, most world stock markets have declined to zero at one
time or another. The buy-and-hold strategy so popular in the U.S. today is based on a statistical
anomaly. It is a strategy based on a survival bias in the U.S. and the U.K. markets, the only countries in history, so far, whose markets have not completely disappeared at some time (Burnham,
2005). This has caused a misleading assumption that U.S. stocks and stocks in general will necessarily continue to rise. “It would be naïve to expect the future of U.S. stocks to be as bright as
the past” (Burnham, 2005, p 175).
We certainly know that individual stocks can go to zero. How about buggy whips in 1910,
or canals in 1830, or bowling in 1950, or junk bonds and REITs in 1980, or more recently the
autos and the banks? Thus, a long-term plan that excludes a means of controlling risk is eventually doomed.
On the other hand, most technical and fundamental methods, by themselves, are not profitable over time either. Some of the exceptions have been covered earlier in this book, but these
methods primarily depend upon the market circumstances at the time, on the method used, and
on controlling risk. Traders’ and investors’ greatest misconception is that the market has order
and that by finding and acting on that order, profits will be consistent and large. It presumes that
a magic formula exists somewhere that can predict markets. This belief is not true. In looking at
the previous studies in this book, there is no magic order to the markets beyond the fact that they
sometimes trend and, more often, remain in trading ranges. The money made is based on the use
of well-controlled entries and exits, especially those that limit the amount of loss that can occur
and that will react to changing conditions in the market. A system will aid the investor or trader
in timing these market entries and exits.

Discretionary Versus Nondiscretionary Systems
Systems are the next step in the development of an investment plan after understanding the methods of either technical or fundamental investing. Systems can be discretionary, nondiscretionary,
or a combination of both. In discretionary systems, entries and exits are determined by intuition;
in other words, the trader or investor exercises some discretion in making trades. Nondiscretionary systems are those in which entries and exits are determined mechanically by a computer.
Think for a minute of the stereotypical discretionary trader. Imagine the ultimate discretionary trader behaving like the man in the antacid advertisement with two or three phones
yelling, “buy” in one, “sell” in another, with computer screens showing prices and charts of securities all over the world, with ringing phones, with news broadcasts from financial TV stations,

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

531

and with a large contact list of people in different specialties. This type of trader is generally
looking for the home run. It is a great image, one that has in it a bit of the swashbuckler, the gunslinger, and so on. In fact, many truly exceptional traders are like this. They have the gifted intuition to be able to do this consistently and profitably.
Most people, however, do not have the time, the knowledge, the contacts, the equipment,
the quickness of thought, or the stomach to do this. In fact, most people who attempt to trade like
this either burn out or go broke. They have no way of evaluating what they are doing except from
the equity in their account at the end of the day. It is as if the excitement is more important than
making profits.
The nondiscretionary trader, on the other hand, is usually calm, calculating, and likely
bored. The majority of successful traders and investors use nondiscretionary systems (Etzkorn
interview of Babcock, 1996). Some have been engineers; others have that type of mind, familiar
with statistics and systems. They have studied the markets, the methods of profit making—both
fundamental and technical—and have tested the techniques using modern statistical methods.
They understand that nothing is perfect and that markets change character over time. However,
by testing their methods and strategies, they have derived a mechanical system that minimizes
risk of loss and maximizes return.
Rules are the structure of a system. An example of a rule would be “buy when one moving
average crosses above another.” Variables are the quantities used in the rules—two moving averages, and parameters are the actual values used in the variables—two days and seven days. A system will include all these factors, and their usefulness is determined by testing different rules,
variables, and parameters over varied markets and market conditions.
A purely nondiscretionary system is one that runs by itself on market data that is continually fed into it. If our rule is to buy when the two-day moving average crosses above the sevenday moving average, for example, a buy order automatically is placed when this occurs. Once the
trader has determined the rule to follow, the system is on autopilot and the trader does not make
decisions.
A trader or investor can also choose to use a partial discretionary system. The partial discretionary system is one that generates signals that then are acted upon by the investor based on
personal confidence in them and experience with them. By having some discretion, however, the
system cannot be tested accurately because emotion can enter into the trading decisions and
cause unquantifiable errors.
Is it always better to choose a nondiscretionary, mechanical system over a discretionary
one? Let us look at some of the advantages and disadvantages of this approach.
Benefits of a Nondiscretionary, Mechanical System
A nondiscretionary, mechanical system provides a mathematical edge as determined by testing
and adjusting. This is the principle behind the casino and an insurance business, both of which
profit from many small profitable trades and occasional losses.
Using a nondiscretionary system avoids emotion. This is an advantage because traders
often lose money due to emotional decisions. The nondiscretionary system also reduces other
trading pitfalls—overtrading, premature action, no action, and constant decision making. Trading with a properly designed mechanical system also prevents large losses and risk of ruin, which

Download at www.wowebook.com

532

Part VIII System Testing and Management

most traders have never quantified or understood. In fact, risk control can be one of the most
important advantages of a mechanical system.
Trading with a nondiscretionary system also provides certainty, develops confidence, and
produces less stress. Anxiety comes from uncertainty. Although a nondiscretionary system cannot predict the future, it can structure how to react to possible outcomes. It gives a list of
responses to events beyond one’s control.
Pitfalls to a Nondiscretionary, Mechanical System
Though there are many benefits to a nondiscretionary, mechanical system, pitfalls also exist. For
one, extrapolating will not have the same results as tests; history does not repeat itself precisely.
The more a system is optimized or curve-fitted, the less reliable it will be in the future. In fact, in
their book, The Ultimate Trading Guide, Hill, Pruitt, and Hill (2000) suggest that you should
generally expect half the profits and twice the drawdowns as shown in tests of past data. Having
been tested, the system designer expects results that are often unrealistic. The designer must be
careful not to lose confidence when unrealistic expectations are not achieved.
Nondiscretionary systems often will make profits in clumps, especially if it is a trend-following system. The trader then loses small amounts waiting for the next clump and protecting
from large losses. In other words, great creativity may have gone into inventing the system, but
its operation is boring. In addition, some system designs allow large drawdowns but still eventually produce profits. The emotional problem for the user is the wait for the drawdown to be
recovered and meanwhile the possible loss of confidence in the system. A loss of confidence
results in fiddling with the rules or giving up just as the system is about to kick in.
Although a good system adjusts to a changing market, it does require periodic updates.
This can often be a source of confusion for the designer. Is it time to update an underperforming
system because of a changing marketplace? Alternatively, is the lackluster performance period a
time for the trader to sit by patiently waiting for the system to kick in? The answers to these questions are not always obvious.
Remember that the system falls apart if it is not followed precisely. This is what the testing
was for, and violations of the rules established from the testing negate the value of the system.
This requires considerable discipline.
Using a nondiscretionary, mechanical system is not easy—otherwise, everyone would do
it. There is a lot of work in coming up with a system, testing it, adjusting it, and trying it correctly
and convincingly. The tendency for many people is to “wing it” and see if it works. That method
leaves the trader nowhere.

HOW DO I DESIGN A SYSTEM?
Now you are convinced that you need to design a system for trading. However, how do you do
that? Let us look at some of the requirements and steps involved in creating an effective system.

Requirements for Designing a System
What is needed to design a successful system? Before even considering the components of a system, we must begin with something even more basic—designing a workable, profitable system

Download at www.wowebook.com

533

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

begins with some basic personal attitudes. Some of the characteristics of the necessary mind-set
include the following:
• Understand what a discretionary or nondiscretionary system will do—be realistically
knowledgeable, and lean toward a nondiscretionary, mechanical system that can be
quantified precisely and for which rules are explicit and constant.
• Do not have an opinion of the market. Profits are made from reacting to the market,
not by anticipating it. Without a known structure, the markets cannot be predicted. A
mechanical system will react, not predict.
• Realize that losses will occur—keep them small and infrequent.
• Realize that profits will not necessarily occur constantly or consistently.
• Realize that your emotions will tug at your mind and encourage changing or fiddling
with the system. Such emotions must be controlled.
• Be organized—winging it will not work.
• Develop a plan consistent with one’s time available and investment horizon—daily,
weekly, monthly, and yearly.
• Test, test, and test again, without curve-fitting. Most systems fail because they have
not been tested or have been overfitted.
• Follow the final tested plan without exception—discipline, discipline, discipline. No
one is smarter than the computer, regardless of how painful losses may be, and how
wide spreads between price and stops may affect one’s staying power.

Understanding Risk
When we set out to create a system, we are usually concentrating on profits. Remember our
underlying objective is to make profits. However, we must be careful not to focus so much on
earning profits that we forget about the critical concept of risk.
The amateur investor or trader usually uses a discretionary system. Testing and analyzing
and evolving a workable nondiscretionary system takes too much time, knowledge, experience,
and thought. Most people would rather just take the word of others and act spontaneously. Profitable professionals, however, always have a system. Although they may use a discretionary system, professionals know the results of investment action from experience and know the risks.
Successful professionals always apply some form of risk control, even if it is just a series of mental stop-loss levels. Considering risk marks the difference between amateurs and professionals.
Those who consider profit potential and not risk are mostly amateurs, even if they think they are
professionals, and generally have or manage portfolios that considerably underperform the markets over the long term.
Risk is a vital concept, but what exactly is it? Academics have long characterized risk as
equivalent to volatility. As seen in Appendix A, “Basic Statistics,” the Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM) and options theory consider volatility not only an important variable in markets,
