
Figure 5-19. Rolling 6-month correlation between oil prices and trade-weighted USD (Source:
U.S. Energy Information Administration, Federal Reserve Bank)

High oil prices negatively impact economic growth in the United States. In
addition, the Fed’s core inflation index excludes food and energy prices,
which means that rising oil prices will not likely be followed by higher
interest rates, another negative in the short-term for the dollar. Finally, trade

121

122

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
between the United States and OPEC is largely one way, unlike trade
between OPEC and the rest of the world, which means that US oil imports
are not offset by increased exports. The upshot is that in the short term,
significant changes (increases) in the price of oil can explain 50% (based on
a correlation of -0.5) of subsequent changes (decreases) in the dollar, as seen
in Figure 5-19.

Correlations between two or more currencies are the most interesting
and the strongest quantitative relationships in forex. As I explained in
Chapter 2, while there are dozens of liquid currencies, there is simply
too much information for all of them to trade independently of one
another. As a result, most currencies (especially those outside of the
majors) tend to fluctuate relative to the US dollar. Emerging market
currencies, in particular, behave similarly, especially during times
when risk appetite is very strong or very weak. As can be seen in
Figure 5-20, emerging market currencies rose and fell in lockstep for
the first half of 2010. In the second half, risk appetite strengthened and
growth/inflation differentials began to diverge, as did emerging market
currencies.

Figure 5-20. Correlations in emerging market currencies break down

As far as correlations between individual currencies go, they tend to fluctuate
in proportion to market conditions. As a general rule, however, currency

Forex for Beginners
correlations have been getting stronger over time. In Figure 5-21 it can
clearly be seen that the correlation between the Canadian and Australian
dollars has been relatively strong for most of the last decade and is currently
nearing 100%!

Figure 5-21. Strengthening correlation between the AUD/USD and CAD/USD

There are a few theories for why this is the case, but the consensus is that
currency markets are converging with other financial markets. Despite
tremendous volume, forex trading was previously relegated to a quiet corner
of finance. As more sophisticated traders expand into forex, they are bringing
pre-existing trading mindsets with them. Many hedge funds, in particular, are
connecting all of their trading operations under the umbrella of one broad
strategy. The result is that algorithms may buy and sell the Canadian and
Australian dollars together when commodity prices are rising, causing the
correlation between these two currencies to become self-fulfillingly strong.
Finally, the rising popularity of index funds (which consist of a basket of
securities designed to represent a particular segment of the markets) has
caused assets that were already correlated to become even more so.
There are a handful of online forex portals that publish real-time correlation
data for the major currencies over different intervals of time. This
information can be used toward a handful of strategic ends, which will be
covered in Chapter 7. For now, consider that they serve as useful gauges for
the strength of various fundamental indicators. For example, let’s say that
one has a theory that rising interest rates are causing the Loonie to rise
against the US dollar. Based on the matrix of correlations displayed in Figure

123

124

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
5-22, however, it seems that the USD/CAD is quite strongly correlated
(greater than 80%) with most of the other major currency pairs. This tells us,
then, that the apparent rise in the CAD is better interpreted as a decline in the
USD, and that one should probably look to US factors to explain the
performance of the USD/CAD.

Figure 5-22. Weekly correlation between Canadian dollar and other major currencies (Source:
Forexticket.co.uk)

Debt Analysis
The efficacy of debt as a fundamental analysis tool varies. During periods of
economic growth, the markets tend to pay scant attention to rising debt
levels. As long as the ratio of debt to GDP stays constant, investors operate
under the implicit assumption that the economy will be able to grow its way
out from under the burden of increased debt. As government spending is a
component of economic output, it can even have a positive impact on
currency performance, especially if it doesn’t crowd out private investment.
When growth slows down, however, debt ratios tend to increase relative to
GDP. This is exacerbated by declining tax revenues, the propensity of
governments to increase spending during recessionary periods, and by
consequent cuts in sovereign credit ratings.
Any time this happens, default can quickly become a self-fulfilling prophecy
as governments find it impossible to take out new debt and refinance existing
debt at affordable interest rates. Investors get nervous and respond by
moving money offshore, causing rapid currency depreciation. In fact, this is
exactly what transpired during the credit crisis. Debt had already risen to
alarming levels, but it wasn’t until growth slowed down in 2008 that
investors took stock of the bubble years. Iceland was singled out for its
imprudence, and it wasn’t long before its banks were declared insolvent, its
government defaulted on its debt, and the krona had to be temporarily
replaced by the euro.

Forex for Beginners
As far as fundamental analysis goes, there are a couple of ways in which debt
is relevant. First of all, it can be used to forecast the likelihood of full-blown
financial crises. The Economist, for instance, uses three indicators (budget
deficit, net debt, and GDP growth minus the cost of finance) to rank
countries in terms of the sustainability of their debt. Unsurprisingly, the four
PIGS countries of Europe were near the top of the 2010 rankings. Then
again, so were Japan and the United States! (See Table 5-1.)
Table 5-1. Countries Ranked by Sustainability of Debt Position in 2010 (Source: The
Economist, Bloomberg L.P., EIU, OECD)
Budget Balance
% of GDP

Net Debt %
of GDP

GDP Growth Less
Cost of Finance

Sovereign Debt,
Years to Maturity

Greece

-4.6

94.6

-3.2

7.7

Ireland

-7.0

38.0

-5.1

6.8

Britain

-6.7

59.0

-1.5

13.7

Japan

-5.9

104.6

0.1

5.4

Portugal

-2.7

62.6

-2.3

6.5

Spain

-4.3

41.6

-3.0

6.7

France

-3.8

60.7

-0.7

6.9

United States

-7.0

65.2

1.4

4.8

Poland

-5.3

32.4

-0.7

5.2

Italy

2.2

100.8

-1.0

7.2

Hungary

4.2

62.1

-3.5

3.3

Norway

-7.8

-143.6

2.4

4.9

Canada

-2.7

32.6

2.0

5.2

Switzerland

0.4

11.0

0.5

6.7

In this case, however, it is not debt itself which presages a crisis, but the ease
with which such debt can be financed. The currency markets thus tend to
view bond yields as being most representative of a country’s ability to deal
with debt. A sudden increase in yields can signal the start of a potential
crisis, and currency depreciation tends to follow. In addition, yields adjust in
real-time while debt levels change incrementally. In the case of the

125

126

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
Eurozone, sudden spikes in bond yields have often corresponded with
depreciation in the euro. (See Figure 5-23.)

Figure 5-23. Portugal’s 10-year bond yield and EUR/USD, relative change (Source:
Bloomberg L.P.)

Some pessimists have argued that both the actual and the potential increase
in US debt levels could threaten the long-term viability of the US dollar.
Alas, neither credit nor currency markets have priced in the possibility of US
federal government default. And the historic downgrade of the US sovereign
credit rating in August 2011 was met with yawns.
Finally, debt level comparisons have been used to buttress the case for
buying emerging market currencies, whose net debt levels are much lower
than their developed world counterparts. To be sure, this is yet another
reason why emerging market currencies will continue their steady upward
march over the next decade.

Forex for Beginners

127

Monetary Policy and Central Bank
Intervention
I’ve already talked about the role that central banks play in setting interest
rates and tweaking money supply. Here I want to examine some of the other
ways in which they can influence the forex markets.
First are the central banks’ open market operations. Open market operations
are now arguably the most prominent weapon in a central bank’s arsenal.
During periods of recession, when inflation is low, central banks can literally
print money in order to fund purchases of financial securities. The central
bank holds these securities on its balance sheet with the intention of selling
them off once the economic pump has been fully primed and inflation has
taken hold.
In the wake of the credit crisis, the world’s major central banks stunned the
markets with the scope of their open market operations. The Fed’s program
was particularly ambitious. In a process known as quantitative easing, the
Fed purchased almost $3 trillion worth of financial securities in two discrete
blocks. (See Figure 5-24.) Critics worried that the bank had sacrificed its
independence, that it was enabling record US government borrowing, and
that it would foment asset price bubbles and inflation. As a result, the
currency markets punished the dollar severely after each round of
quantitative easing was announced. Whether their concerns were justified
ultimately depends on whether the Federal Reserve Bank can unwind the
program (by selling the securities on its balance sheet back to private
investors) when inflation picks up.

h

128

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Figure 5-24. Federal Reserve Bank balance sheet

From the standpoint of fundamental analysis, there is an edge to be gained
from correctly reading the tea leaves and predicting both the beginning and
end of quantitative easing programs. Those that guess right and invest
accordingly will be rewarded with profits. More importantly, fundamental
analysts should understand how quantitative easing can indirectly impact
forex markets in various ways, via a stronger stock market, lower bond
yields, and potentially higher inflation.
Central banks can also attempt to guide their exchange rates through forex
intervention. Most emerging market central banks are active (to varying
degrees) in taking steps to push down their respective currencies, though
countries in Latin America and Asia have been particularly aggressive. This
is typically achieved by selling large chunks of their home currency on the
spot market and can be supported with measures that penalize speculation by
foreign investors. Some central banks have fixed intervention programs in
place. Others spend large amounts on discrete occasions in a bid to
overwhelm the markets. Still others engage in “verbal intervention” without
ever directly entering the markets.
Beginning in 2009, central banks began intervening, one after another, in
vain attempts to prevent their currencies from returning to pre-credit crisis
levels. Even the major central banks contributed with a coordinated
intervention on behalf of the yen, which had strengthened after the March
2011 earthquake. In November 2011, the central banks intervened again with

Forex for Beginners
a program of liquidity swaps that was designed to prop up the ailing euro.
The Swiss National Bank, meanwhile, keeps threatening to renew its failed
program to hold down the franc. After a multi-day appreciation, it intervened
verbally and caused the CHF/EUR to raise by an unprecedented 1000 PIPs in
a single trading session! (Note Figure 5-25.) To be sure, all intervention is
doomed to fail over the long term. Over the short term, however, it can quite
spur magnificent spikes.

Figure 5-25. Immediate and medium-term impact of SNB franc intervention

When central banks intervene, they inadvertently provide support for
opposing currencies. In other words, a central bank cannot simply sell its
home currency; it must simultaneously buy an opposing currency. As I
explained in Chapter 3, this drives the accumulation of currency reserves.
That most central banks disproportionately prefer USD-denominated assets is
a huge source of support for the US dollar. While there are frequent
indications that this could change, problems with the other major currencies
(most recently with the euro) favor a continuation of the status quo.
Emerging market currencies meanwhile remain subject to liquidity and other
logistical complications that hinder their broad adoption as reserve
currencies. Nevertheless, central banks collectively represent one of the
largest long-term players in the forex markets, and fundamental analysts
must closely monitor this situation for any signs of change.

129

130

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Political Factors
The role of politics in financial markets has always been difficult to quantify.
Generally speaking, elections and changes in political administrations tend to
have only a psychological impact on forex markets. This is especially true in
the case of the United States, where economic policy has not changed
significantly over the last few decades. Free trade has been gradually
embraced, tax rates have edged down slightly, corporations have become
more profitable, budget deficits have become the norm as spending has
surged, the business cycle is increasingly driven by financial factors, and so
forth. To be sure, policy may shift to the right or to the left depending on
which party holds power. For the most part, though, the overall trend has
remained intact. As a result, elections tend to offer very little insight into how
a particular currency will perform during the years that follow. Instead,
financial-economic factors tend to carry more weight. As can be seen from
Figure 5-26, former President Bill Clinton can claim the dubious distinction
of being the only US president to witness an overall rise in the US dollar
while in office. This was probably less due to the nuances of his economic
policy, however, than the economic and stock market boom that began in the
late 1990s and carried over into the presidency of George W. Bush.
That’s not to say that politics are irrelevant. On the contrary, the whims of
governments can cause significant gyrations in the forex markets. For
example, the US dollar suffered mightily when the US Congress temporarily
balked at raising the US borrowing limit in May 2011. Meanwhile, political
developments in Europe continue to drive the euro, whose very existence
seems to hinge on political life support.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 5-26. USD Trade-weighted index and corresponding US president

Emerging market currencies are perhaps most sensitive to political
developments, because their governments are more likely to pay attention to
and take steps to influence the value of their currencies. While this task is
supposed to be delegated to independent central banks, in practice it is
subject to political meddling. For example, if the incumbent government of
Brazil makes a strong export sector the cornerstone of its economic policy, it
may instruct the Bank of Brazil to actively take steps to hold down the real.
This practice reached an extreme from 2010–2011, as cash (spurred by loose
monetary policies in industrialized countries) began to pour into emerging
markets, causing their currencies to appreciate rapidly. Emerging market
central banks fought back and, one after another, sought to devalue their
respective currencies. Before long, a full-scale currency war had erupted, and
emergency meetings of the G7 and G20 were convened. It wasn’t until late
2011 (when the European sovereign debt crisis flared up and risk appetite
cratered) that the currency wars began to fade, once again underscoring that
political factors are less important than financial-economic factors.

131

132

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Conclusion
If there is any lesson to be learned from the preceding discussion, it is that
there are no cut-and-dried rules in fundamental analysis. In understanding
how numerous variables impact exchange rates, one must first understand the
particular narrative that is guiding the markets at any given time. Whether
risk appetite is strong or weak, whether a currency has or has not been
targeted by carry traders, whether an interest rate change has been anticipated
in advance are all factors that will ultimately determine the market reaction.
Fundamental analysis merely provides a framework for understanding these
narratives.

Forex for Beginners

133

CHAPTER

6
Technical
Analysis
Analyzing Exchange Rates
Based on Technical Factors
Technical analysis is grounded in the notion that price data alone is all that is
needed to forecast future price movements. While simple in theory, technical
analysis is extremely complex in practice. There are dozens of basic
technical trading strategies, incorporating hundreds of tools and thousands of
different iterations. To master (let alone attempt to utilize) more than a
handful of these tools would be unrealistic or even counterproductive.
Accordingly, in the sections that follow, I have tried to pare down the vast
spectrum of technical analysis strategies into a manageable number, with an
emphasis on those that are easy to use, quantitative, and compatible with
fundamental analysis.

Charts
A trader’s best friend is his chart, and this is especially true for technical
traders. With time on the x-axis and price on the y-axis, a chart is the most
basic visual representation of the historical exchange rate performance for a
given currency pair. If only it were that simple! One must first select the
chart type, variously depicted in Figure 6-1. Line charts and area charts
connect individual price points over a given period of time. Technical traders
prefer bar or candlestick charts—which show opening, closing, high, and low

136

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
prices for each unit of time, and are color-coded to distinguish upward and
downward movements—because of the depth of information that they
contain.

Figure 6-1. Examples of different chart types

In fact, there is a branch of technical analysis devoted to the study of
candlestick formations, with a system of Japanese nomenclature to boot.
Individual formations (some of which are depicted in Figure 6-2) can be
interpreted as being bullish, bearish, or stable, and series of formations can
potentially indicate good times to buy and sell. Alas, candlestick analysis is
exceedingly intricate, and it extends beyond the scope of this book. For those
of you interested in learning more, I would recommend consulting one of the
numerous books that have been written about the subject.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 6-2. Basic candlestick formations and their interpretations

Anyway, the next step in setting up a chart is to select the overall time frame
(e.g., one year, one month, one day, one hour) and the unit of time (e.g., one
day, five minutes, one minute). While seemingly trivial, the time frame of
your chart is actually a very important consideration. Different lengths of
time may show different—and sometimes contradictory—trends. Naturally,
it’s best to select a time period that is consistent with your trading horizon. If
you plan to follow the swing trading approach advocated in this book, it
makes sense to look at price data on 3–12 month time frame. If, in contrast,
you are an aspiring day trader, you probably won’t be able to glean anything
useful from a chart covering anything longer than one week.
In fact, as you can see in Figure 6-3, selecting the wrong time scale for your
chart could yield disastrous consequences. Specifically, if you bought the
EUR/GBP based on your interpretation of the 30-minute inset chart, you
probably would have lost money on the trade. If you instead had taken the
time to examine a medium-term (five-hour) chart, you would have clearly

137

138

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
noticed that the overall trend was still bearish. Sure enough, the EUR/GBP
resumed its downward arc immediately after the slight correction. The lesson
here is that it’s important to have a broad perspective when performing any
kind of analysis.

Figure 6-3. Multiple time scale analysis

Some charting software also includes data on volume and open interest. Due
to the decentralized nature of spot forex trading, however, both are calculated
based primarily on activity in the futures or options markets. Volume tends to
ebb and flow in accordance with daily and seasonal patterns; the open and
closing of the main markets, as well as the middle of the week (go figure!),
tend to see the greatest volume. Volume spikes during news releases and falls
off around major holidays and during the summer when traders are away
from their desks. This is also reflected in terms of lower volatility. (See
Figure 6-4.)

Forex for Beginners

Figure 6-4. Average USD/EUR volatility, by month

Volume can also be used as proxy for momentum and to confirm the
existence of trends. For instance, if the EUR/USD suddenly experiences an
upside break-out after a period of flat trading, you might see a corresponding
surge in volume as traders rush to buy the EUR/USD before it loses its
upward momentum.
Open interest, meanwhile, reflects futures positions that have not yet been
settled by offsetting positions. When a new long position is opened, open
interest rises while the closing of a long position (or the opening of a short
position) will cause open interest to fall. Since real-time open interest is
available only through futures and options brokers, most spot forex portals
will use the Commitments of Traders (COT) data as a proxy. Every Friday
afternoon, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) releases its
weekly COT report, which shows long and short positions for various
financial and commodity futures and options contracts. Overall open interest
for each contract is calculated, and data is further broken down among the
different types of participants. As can be seen from Figure 6-5, there is often
a tight relationship between open interest and spot prices. In this case, the
longest sustained rise in the New Zealand dollar in 2011 was preceded by a
bottoming out of open interest.
