
Bands
Bands are also envelopes around a moving average but, rather than being fixed in size, are calculated to adjust for the price volatility around the moving average. They, thus, shrink when prices
become calm and expand when prices become volatile. The most widely used band is the
Bollinger Band, named after John Bollinger (2002).
Bollinger Band
As we mentioned earlier, there are two principal ways to measure price volatility. One is the standard deviation about a mean or moving average, and the other is the ATR. Bollinger Bands use
the standard deviation calculation.
To construct Bollinger Bands, first calculate a simple moving average of prices. Bollinger
uses the SMA because most calculations using standard deviation use an SMA. Next, draw
bands a certain number of standard deviations above and below the moving average. For example, Bollinger’s standard calculation, and the one most often seen in the public chart services,
begins with a 20-period simple moving average. Two standard deviations are added to the SMA
to plot an upper band. The lower band is constructed by subtracting two standard deviations from
the SMA. The bands are self-adjusting, automatically becoming wider during periods of extreme
price changes.
Figure 14.10 shows the standard Bollinger Band around the 20-period moving average. Of
course, both the length of the moving average and the number of standard deviations can be
adjusted. Theoretically, the plus or minus two standard deviations should account for approximately 95% of all the price action about the moving average. In fact, this is not quite true because
price action is nonstationary and nonrandom and, thus, does not follow the statistical properties
of the standard deviation calculation precisely. However, it is a good estimate of the majority of
price action. Indeed, as the chart shows, the price action seems to oscillate between the bands
quite regularly. This action is similar to the action in a congestion area or rectangle pattern (see
Chapter 15, “Bar Chart Patterns”), except that prices also tend to oscillate within the band as the
price trends upward and downward. This is because the moving average is replicating the trend
of the prices and adjusting for them while the band is describing their normal upper and lower
limits around the trend as price volatility changes.

Download at www.wowebook.com

293

Chapter 14 Moving Averages

80.00

Bollinger Bands

78.00

with 20-day sma
and 2 std deviations

76.00
74.00
72.00
70.00
68.00
66.00
64.00

CLB - Core Laboratories

62.00
60.00

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 14.10

Bollinger Bands (CLB daily: February 2010–July 2010)

Keltner Band
Chester Keltner (1969) introduced Keltner Bands in his book, How to Make Money in Commodities. To construct these bands, first calculate the “Typical Price” (Close + High + Low) ÷ 3, and
calculate a ten-day SMA of the typical price. Next, calculate the band size by creating a ten-day
SMA of High minus Low or bar range. The upper band is then plotted as the ten-day SMA of the
typical price plus the ten-day SMA of bar range. The lower band is plotted as the ten-day SMA
to the typical price minus the ten-day SMA of bar range. (When the calculation is rearranged, it
is very similar to the use of an ATR, and these bands are sometimes referred to as ATR bands.)
As with most methods, different analysts prefer to modify the basic model to meet their
specific needs and investment strategies. Although Keltner’s original calculation used ten-day
moving averages, many analysts using this method have extended the moving averages to 20
periods. The 20-period calculation is more in line with the calculation for a Bollinger Band.
STARC Band
STARC is an acronym for Stoller Average Range Channel, invented by Manning Stoller. This
system uses the ATR over five periods added to and subtracted from a five-period SMA of prices.
It produces a band about prices that widens and shrinks with changes in the ATR or the volatility
of the price. Just as with the Keltner Bands, the length of the SMA used with STARC can be
adjusted to different trading or investing time horizons.

Download at www.wowebook.com

294

Part III Trend Analysis

Trading Strategies Using Bands and Envelopes
In line with the basic concept of following the trend, bands and envelopes are used to signal
when a trend change has occurred and to reduce the number of whipsaws that occur within a
tight trading range. While looking at the envelopes or bands on a chart, one would think that the
best use of them might be to trade within them from high extreme to low extreme and back, similar to strategies for rectangle patterns. However, the trading between bands is difficult. First, by
definition, except for fixed envelopes, the bands contract during a sideways, dull trend and leave
little room for maneuvering at a cost-effective manner and with profitable results. Second, when
prices suddenly move on a new trend, they will tend to remain close to the band in the direction
of the trend and give many false exit signals. Third, when the bands expand, they show that
volatility has increased, usually due to the beginning of a new trend, and any position entered in
further anticipation of low volatility is quickly stopped out.
Bands, therefore, have become methods of determining the beginnings of trends and are
not generally used for range trading between them. When the outer edge of a band is broken,
empirical evidence suggests that the entry should be in the direction of the breakout, not unlike
the breakout of a trend line or support or resistance level. A breakout from a band that contains
roughly 90% of previous price action suggests that the general trend of the previous price action
has changed in the direction of the breakout.
In Figure 14.10, a breakout buy signal occurs in April, when the price breaks above the
upper Bollinger Band, hinting that a strong upward trend is starting. You will notice that the
bands had become narrower during March. This band tightening, caused by shrinking volatility,
is often followed by a sharp price move.
The only difference between a band breakout and a more conventional kind is that a band
is generally more fluid. Because moving averages will often become support or resistance levels,
the moving average in the Bollinger Band calculation should then become the trailing stop level
for any entry that previously occurred from a breakout above or below the band. The ability of
moving averages to be used as trailing stops is easily spliced into a system utilizing any kind of
bands that adjust for volatility.
The other use for the moving average within a band is that because the moving average
often becomes either support or resistance, it can become a retracement level for additional entry
in the trend established by the direction of the moving average and the bands. With a stop only
slightly below the moving average using the rules we learned in the last chapter for establishing
stop levels, when the price retraces back into the area of the moving average while in a strong
upward trend, an additional entry can be made where the retracement within the band is expected
to halt.
In testing band breakouts, the longer the bar, it seems, the more profitable the system. Very
short-term volatility, because it is proportionally more active, causes many false breakouts.
Longer-term periods with less volatility per period appear to remain in trends for longer periods
and are not whipsawed as much as short-term trends. The most profitable trend-following systems are long-term, and as short-term traders have learned, the ability of price to oscillate sharply

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 14 Moving Averages

295

is greater than when it is smoothed over longer periods. Thus, the inherent whipsaws in shortterm data become reduced over longer periods, and trend-following systems tracking longer
trends have fewer unprofitable signals. Bands are more successful in trending markets and are,
therefore, more suitable for commodities markets than the stock market.
Another use for bands is to watch price volatility. Low volatility is generally associated
with sideways to slightly slanted trends, ones where whipsaws are common and patterns fail.
High volatility is generally associated with a strong trend, up or down. By watching volatility,
especially for an increase in volatility, the analyst has a clue that a change in trend is forthcoming. To watch volatility, one should take a difference between the high band and low band and
plot it as a line below the price action. Bollinger calls this line a Bandwidth Indicator. A rise in
the bandwidth line, which results from increasing volatility, can be associated directly with price
action. Any breakout from a pattern, support or resistance level, trend line, or moving average
can be confirmed by the change in volatility. If volatility does not increase with a price breakout,
the odds favor that the breakout is false. Volatility, therefore, can be used as confirmation for
trend changes, or it can be used as a warning that things are about to change. This use of bands is
more successful when combined with other methods of determining an actual trend change.

Channel
In discussing trend lines, we noted that a line can often be drawn parallel to a trend line that
encompasses the price action in what was called a channel. For present purposes, that definition
changes slightly by relaxing the requirement for a parallel line.
Channels have become described as something simpler than two parallel lines. For example, in Chapter 12, we mentioned the Donchian channel method that has been so successful even
though it’s been widely known for many years. Signals occur with the Donchian channel when
the breaking above or below a high or low over some past period occurs (see Figure 14.11). This
method does not require the construction of a trend line; the only requirement is a record of the
highs and lows over some past period. In the case of the Donchian channel method, the period
was four weeks, and the rule was to buy when the price exceeded the highest level over the past
four weeks and sell when the price declined below the lowest low over the past four weeks. Such
systems are usually “stop and reverse” systems that are always in the market, either long or short.
As is likely imagined, the channel systems are more commonly used in the commodities markets
where long and short positions are effortless and prices tend to trend much longer.
An adaptation of the standard channel breakout system is to use different periods for buy
and sell signals. For example, a 200-day period of highs might be used for a buy signal, and a 20day period might be used for a sell signal. Generally, this method works well in commodity markets where trending is stronger and longer lasting. It does not work as well in the stock market.

Download at www.wowebook.com

296

Part III Trend Analysis

80.00
78.00
20-day
Donchian Channel

76.00
74.00
72.00
70.00
68.00
66.00
64.00
62.00

CLB - Core Laboratories
Mar

Apr

May

Jun

60.00

Jul

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 14.11 Donchian Channel on daily closes (CLB daily: February 26, 2010–July 13, 2010)

CONCLUSION
The basic way the technical analyst makes profits is by identifying a trend in prices and riding
that trend. At times, daily fluctuations in prices make it difficult for the analyst to view the basic
underlying trend in prices. Moving averages are tools used to smooth this erratic data, making it
easier to discern the genuine underlying trend.
Although there are various methods of calculating a moving average, the basic idea is to
give a summary of the average or normal price history of a particular period. Because the moving averages are based on historical prices, by nature, they will be a lagging indicator of trends.
The shorter the period covered by the moving average, the less of a lag there will be. However,
using a shorter period also leads to more false signals. As usual, when choosing a moving average system, there is a trade-off between early trend reversal recognition and certainty of trend
reversal. The use of envelopes, bands, and channels around the moving average can minimize the
number of false signals by providing a larger range of price movement before a signal is triggered.
Box 14.1 gives a list of basic principles that the technical analyst should keep in mind. This
list provides a summary of some of the key points we have addressed in the past three chapters.

Download at www.wowebook.com

297

Chapter 14 Moving Averages

BOX 14.1 TRADING RULES
In the past few chapters, we have covered a good deal of material regarding trends.
Here are some of the key points to remember when investing:
• Riding the trend is the most profitable use of technical analysis.
• Trends can be identified with trend lines, moving averages, and relative highs
and lows.
• Always pick a security that trends up and down. Flat or random trends are
usually unprofitable.
• Be aware of the next longer period and shorter period trends from the one
being traded.
• Always trade with the trend:
• “Trend is your friend.”
• “Don’t buck the trend.”
• Breakouts from support or resistance levels, patterns, or bands usually signal
a change in trend.
• A trend line breakout is at least a warning.
• The longer the trend, the more important the breakout.
• Confirm any breakout with other evidence, especially when entering a position. In exiting, confirmation is not as important.
• Always use stops, protective and trailing.
• Do not sell profitable positions too soon; just keep trailing with stops.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain why a rising moving average indicates an upward trend and a falling moving average indicates a downward trend in stock prices.
2. Explain why there is a lag between the time a trend reverses and when the moving average
signals this reversal. Why is this lag longer for a 200-day moving average than a 10-day
moving average?
3. What problems are associated with an SMA that an EMA calculation is designed to overcome?
4. Explain why a shorter-term moving average is considered to be a “faster” moving average
and a longer-term moving average is considered to be a “slower” moving average.
5. Sophia says that she is watching a 10-day SMA and a 60-day SMA of her favorite stock,
and she is planning to purchase the stock when the 10-day SMA crosses above the 60-day
SMA. Explain the rationale for Sophia’s strategy.

Download at www.wowebook.com

298

Part III Trend Analysis

6. Thomas warns Sophia that her strategy can easily lead to whipsaws. Explain what Thomas
means by whipsaws, and describe the type of market in which whipsaws are most likely to
occur.
7. If Sophia is concerned about whipsaws, how might she use envelopes or bands to minimize
the likelihood of whipsaws?
8. Why is choosing a stock that is trending upward or downward, rather than one that is moving sideways, an important key to trading profitability?
9. Explain what Welles Wilder means by the term directional movement and how this concept
is important to determining price trends.
10. Why does a low value for ADX suggest a period of congestion?
11. Gather the daily high, low, and closing prices for McDonald’s stock (ticker symbol MCD)
for January 2009 through July 2010 from Yahoo! Finance or another electronic source.
a. Using a spreadsheet, calculate 10-day and 60-day SMAs. Plot these two curves with
a bar chart of the stock prices.
b. Compare and contrast the 10-day and the 60-day SMA.
c. Explain the relationship between the market trend and the 60-day SMA during the
following periods:
i. May 2004–October 2004
ii. October 2004–May 2005
iii. May 2005–July 2005
d. Find a point in your graph where the faster moving average crosses the slower moving average. What type of signal would occur at this point? In hindsight, would trading on that signal have been profitable? Why or why not?
e. Construct DMI+ and DMI– for McDonald’s for the period August 2004–March
2005.
i. Interpret DMI+ during this time.
ii. Interpret DMI– during this time.
iii. Compare DMI+ and DMI– with the price movement over this time. What type
of relationships do you see?

Download at www.wowebook.com

P A R T

I V

CHART PATTERN
ANALYSIS
C HAPTER 15 B AR C HART PATTERNS
C HAPTER 16 P OINT- AND -F IGURE C HART PATTERNS
C HAPTER 17 S HORT-T ERM PATTERNS

299

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

1 5

BAR CHART PATTERNS

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
By the end of this chapter, you should be familiar with

• Controversy over whether patterns exist
• The influence that computer technology has had on the study of patterns
• The formation of classic bar chart patterns such as triangles, flags, pennants, double
tops, and head-and-shoulders

• Historical performance measures of major bar chart patterns
In the next three chapters, we discuss chart and price patterns. Traditionally, technical analysis
has been closely associated with price patterns, perhaps even more than it should be. Prior to the
advent of the computer, hand-drawn charts of prices were the only technical resources available.
Trend lines and patterns were the principal means of analyzing price behavior. The computer has
diversified technical analysis because it has made other mathematical relationships easier to calculate.
After discussing some of the basic characteristics of patterns, we look at classic bar chart
patterns, those used by the majority of technical analysts and having the longest history of use, in
this chapter. In Chapter 16, “Point-and-Figure Chart Patterns,” we focus on point-and-figure
charts. In Chapter 17, “Short-Term Patterns,” we consider short-term patterns, candlesticks, oneand two-day patterns, and other patterns that are not so widely used. There are as many different
patterns as the combinations of price open, high, low, and close can accommodate. Generally,
shorter patterns are more common and less reliable, and longer patterns are more complex and
less frequent. In addition, as a rule, the more complicated the pattern, the less likely it will be
profitable, and the more frequent a pattern, the less likely it will be profitable. The best patterns
seem to be in the middle of frequency and complexity. We address these. There are many reference books on other patterns that you can investigate, but most fail to give any special advantage
over the classic patterns.

301

Download at www.wowebook.com

302

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

WHAT IS A PATTERN?
In the literature and usage of technical analysis, the terms pattern and formation are used interchangeably. We will do the same. A pattern is simply a configuration of price action that is
bounded, above and below, by some form of either a line or a curve.
The lines that bind price movement in a pattern can be trend lines or support/resistance
lines. In this chapter, we apply the concepts and terminology that we studied in Chapter 12,
“Trends—The Basics,” regarding these lines. When studying patterns, we add a new concept—
prices being bound by a curve instead of a straight line. A curve is a less-definite arc drawn with
either a “smiley face” for a bottom curve or a “frown” for the top curve. The lowest level in a bottom curve is a support level, and the highest level in a top curve is a resistance level. Curves simply define a support or resistance level with curved rather than straight lines. A pattern can be
bounded by any combination of curves or lines as long as the upper and lower bounds are defined
well enough for a breakout level to be established.

Common Pattern Characteristics
The focus of this chapter is bar chart price configurations. Thomas N. Bulkowski has accomplished the most comprehensive modern study of bar chart patterns in his twin books, Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns, 2nd edition (2005) and Trading Classic Chart Patterns (2002).
Bulkowski observed over 700 stocks over ten years on a daily basis and cataloged their results
under varying conditions. In total, over two market periods he found and analyzed 12,385 chart
patterns. Although his analysis of patterns was, of course, subject to his potential bias, it was
consistent and included a significantly large number of examples. Much of the material—specifically the statistics—in this chapter rely on Bulkowski’s work. Bulkowski has a Web site
(www.thepatternsite.com) that explains in significant detail all the patterns we discuss and more.
Before we begin discussing some of the particular patterns, however, we need to explain some
vocabulary related to the general characteristics of bar chart patterns.
Entry and Exit
All patterns have a combination of an entry and exit. The entry describes the trend preceding the
formation, and the exit is usually the signal for action. A pattern can occur after a decline, in
which case, the entry is from above, or after an advance, in which case, the entry is from below.
The exit, of course, can also be downward or upward. Figure 15.1, a double bottom, shows an
entry from above and an upward breakout. On the other hand, a top formation has an entry from
below and an exit downward. A consolidation in a larger uptrend has an entry from below and an
exit upward. Thus, all patterns are described with these four variables: entry from above, entry
from below, downward exit, and upward exit. These variables are important because statistically,
in each pattern type, some of these characteristics are more reliable, occur more frequently, or
are more profitable than others.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

303

Fractal
The bars in a bar chart can be any period: weekly, daily, minute, and so on. Bar chart patterns are
fractal. This means they can occur in any bar chart, regardless of the bar period. A triangle formation, for example, can occur in hourly bars or weekly bars. The pattern is always the same
type and will always have the same general characteristics. This is odd but true. Indeed, looking
at a bar chart pattern without a specified time horizon, a technical analyst who is experienced in
pattern recognition cannot tell the periods of the bars.
Pullbacks and Throwbacks
Pullbacks occur when prices break out downward and then “pull back” to their breakout level.
Throwbacks occur when prices break out upward and then “throw back” to their breakout level
(Edwards and Magee, revised 2007). Figure 15.1 shows an example of a pullback. Neither a pullback nor a throwback is easily or precisely defined, but you know one when you see it. The interesting aspect of this price behavior is that invariably a pullback or throwback will decrease the
extent of the eventual move in the direction of the breakout. Thus, although each may provide a
second opportunity for action at the breakout level, the subsequent rise or fall generally will be
less than if there were no pullback or throwback. Tactically, this implies that a breakout should
be acted upon immediately; waiting for the retracement will diminish profitability, and you may
very likely miss the entire price move.
Pullbacks seem to occur more frequently on downward breakouts with less-than-average
volume, and throwbacks occur more frequently with upward breakouts on above-average volume. Because pullbacks and throwbacks seem to undermine performance, the ideal situation, as
a rule, is that on an upward breakout, less volume is preferred, and on a downward breakout,
more volume is preferred.
Failures
All breakouts can fail in any of the formations, some more than others. Remember that a breakout is a signal that prices are beginning to trend, either upward or downward. This is particularly
frustrating to the beginner who desires perfection. As we have seen, however, perfection is not in
the lexicon of technical analysis. It is favorable odds, or an “edge,” for which we are looking.
Bulkowski’s definition of a failure, which we use, is when a breakout occurs and the price fails to
move at least 5% in the direction of the breakout.
