
Download at www.wowebook.com

81

Chapter 6 Dow Theory

purchased; second, selling due to decreased earnings; and third, distress selling, regardless of
value, by those who believe the worst is yet to come or who are forced to liquidate.

The Secondary Trend
…a secondary reaction is considered to be an important decline in a bull market or
advance in a bear market, usually lasting from three weeks to as many months, during which intervals the price movement generally retraces from 33 percent to 66 percent of the primary price change since the termination of the last preceding
secondary reaction. (Rhea, 1932)
The secondary trend is an intermediate-term trend that runs counter to the primary trend. For
example, during a several-year primary uptrend, prices may fall for a few weeks or a few months.
During this secondary trend market decline, prices fall often, erasing 33% to 66% of the gain that
has occurred since the completion of the previous secondary uptrend. Points A to B in Figure 6.2
represent a secondary downtrend.
Being able to anticipate or recognize secondary reactions increases profit capabilities by
taking advantage of smaller market swings, but Dow believed this exercise was too dangerous.
Because the primary trend and secondary trend reversal have similar characteristics, secondary
reactions are often initially assumed as changes in primary trends or are mistakenly thought to be
only reactions when the primary trend is changing.

The Minor Trend
Inferences drawn from one day’s movement of the averages are almost certain to be
misleading and are of but little value except when “lines” are being formed. The day
to day movement must be recorded and studied, however, because a series of charted
daily movements always eventually develops into a pattern easily recognized as having a forecasting value. (Rhea, 1932)
A line is two to three weeks of horizontal price movement in an average within a 5%
range. It is usually a sign of accumulation or distribution, and a breakout above or
below the range high or low respectively suggests a movement to continue in the
same direction as the breakout. Movement from one average unconfirmed by the
other average is generally not sustained. (Rhea, 1932)
The portion of the Dow Theory which pertains to “lines” has proved to be so dependable as almost to deserve the designation of axiom instead of theorem. (Hamilton,
September 23, 1929)
The stock market is not logical in its movements from day to day. (Hamilton, 1929)

Download at www.wowebook.com

82

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

Dow, Hamilton, and Rhea would likely be horrified at today’s preoccupation with minute-tominute “day trading” and would likely consider such activity too risky. (Based on the percentage
of day traders who currently fail, they would be right.) Their observation essentially states that
prices become more random and unpredictable as the time horizon shrinks. This is certainly true
today as well and is one reason why, as during Dow’s, Hamilton’s, and Rhea’s time, investors
today should concentrate on longer-term time horizons and avoid the tempting traps in shortterm trading.

Concept of Confirmation
Dow always ignored a movement of one average which was not confirmed by the
other, and experience since his death has shown the wisdom of that method of checking the reading of the averages. His theory was that a downward movement of secondary, and perhaps ultimately primary importance, was established when the new
lows for both averages were under the low points of the preceding reaction. (Hamilton, June 25, 1928)
In line with the economic rationale for the use of the industrial and railroad averages as proxies
for the economy and state of business, Dow Theory introduced a concept that also is important
today, namely the concept of confirmation. Confirmation has taken new directions, which this
book covers later, but in Rhea’s time, confirmation was the consideration of the industrial and
railroad averages together. “Conclusions based upon the movement of one average, unconfirmed
by the other, are almost certain to prove misleading” (Rhea, 1932).
Confirmation in the Dow Theory comes when both the industrial and railroad averages
reach new highs or new lows together on a daily closing basis. These new levels do not necessarily have to be reached at exactly the same time, but for a primary reversal, it is necessary that
each average reverses direction and reaches new levels before the primary reversal can be recognized (see Figure 6.3). Confirmation, therefore, is the necessary means for recognizing in what
direction the primary trend is headed. Failure to reach new levels during a secondary reaction is
a warning that the primary trend may be reversing. For example, when there is a primary bull
market, the failure of the averages to reach new highs during a secondary advance alerts the analyst that the primary trend may be reversing to a bear market. In addition, if lower levels are
reached during the secondary bear trend, it is an indication that the primary trend has changed
from an upward bull trend to a downward bear trend. Thus, more extreme levels occurring during a secondary retracement in the opposite direction of the primary trend are evidence that the
primary trend has changed direction. When confirmed by the other average, the technical analyst
then has proof that the primary trend has reversed and can act accordingly.

Download at www.wowebook.com

83

Chapter 6 Dow Theory

10,500

Confirmation of
New High in
Transports

10,000
9,500
9,000

Dow Jones Industrial Average
8,500
8,000
7,500
3,800
3,600
3,400
3,200
3,000
2,800

New High

J

O

2003

2,600

A

J

O

Dow Jones Transportation Average

2,400

Weekly: May 2002–May 2005

2,200

2004

A

J

O

2005 A

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 6.3

Dow Theory of “confirmation”

Today, because the makeup of the economy is so different than in Dow’s and Hamilton’s
time, with the advent of a wider base of industrial stocks and technology stocks, the usual
method of confirming a primary trend is to use confirmation between the two indexes: Standard
& Poor’s 500 and the Russell 2000. The economic rationale is that the Standard & Poor’s 500
represents the largest, most highly capitalized companies in the United States, and the Russell
2000 represents smaller companies with higher growth and usually a technological base. When
these two indexes confirm each other, the primary trend is confirmed. Figure 6.4 shows the more
modern application of Dow’s theory of confirmation.

Importance of Volume
Various meanings are ascribed to reductions in the volume of trading. One of the
platitudes most constantly quoted in Wall Street is to the effect that one should never
sell a dull market short. That advice is probably right oftener than it is wrong, but it
is always wrong in an extended bear swing. In such a swing… the tendency is to
become dull on rallies and active on declines. (Hamilton, May 21, 1909), as quoted
in Rhea, 1932)

Download at www.wowebook.com

84

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

1,210.00
1,156.00
1,104.00
1,055.00

New High

1,008.00
963.00

S&P 500

920.00
879.00
840.00
803.00

650.00

Beginning Of Primary Uptrend
(Large Cap versus Small Cap)

600.00
550.00
500.00

New High

Russell 2000

450.00
400.00
350.00
J

O

2003

A

J

O

2004

A

J

O

2005

A

J

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 6.4 Confirmation between the Standard & Poor’s 500 and the Russell 2000 (Weekly: May
2002–September 2005)

Although volume of transactions cannot signal a trend reversal, it is important as a secondary
confirmation of trend. Excessively high market prices that are accompanied by less volume on
rallies and more activity on declines usually suggest an overbought market (see Figure 6.5). Conversely, extremely low prices with dull declines and increased volume on rallies suggest an oversold market. “Bull markets terminate in a period of excessive activity and begin with
comparatively light transactions” (Rhea, 1932).
The originators of Dow Theory were quick, however, not to overstate the importance of
volume. Although volume was considered, it was not a primary consideration. Price trend and
confirmation overrode any consideration of volume.
The volume is much less significant than is generally supposed. It is purely relative,
and what would be a large volume in one state of the market supply might well be
negligible in a greatly active market. (Hamilton, 1922, p. 177)

Download at www.wowebook.com

85

Chapter 6 Dow Theory

Declining
Price

S&P 500:
Volume Confirmation

1,220
1,200
1,180
1,160
1,140

Rising Price
(Bearish)

(Bearish)
Declining
Volume

Rising Price
Rising Volume

(Bullish)

Oct.

1,080

8,500
7,000
5,500

Volume
Sept.

1,100

10,000

Rising Volume

Aug.

1,120

Nov.

Dec.

2005

Feb.

Mar.

Apr.

May

June

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 6.5

Volume confirmation (Weekly: August 2004–May 2005)

CRITICISMS OF THE DOW THEORY
Although Dow Theory forms the building blocks for modern-day technical analysis, this theory
is not without criticisms. One of the criticisms is that following the theory will result in an
investor acting after rather than before or at market tops and bottoms. With Dow Theory, there is
an inevitable lag between the actual turn in the primary trend and the recognition of the change
in trend. The theory does not recognize a turn until long after it has occurred and has been confirmed.
On the other hand, the theory, if properly interpreted, will recognize that primary trend
change and will, thus, never allow a large loss. Dow’s contention was that concentrating on any
direction change of shorter duration than the primary trend increased the chances of having one’s
portfolio whittled away by high turnover, many errors in judgment, and increased transaction
costs. Therefore, Dow Theory is biased toward late recognition of a change in trend to minimize
the costs of wrongly identifying a change in trend.
A second criticism of Dow Theory is that the different trends are not strictly defined. Often
the interpretation of price swings is difficult to assign to a specific trend type. Secondary trend
beginnings often appear like primary trend beginnings, for example. This makes the determination of the primary trend unclear at times and can incite investment in the wrong direction.
Others, however, criticize Dow Theory for being too specific about the requirements
needed to identify a change in trend. Requiring that only closing prices be used or that any break
to a new level no matter how small is significant often places too much emphasis on a small
change in price.

Download at www.wowebook.com

86

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

SUMMARY OF DOW’S WISDOM
…the Dow-Jones averages… have a discretion not shared by all prophets. They are
not talking all the time. (Hamilton, December 17, 1925)

CONCLUSION
Even though Charles Dow never formalized the Dow Theory, his work has formed the basis for
modern-day technical analysis. Despite the many changes that have occurred in the securities
markets over the past century, much of Dow’s basic work and ideas remain pertinent today.
Though Dow might be surprised at the analysis that more advanced tools and computer power
allow, his classic work provides the basic theory that these contemporary models build upon.
Although the specific economic relationships that were valid in Dow’s lifetime, such as the relationship between industrial stocks and railroad stocks, may need to be altered to represent
today’s economy, basic economic relationships such as these are still fundamental to market
activity. Despite the fact that today’s technical analyst can build sophisticated, complex mathematical models and run complicated computer tests of trading strategies, it is important to
remember that a thorough grounding in the basics of market activity is necessary for any trading
philosophy to stand the test of time and remain profitable.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What were the three hypotheses of Dow Theory presented by Rhea? How is each of these
hypotheses relevant for the modern investor?
2. Describe what the Dow Theory ideal market pattern of an uptrend, top, downtrend, and
bottom looks like.
3. Why did Dow think there was an important economic relationship between the stocks of
industrial companies and the stocks of railroads? How do you think this general relationship between economic activity and sectors of the economy might be seen and measured in
today’s economy?
4. What are the three major trends in Dow Theory? Which is the most important? Why?
5. Dow Theory teaches that, while the investor is foregoing potential profit, the investor
should avoid trying to make money by attempting to predict the secondary trend. Why did
Dow and his followers think that trading with the secondary trend was too risky?
6. How would Dow and his followers react to the modern-day practice of day trading?
According to Dow Theory, what trend are these day traders following?

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 6 Dow Theory

87

7. What is meant by the term confirmation in Dow Theory?
8. What role does volume play in Dow Theory?
9. According to Dow Theory, what signals would an investor watch for that would indicate a
reversal in the primary trend?
10. One of the criticisms of Dow Theory is that it calls market reversals long after they occur.
Explain why Dow Theory makes these market calls late. What are the trade-offs that
investors make with a system that tends to make late calls of market reversals?

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

7

SENTIMENT

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should

• Understand what the term sentiment means
• Understand the concept of contrary opinion
• Be familiar with methods for measuring sentiment of uninformed and informed market
players

As a general rule, it is foolish to do just what other people are doing, because there
are almost sure to be too many people doing the same thing. (William Stanley Jevons
[1835–1882], as quoted in Neill, 1997, p 13)
The focus of this chapter is market sentiment. Market sentiment refers to the psychology or
emotions of market participants. At times, investors are acting on feelings of fear and pessimism.
At other times, hope, overconfidence, and greed characterize investor psychology. Investors
react emotionally to the market, and these reactions affect the market. Thus, investor psychology
is both influenced by and an influencer of market activity.
From a simplistic standpoint, consider a bull market in which stock prices have been
advancing. Investors see their portfolio values increasing. Those who have been sitting on the
sidelines hear how their friends have made money in the stock market. Not wanting to miss out
on these returns, they join in. The average investor is hopeful and confident that the trend of rising stock prices will continue. Of course, as these investors place more and more money in the
market, stock prices do rise; in economic jargon: As the quantity of investors in the marketplace
increases, the demand for stocks increases, driving stock prices higher. The optimistic view of
the market participants drives prices even higher. Seeing that they were correct, investors eventually become overconfident and greedy, and purchase even more stocks irrespective of “value.” At
the peak of optimism, investors have placed most of their available money in the stock market. At
89

Download at www.wowebook.com

90

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

this point, there are dwindling amounts of money available to fuel the demand that has been driving price upward. There is no more fuel to keep stock prices rising, and the stock market reaches
a peak.
Conversely, when investors are pessimistic and fearful, they begin to sell stock. As the
level of pessimism rises in the market and more investors sell, stock prices fall. These falling
prices lead more and more investors to feel fearful and to sell their shares. When investors are the
most pessimistic and fearful, they have withdrawn much of their money from the market. The
downward trend exacerbated by investors leaving the market ends, and the market reaches a bottom.

WHAT IS SENTIMENT?
Sentiment is defined as the net amount of any group of market players’ optimism or pessimism
reflected in any asset or market price at a particular time. When a stock or commodity is trading
at a price considerably above or below its intrinsic value, something we will not know until considerably later, the difference or deviation from that value often will be accounted for by sentiment. It is the collective emotion and other intangible factors that come from the human
interaction involved in determining a price over or under the supposed value. It is the subject of
study by behavioral finance departments, which are interested in the ways that human cognitive
bias and brain activity affect financial decisions, and it is a staple in technical analysis, for technical analysts have long held that prices are a combination of fact and emotion. When emotion
becomes excessive and prices thereby deviate substantially from the norm, a price reversal is
usually due, a reversion at least to the mean and sometimes beyond. It is, thus, important for the
technical analyst to know when prices are reflecting emotional extremes.

BOX 7.1 THE THEORY OF CONTRARIAN INVESTING
Whenever nonprofessional investors become “significantly” one-sided in their
expectations about the future course of stock prices, the market will move in the
direction opposite to that which is anticipated by the masses.
Suppose the overwhelming numbers of investors (call them “nonprofessionals”)
become rampantly bullish on the market. The logical extension of highly bullish
expectations results in the purchase of stocks right up to the respective financial limits of the masses. At the very moment when the masses become most bullish, they
will be very nearly fully invested! They won’t have the financial capacity to do more
buying. Who then is left to create demand? Certainly not the minority of investors
we call professionals. It is that group which recognizes over-valuations and presumably has been the supplier of stock to the nonprofessionals during the time that both
prices and the optimism of the masses were rising.

Download at www.wowebook.com

91

Chapter 7 Sentiment

Thus, when the crowd has become extraordinarily bullish, a dearth of demand
exists. The nonprofessionals are loaded with stocks and are cash-poor, while the professionals are liquid, but in no frame to buy. Demand is saturated, and even minor
increases in supply will cause stock prices to tumble. At this point, prices are a
strong bet to go (nowhere) but down. (Marty Zweig in the foreword to Ned Davis’
The Triumph of Contrarian Investing, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2004.)

MARKET PLAYERS AND SENTIMENT
The appropriate corresponding timing strategy is to follow informed trader sentiment, act against positive feedback trader sentiment, and ignore liquidity trader sentiment. (Wang, 2000)
Remember from Chapter 5, “An Overview of Markets,” that there are three types of players in
any market: the informed, the uninformed, and the liquidity players. The estate that needed to
sell stock to raise cash in the discussion of market players in Chapter 5 was an example of a liquidity player. Liquidity players have only a cursory interest in the markets and do not have an
important role in determining price trends. They affect the market minimally. On the other hand,
informed and uninformed players are the market. Because the interactions between the informed
and uninformed players determine prices, we will focus our discussion on those two groups.
The uninformed players are those participants who, being ruled by their emotions and
biases, act irrationally. They tend to be optimistic after a market rise and buy, thus creating market peaks, and to be pessimistic during a market decline and sell, thus creating market bottoms.
Though the uninformed players are often called the “public,” even professionals can be part of
this group. It is not simply the profession or career standing of a market player that classifies an
individual as an informed or uninformed player, it is the timing of the player’s optimistic buying
and pessimistic selling relative to market highs and lows. Research has found that even professionals such as mutual fund managers, Wall Street strategists, and investment-advisory newsletter writers often behave as uninformed participants. In other words, the majority of market
players are uninformed players.
The informed market players tend to act in a way that is contrary to the majority. That is,
the informed market participants tend to sell at the top, when the majority is optimistic, and buy
at the bottom, when the majority is fearful and selling. Just as uninformed players need not be
amateurs, informed players need not be professionals. They can be corporate insiders or day
traders sitting in their dens in the Caribbean.
By and large, the uninformed players have considerably more money than the informed
players. While day to day the informed players stabilize the markets by spotting and acting upon
small anomalies in prices or as contrarian investors invest in undervalued assets, over longer
periods, the uninformed tend to overwhelm the price action with their positive feedback, in many
instances, forcing the informed to ride with the trend of emotion.

Download at www.wowebook.com

92

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

Because maximum optimism and pessimism tend to occur at market price extremes, and
because this emotional background is principally the provenance of the uninformed player, if the
technical analyst can determine how each group is acting, some knowledge of the future direction of prices can be gained. Presumably, the informed professional will act correctly, and the
uninformed public will act incorrectly, especially at emotional extremes. If we know that a
majority of those participating in the market are extremely optimistic about stock prices continuing on an upward trend, we can conclude that these investors are near fully invested in the market and that stock prices are close to a peak. The sentiment indicators that we discuss in this
chapter are designed to measure the extent of investor optimism or pessimism. By using sentiment indicators, the technical analyst is attempting to separate the opinions and actions of the
informed players from the uninformed players. The analyst wants to make investment decisions
contrary to those that the uninformed group is making and wants to mimic the actions of the
informed players.
