
WARNING

they hit on a Harry Potter string of super-best-sellers - provided of
course that they publish quality work that has a small probability of
being of very high appeal.
In the markets, there is a category of traders who have inverse rare
events, for whom volatility is often a bearer of good news. These traders
lose money frequently, but in small amounts, and make money rarely,
but in large amounts. I call them crisis hunters. I am happy to be one of
them.

why don't statisticians detect rare

events?

Statistics to the layman can appear rather complex, but the concept
behind what is used today is so simple that my French mathematician
friends call it deprecatorily "cuisine". It is all based on one simple
notion; the more information you have, the more you are confident
about the outcome. Now the problem; by how much? Common
statistical method is based on the steady augmentation of the confidence
level, in nonlinear proportion to the number of observations. That is, for
an n times increase in the sample size, we increase our knowledge by the
square root of n. Suppose I am drawing from an urn containing red and
black balls. My confidence level about the relative proportion of red and
black balls, after 20 drawings is not twice the one I have after 10
drawings; it is merely multiplied by the square root of 2 (that is, 1.41).
Where statistics becomes complicated, and fails us, is when we have
distributions that are not symmetric, like the urn above. If there is a very
small probability of finding a red ball in an urn dominated by black ones,
then our knowledge about the absence of red balls will increase very
slowly - more slowly than at the expected square root of n rate. On the
other hand our knowledge of the presence of red balls will dramatically
improve once one of them is found. This asymmetry in knowledge is not
trivial; it is central in this book - it is a central philosophical problem for
such people as Hume and Karl Popper (on that, later).
To assess an investor's performance, we either need more astute, and
less intuitive, techniques, or we may have to limit our assessments to
situations where our judgment is independent of the frequency of these
events.

SKEWNESS

AND

97

ASYMMETRY

a mischievous child replaces t h e black

balls

But there is even worse news. In some cases, if the incidence of red balls
is itself randomly distributed, we will never get to know the composition
of the urn. This is called the problem of stationarity. Think of an urn
that is hollow at the bottom. As I am sampling from it, and without my
being aware of it, some mischievous child is adding balls of one color or
another. My inference thus becomes insignificant. I may infer that the
red balls represent 50% of the urn while the mischievous child, hearing
me, would swiftly replace all the red balls with black ones. This makes
much of our knowledge derived through statistics quite shaky.
The very same effect takes place in the market. We take past history
as a single homogeneous sample and believe that we have considerably
increased our knowledge of the future from the observation of the
sample of the past. What if vicious children were changing the
composition of the urn? In other words, what if things have changed?
I have studied and practiced econometrics for more than half my life
(since I was 19), both in the classroom and in the activity of a
quantitative derivatives trader. The "science" of econometrics consists
of the application of statistics to samples taken at different periods of
time, which we called time series. It is based on studying the time series
of economic variables, data, and other matters. In the beginning, when I
knew close to nothing (that is even less than today), I wondered whether
the time series reflecting the activity of people now dead or retired
should matter for predicting the future. Econometricians who knew a
lot more than I did about these matters asked no such question; this
hinted that it was in all likelihood a stupid inquiry. One prominent
econometrician, Hashem Pesaran, answered a similar question by
recommending to do "more and better econometrics". I am now
convinced that, perhaps, most of econometrics could be useless - much
of what financial statisticians know would not be worth knowing. For a
sum of zeros, even repeated a billion times, remains zero; likewise an
accumulation of research and gains in complexity will lead to naught if
there is no firm ground beneath it. Studying the European markets of the
1990s will certainly be of great help to a historian; but what kind of
inference can we make now that the structure of the institutions and the
markets has changed so much?

98

SOLON'S

WARNING

Note that the economist Robert Lucas dealt a blow to econometrics
by arguing that if people were rational then their rationality would
cause them to figure out predictable patterns from the past and adapt, so
that past information would be completely useless for predicting the
future (the argument, phrased in a very mathematical form, earned him
a Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics). We are human and act
according to our knowledge, which integrates past data. I can translate
his point with the following analogy. If rational traders detect a pattern
of stocks rising on Mondays, then, immediately such a pattern becomes
detectable, it would be ironed out by people buying on Friday in
anticipation of such an effect. There is no point searching for patterns
that are available to everyone with a brokerage account; once detected,
they would be ironed out.
Somehow, what came to be known as the Lucas critique was not
carried through by the "scientists". It was confidently believed that the
scientific successes of the industrial revolution could be carried through
into the social sciences, particularly with such movements as Marxism.
Pseudoscience came with a collection of idealistic nerds who tried to
create a tailor-made society, the epitome of which is the central planner.
Economics was the most likely candidate for such use of science; you
can disguise charlatanism under the weight of equations, and nobody
can catch you since there is no such thing as a controlled experiment.
Now the spirit of such methods, called scientism by its detractors (like
myself), continued past Marxism, into the discipline of finance as a few
technicians thought that their mathematical knowledge could lead them
to understand markets. The practice of "financial engineering" came
along with massive doses of pseudoscience. Practitioners of these
methods measure risks, using the tool of past history as an indication of
the future. We will just say at this point that the mere possibility of the
distributions not being stationary makes the entire concept seem like a
costly (perhaps very costly) mistake. This leads us to a more
fundamental question: the problem of induction, to which we will turn
in the next chapter.

SEVEN
+
THE PROBLEM OF INDUCTION
On the chromodynamics of swans. Taking Solon's warning into
some philosophical territory. How Victor Niederhoffer taught
me empiricism; I added deduction. Why it is not scientific to
take science seriously. Soros promotes Popper. That bookstore
on 21st and Fifth Avenue. Pascal's wager.

From Bacon to Hume
ow we discuss this problem viewed from the broader standpoint
of the philosophy of scientific knowledge. There is a problem in
inference well known as the problem of induction. It is a problem that
has been haunting science for a long time, but science has not been as
harmed by it as the financial markets. Why? Because the randomness
content compounds its effects. Nowhere is the problem of induction
more relevant than in my world of finance - and nowhere has it been as
ignored!

100

SOLON'S

WARNING

cygnus

atratus

In his Treatise on Human Nature, the Scots philosopher David Hume
posed the issue in the following way (as rephrased in the now famous
black swan problem by John Stuart Mill): No amount of observations of
white swans can allow the inference that all swans are white, but the
observation of a single black swan is sufficient to refute that conclusion.
Hume had been irked by the fact that science in his day (the
eighteenth century) had experienced a swing from scholasticism, entirely
based on deductive reasoning (no emphasis on the observation of the
real world) to, owing to Francis Bacon, an overreaction into naive and
unstructured empiricism. Bacon had argued against "spinning the
cobweb of learning" with little practical result. Science had shifted,
thanks to Bacon, into an emphasis on empirical observation. The
problem is that, without a proper method, empirical observations can
lead you astray. Hume came to warn us against such knowledge, and to
stress the need for some rigor in the gathering and interpretation of
knowledge - what is called epistemology (from episteme, Greek for
learning). Hume is the first modern epistemologist, (epistemologists are
often called methodologists or philosophers of science). What I am
writing here is not strictly true, for Hume said things far worse than
that; he was an obsessive skeptic and never believed that a link between
two items could be truly established as being causal. But we will tone
him down a bit for this book.

nlfcderhoffer, victorian

gentleman

It is worth noting that finance has its Francis Bacon in the person of
Victor Niederhoffer. He was the very first to stand against the cobweb
of learning of the University of Chicago and the efficient market religion
of the 1960s, when it was at its worst. In contrast with the scholasticism
of financial theorists, he looked at data in search of anomalies - and
found enough of them to be able to conduct a successful career in
randomness and deliver an insightful book, The Education of a
Speculator. Since then, an entire industry of such operators, called
"statistical arbitrageurs", flourished, the major and most successful ones

THE

PROBLEM

OF

INDUCTION

101

were initially his trainees. While Niederhoffer had a publicized hiccup,
some of his trainees fared well because they added rigor and methodology to their statistical inference. In other words, Niederhoffer's
empiricism missed just a modicum of methodology.
I have to admit that for all my intellectual disagreements with him I
have been inspired by his empiricism and owe him a large share of my
intellectual growth. I experienced a jump in my trading style in 1996,
when Victor blurted to me that any "testable" statement should be
tested (it was so obvious but I had not done it until then). His advice
went straight home. A testable statement is one that can be broken
down into quantitative components and subjected to statistical
examination. For instance, a conventional-wisdom style statement like
accidents happen closer to home
can be tested by taking the average distance between the accident and
the domicile of the driver (if, say, about 20% of accidents happen within
a 12-mile radius). However, one needs to be careful in the interpretation; a naive interpreter of the result would tell you that you are
more likely to have an accident if you drive in your neighborhood than
if you did so in remote places, which is an example of naive empiricism.
Why? Because accidents may happen closer to home simply because
people spend their time driving close to home (if people spend 20% of
their time driving in a 12-mile radius).
Since that very same day I have not made a single testable proposition
without testing it, thanks to the computer which I rarely use for noncomputational tasks. However, the differences between Victor
Niederhoffer and myself remain immense; I can use data to disprove a
proposition, never to prove one. I can use history to refute a conjecture,
never to affirm it. For instance, the statement
The market never goes down 20% in a given 3-month

period

can be tested, but is completely meaningless if verified. I can quantitatively reject the proposition by finding counterexamples, but it is
impossible for me to accept it simply because in past data the market
never went down 20% in any 3-month period.

102

SOLON'S

WARNING

Returning to the black swan problem, consider the following
statement:
Statement A: No swan is black because I looked at 4000 swans and
found none.
Statement B: Not all swans are white.
I cannot logically make statement A, no matter how many successive
white swans I may have observed in my life and may observe in the
future (except of course if I am given the privilege of observing with
certainty all available swans). It is however possible to make Statement
B merely by finding one single black swan in my sample. Indeed,
statement A was disproved by the discovery of Australia, as it led to the
sighting of the cygnus atratus, a swan variety that was jet black! The
reader will see a hint of Popper (after we are done with my semi-mentor
Victor); there is a strong asymmetry between the two statements. Such
asymmetry lies in the foundations of knowledge. It is also at the core of
my dealing with randomness as a trader.
The following inductive statement illustrates the problem of
interpreting past data without logical method:
I have just completed a thorough statistical examination of the life of
President Bush. For 55 years, close to 16,000 observations, he did not
die once. I can hence pronounce him as immortal, with a high degree
of statistical significance.
Although Victor and I trade in such an opposite manner that many of
his trades end up in my inventory, I have a large measure of respect for
him. He sells out-of-the-money options for a living; I buy them for a living
(by selling an out-of-the-money option one is betting that an event will
not happen; by buying one I am merely betting that it may happen). He
tries to make steady income, I prefer a lumpy and rare payoff. Although
we seem to be diametrically opposite traders, we share many superficial
personal traits. These may be worth bringing in here because we both
make our private traits part of our trading and make a thin distinction
between activities middlebrow people call "work" and those they call
"leisure". Both of us are traders trying to live under the illusion of

THE

PROBLEM

OF

INDUCTION

103

operating a scientific laboratory. Both of us surround ourselves with
scholars and scientists, not businessmen (talking to successful scientists is
a good discipline to avoid pedestrianism in our own thinking). Both of us
try to lead the lives of the Victorian gentleman scholar with books
scattered around us, by escaping many of the popular accretions of the
twentieth century. Both of us glorify our personal idiosyncrasies to avoid
bearing any intellectual resemblance to the crowd. Both of us obsessively
pursue athletic activities on a daily basis (but he is competitive and
competition in sports repels me). Victor's model seems to be the Victorian
gentleman (like his hero Francis Galton, the tinkering cousin of Charles
Darwin, who is the true inspiration of all applied statisticians) while, like
a true Victorian, I am first and last a classicist and remain steeped in the
Greco-Roman culture in which I grew up (my heroes are rather literary
figures). Both of us avoid the media, television, newspapers, although
Victor is far more vigorous than I in such strictures. Both of us avoid
chitchat and small talk like the plague (too much left-column noise).

Sir Karl's Promoting Agent
Next I will discuss how I discovered Karl Popper via another trader,
perhaps the only one I have ever truly respected. I do not know if it
applies to other people, but, in spite of my being a voracious reader, I
have rarely been truly affected in my behavior (in any durable manner)
by anything I have read. A book can make a strong impression, but such
an impression tends to wane after some newer impression replaces it in
my brain (a new book). I have to discover things by myself (recall The
Stove is Hot section in Chapter 2). These self discoveries last.
One exception of ideas that stuck with me are those of Sir Karl, whom
I discovered (or perhaps rediscovered) through the writings of the trader
and self-styled philosopher George Soros who seemed to have organized
his life by becoming a promoter of the ideas of Karl Popper. What I
learned from George Soros was not quite in the way he perhaps intended
us to learn from him. I disagreed with his statements when it came to
economics and philosophy - but somehow I succumbed to the charm of

104

SOLON'S

WARNING

this Hungarian man who like me is ashamed of being a trader and prefers
his trading to be a minor extension of his intellectual life (it can be seen in
his first book The Alchemy of Finance). Having never been impressed by
people with money (and I have met plenty of those throughout my life), I
did not look at any of them as remotely a role model for me. Perhaps the
opposite effect holds, as I am generally repelled by the wealthy, generally
because of the attitude of epic heroism that usually accompanies rapid
enrichment. Soros was the only one who seemed to share my values. He
wanted to be taken seriously as a Middle European professor who
happened to have gotten rich owing to the validity of his ideas (it was
only by failing to gain acceptance by other intellectuals that he would try
to gain alpha status through his money, sort of like a seducer who after
trying hard, would end up using such an appendage as the red Ferrari to
seduce the girl). In addition, although Soros did not come across very
clearly in his writings, he knew how to handle randomness, by keeping a
critical open mind and changing his opinions with minimal shame (which
carries the side effect of making him treat people like napkins). He
walked around calling himself fallible, but was so potent because he
knew it while others had loftier ideas about themselves. He understood
Popper. He lived a Popperian life.
As an aside, Popper was not new to me. I had briefly heard of Karl
Popper when I was in my teens and early twenties, as part of a
motivated education in Europe and the United States. But I did not
understand his ideas as presented then, nor did I think it would be
important (like metaphysics) for anything in life. I was at the age when
one felt like one needed to read everything, which prevented one from
making contemplative stops. Such hurry made it hard to detect that
there was something important in Popper. It was either my conditioning
by the intellectual-chic culture at the time (too much Plato, too many
Marxists, too much Hegel, too many pseudoscientific intellectuals), the
educational system (too many conjectures propounded as truth) or the
fact that I was too young and was reading too much then to make a
bridge to reality.
Popper then slipped out of my mind without hanging on a single brain
cell - there was nothing in the baggage of a boy without experience to let it
stick. Besides, having started trading, I entered an anti-intellectual phase; I
needed to make a non-random buck to secure my newly lost future and

THE

PROBLEM

OF

INDUCTION

105

wealth that had just evaporated with the Lebanese war (until then I was
living with the desire to become a comfortable man of leisure like almost
everyone in my family, over the past two centuries). I suddenly felt
financially insecure and feared becoming an employee of some firm that
would turn me into a corporate slave with "work ethics" (whenever I hear
work ethics I interpret inefficient mediocrity). I needed the backing of my
bank account so I could buy time to think and enjoy life. The last thing I
needed was immediate philosophizing and work at the local McDonald's.
Philosophy, to me, became something rhetorical people did when they had
plenty of time on their hands; it was an activity reserved to those who are
not well versed in quantitative methods and other productive things. It
was a pastime that should be limited to late hours, in bars around the
campuses, when one had a few drinks and a light schedule - provided one
forgot the garrulous episode as early as the next day. Too much of it can
get a man in trouble, perhaps turn one into a Marxist ideologue. Popper
was not to reemerge until I secured my career as a trader.

location,

location

It is said that people generally remember the time and geographic
condition where they were swept with a governing idea. The religious
poet and diplomat Paul Claudel remembers the exact spot of his
conversion (or re-conversion) to Catholicism in the Cathedral NotreDame of Paris, near a precise column. Thus I remember exactly the spot
at Barnes and Noble on 21st Street and Fifth Avenue where in 1987,
inspired by Soros, I read 50 pages of The Logic of Scientific Discovery
and feverishly bought all the Popper titles I could get my hands on lest
they run out of stock. It was in a sparsely lit side-room that had a
distinctive smell of mildew. I remember vividly the thoughts that rushed
through my head like a revelation.
Popper turned out to be exactly the opposite of what I initially
thought about "philosophers"; he was the epitome of no nonsense. By
then I had been an option trader for a couple of years and I felt angry
that I was being taken for a total ride by the academic researchers in
finance, particularly since I was deriving my income from the failure of
their models. I had already started talking to finance academics as part

106

SOLON'S

WARNING

of my involvement with derivatives and I had trouble getting through to
them some basic points about financial markets (they believed in their
models a little too much). There was all along lurking in-my mind the
idea that these researchers had missed a point, but I did not quite know
what it was. It was not what they knew, it was how they knew it that
was the subject of my annoyance.

popper's a n s w e r

Popper came up with a major answer to the problem of induction (to me
he came up with the answer). No man has influenced the way scientists
do science more than Sir Karl - in spite of the fact that many of his
fellow professional philosophers find him quite naive (to his credit, in
my opinion). Popper's idea is that science is not to be taken as seriously
as it sounds (Popper when meeting Einstein did not take him as the
demigod he thought he was). There are only two types of theories:
1. Theories that are known to be wrong, as they were tested and
adequately rejected (he calls them falsified).
2. Theories that have not yet been known to be wrong, not falsified yet,
but are exposed to be proved wrong.
Why is a theory never right? Because we will never know if all the
swans are white (Popper borrowed the Kantian idea of the flaws in our
mechanisms of perception). The testing mechanism may be faulty.
However, the, statement that there is a black swan is possible to make. A
theory cannot b'e verified. To paraphrase baseball coach Yogi Berra
again, past data has a lot of good in it, but it is the bad side that is bad. It
can only be provisionally accepted. A theory that falls outside of these
two categories is not a theory. A theory that does not present a set of
conditions under which it would be considered wrong would be termed
charlatanism - they would be impossible to reject otherwise. Why?.
Because the astrologist can always find a reason to fit the past event, by
saying that Mars was probably in line but not too much so (likewise to
me a trader who does not have a point that would make him change his
mind is not a trader). Indeed the difference between Newtonian physics,
which was falsified by Einstein's relativity, and astrology lies in the
