
Major currency pairs
The major currency pairs all involve the U.S. dollar on one side of the deal. The designations of
the major currencies are expressed using International Standardization Organization (ISO) codes
for each currency. Table 4-1 lists the most frequently traded currency pairs, what they’re called in
conventional terms, and what nicknames the market has given them.

Major cross-currency pairs
Although the vast majority of currency trading takes place in the dollar pairs, cross-currency pairs
serve as an alternative to always trading the U.S. dollar. A cross-currency pair, or cross or
crosses for short, is any currency pair that does not include the U.S. dollar. Cross rates are
derived from the respective USD pairs but are quoted independently and usually with a narrower
spread than you could get by trading in the dollar pairs directly. (The spread refers to the
difference between the bid and offer, or the price at which you can sell and buy and spreads are
applied in most financial markets.)

Crosses enable traders to more directly target trades to specific individual currencies to
take advantage of news or events. For example, your analysis may suggest that the Japanese
yen has the worst prospects of all the major currencies going forward, based on interest rates
or the economic outlook. To take advantage of this, you’d be looking to sell JPY, but against
which other currency? You consider the USD, potentially buying USD/JPY (buying
USD/selling JPY), but then you conclude that the USD’s prospects are not much better than
the JPY’s. Further research on your part may point to another currency that has a much better
outlook (such as high or rising interest rates or signs of a strengthening economy), say the
Australian dollar (AUD). In this example, you would then be looking to buy the AUD/JPY
cross (buying AUD/selling JPY) to target your view that AUD has the best prospects among
major currencies and the JPY the worst.

Cross trades can be especially effective when major cross-border mergers and acquisitions
(M&A) are announced. If a U.K. conglomerate is buying a Canadian utility company, the UK
company is going to need to sell GBP and buy CAD to fund the purchase. The key to trading
on M&A activity is to note the cash portion of the deal. If the deal is all stock, then you don’t
need to exchange currencies to come up with the foreign cash.
The most actively traded crosses focus on the three major non-USD currencies (namely EUR, JPY,
and GBP) and are referred to as euro crosses, yen crosses, and sterling crosses. The remaining
currencies (CHF, AUD, CAD, and NZD) are also traded in cross pairs. Tables 4-2, 4-3, and 4-4
highlight the key cross pairs in the euro, yen, and sterling groupings, respectively, along with their
market names. (Nicknames never quite caught on for the crosses.) Table 4-5 lists other crosscurrency pairs.

Table 4-2 Euro Crosses
ISO Currency Pair Countries

Market Name

EUR/CHF

Eurozone/Switzerland

Euro-Swiss

EUR/GBP

Eurozone/United KingdomEuro-sterling

EUR/CAD

Eurozone/Canada

Euro-Canada

EUR/AUD

Eurozone/Australia

Euro-Aussie

EUR/NZD

Eurozone/New Zealand

Euro-Kiwi

Table 4-3 Yen Crosses
ISO Currency Pair Countries

Market Name

EUR/JPY

Eurozone/Japan

Euro-yen

GBP/JPY

United Kingdom/Japan Sterling-yen

CHF/JPY

Switzerland/Japan

Swiss-yen

AUD/JPY

Australia/Japan

Aussie-yen

NZD/JPY

New Zealand/Japan

Kiwi-yen

CAD/JPY

Canada/Japan

Canada-yen

Table 4-4 Sterling Crosses
ISO Currency Pair Countries

Market Name

GBP/CHF

United Kingdom/Switzerland Sterling-Swiss

GBP/CAD

United Kingdom/Canada

Sterling-Canadian

GBP/AUD

United Kingdom/Australia

Sterling-Aussie

GBP/NZD

United Kingdom/New Zealand Sterling-Kiwi

Table 4-5 Other Crosses

Table 4-5 Other Crosses
ISO Currency Pair Countries

Market Name

AUD/CHF

Australia/Switzerland Aussie-Swiss

AUD/CAD

Australia/Canada

AUD/NZD

Australia/New Zealand Aussie-Kiwi

CAD/CHF

Canada/Switzerland

Aussie-Canada

Canada-Swiss

Base currencies and counter currencies
When you look at currency pairs, you may notice that the currencies are combined in a seemingly
strange order. For instance, if sterling-yen (GBP/JPY) is a yen cross, then why isn’t it referred to
as “yen-sterling” and written “JPY/GBP”? The answer is that these quoting conventions evolved
over the years to reflect traditionally strong currencies versus traditionally weak currencies, with
the strong currency coming first.
It also reflects the market quoting convention where the first currency in the pair is known as the
base currency. The base currency is what you’re buying or selling when you buy or sell the pair.
It’s also the notional, or face, amount of the trade. So if you buy 100,000 EUR/JPY, you’ve just
bought 100,000 euros and sold the equivalent amount in Japanese yen. If you sell 100,000
GBP/CHF, you just sold 100,000 British pounds and bought the equivalent amount of Swiss francs.
The second currency in the pair is called the counter currency, or the secondary currency. Hey,
who said this stuff was complicated? Most important for you as an FX trader, the counter currency
is the denomination of the price fluctuations and, ultimately, what your profit and losses will be
denominated in. If you buy GBP/JPY, it goes up, and you take a profit, your gains are not in pounds,
but in yen. (I run through the math of calculating profit and loss later in this chapter.)

The long and the short of it
Forex markets use the same terms to express market positioning as most other financial markets
do. But because currency trading involves simultaneous buying and selling, being clear on the
terms helps — especially if you’re totally new to financial market trading.

Going long
No, I’m not talking about running out deep for a football pass. A long position, or simply a long,
refers to a market position in which you’ve bought a security. In FX, it refers to having bought a
currency pair, meaning you’ve bought the base currency and sold the counter currency. When
you’re long, you’re looking for prices to move higher, so you can sell at a higher price than where
you bought. When you want to close a long position, you have to sell what you bought. If you’re
buying at multiple price levels, you’re adding to longs and getting longer.

Getting short
A short position, or simply a short, refers to a market position in which you’ve sold a security
that you never owned. In the stock market, selling a stock short requires borrowing the stock (and
paying a fee to the lending brokerage) so you can sell it. In forex markets, it means you’ve sold a
currency pair, meaning you’ve sold the base currency and bought the counter currency. So you’re
still making an exchange, just in the opposite order and according to currency-pair quoting terms.
When you’ve sold a currency pair, it’s called going short or getting short, and it means you’re
looking for the pair’s price to move lower so you can buy it back at a profit. If you sell at various
price levels, you’re adding to shorts and getting shorter.

In most other markets, short selling either comes with restrictions or is considered too
risky for most individual traders. In currency trading, going short is as common as going long.
“Selling high and buying low” is a standard currency trading strategy.

Currency pair rates reflect relative values between two currencies and not an absolute price
of a single stock or commodity. Because currencies can fall or rise relative to each other,
both in medium- and long-term trends and minute-to-minute fluctuations, currency pair prices
are as likely to be going down at any moment as they are up. To take advantage of such
moves, forex traders routinely use short positions to exploit falling currency prices. Traders
from other markets may at first feel uncomfortable with short selling, but it’s just something
you have to get your head around.

Squaring up
If you have no position in the market, it’s called being square or flat. If you have an open position
and you want to close it, it’s called squaring up. If you’re short, you need to buy to square up. If
you’re long, you need to sell to go flat. The only time you have no market exposure or financial
risk is when you’re square.

Profit and Loss
Profit and loss (P&L) is how traders measure success and failure. You don’t want to be looking at
the forex market as some academic or thrill-seeking exercise. Real money is made and lost every
minute of every day. If you’re going to trade currencies actively, you need to get up close and
personal with P&L.
A clear understanding of how P&L works is especially critical to online margin trading, where
your P&L directly affects the amount of margin you have to work with. (I introduce online margin

trading in Chapter 2.) Changes in your margin balance will determine how much you can trade and
how long you can trade if prices move against you.

Leverage amplifies risk and reward
Online margin trading is usually based on leverage, where the brokerage effectively lets you
borrow more money than you have deposited as collateral. Leverage refers to the ratio of that loan
to your collateral. A leverage ratio of 50:1, for example, means that your collateral can be
leveraged 50 times. More concretely, if you open an account with $1,000, you could trade a
position size as large as $50,000. At 100:1, that same $1,000 margin deposit could control a
position size of $100,000. But those calculations miss the point.

The real point of leverage is what it does to your trading results: It amplifies any gains or
losses equally. If your trade is profitable, great. You just made more than you otherwise
could have. But if your trade misses, the result is a larger loss than you may be willing or
able to tolerate. Above all, don’t be deluded into trying to maximize position size. Stay
focused on your P&L targets when devising a trade strategy and what those results mean for
your margin balance. (Margin/leverage considerations for trade strategies are discussed in
greater depth in Chapter 13.)

Many newcomers to the currency market seek out the highest leverage ratios available,
sometimes opening accounts offshore in questionable jurisdictions. Use leverage sparingly;
that 50:1 is more than ample to trade actively, yet prudently.

Margin balances and liquidations
When you open an online currency trading account, you’ll need to pony up cash as collateral to
support the margin requirements established by your broker. That initial margin deposit becomes
your opening margin balance and is the basis on which all your subsequent trades are
collateralized. Unlike futures markets or margin-based equity trading, online forex brokerages do
not issue margin calls (requests for more collateral to support open positions). Instead, they
establish ratios of margin balances to open positions that must be maintained at all times.
If your account’s margin balance falls below the required ratio, even for just a few seconds, your
broker probably has the right to close out your positions without any notice to you. In most cases,
that only happens when an account has losing positions. If your broker liquidates your positions,
that usually means your losses are locked in and your margin balance just got smaller.

Be sure you completely understand your broker’s margin requirements and liquidation
policies. Requirements may differ depending on account size and whether you’re trading
standard lot sizes (100,000 currency units) or minilot sizes (10,000 currency units). Some
brokers’ liquidation policies allow for all positions to be liquidated if you fall below margin
requirements. Others close out the biggest losing positions or portions of losing positions
until the required ratio is satisfied again. You can find the details in the fine print of the
account opening contract that you sign. Always read the fine print to be sure you understand
your broker’s margin and trading policies.

Unrealized and realized profit and loss
Most online forex brokers provide real-time mark-to-market calculations showing your
margin balance. Mark-to-market is the calculation that shows your unrealized P&L based on
where you could close your open positions in the market at that instant. Depending on your
broker’s trading platform, if you’re long, the calculation will typically be based on where
you could sell at that moment. If you’re short, the price used will be where you can buy at that
moment. Your margin balance is the sum of your initial margin deposit, your unrealized P&L,
and your realized P&L.
Realized P&L is what you get when you close out a trade position, or a portion of a trade position.
If you close out the full position and go flat, whatever you made or lost leaves the unrealized P&L
calculation and goes into your margin balance. If you only close a portion of your open positions,
only that part of the trade’s P&L is realized and goes into the margin balance. Your unrealized
P&L will continue to fluctuate based on the remaining open positions and so will your total margin
balance.
If you’ve got a winning position open, your unrealized P&L will be positive and your margin
balance will increase. If the market is moving against your positions, your unrealized P&L will be
negative and your margin balance will be reduced. FX prices are constantly changing, so your
mark-to-market unrealized P&L and total margin balance will also be constantly changing.

Calculating profit and loss with pips
Profit-and-loss calculations are pretty straightforward in terms of math — it’s all based on
position size and the number of pips you make or lose. A pip is the smallest increment of price
fluctuation in currency prices. Pips can also be referred to as points; I use the two terms
interchangeably.

It’s unclear where the term pip came from. Some say it’s an abbreviation for percentage in
point, but it could also be the FX answer to bond traders’ bips, which refers to bps, or basis
points (meaning 1⁄100 of 1 percent).
Just a couple paragraphs earlier, I mentioned that the pip is the smallest increment of currency
price fluctuations. Not so fast. Even the venerable pip has been broken down into decimals or
fractionals. Decimals or fractionals refer to one-tenth of a pip. The good news for traders is that
typically means narrower trading spreads. Instead of trading on a whole pip spread of 3 pips, you
might see a spread of 2.6 or 2.2 pips, which can lead to lower transaction costs over time.
For now, though, to get a handle on P&L calculations, you’re better off sticking with whole pips.
Take a look at a few currency pairs to get an idea of what a pip is. (I leave out the decimalized pip
version for simplicity sake for the rest of this chapter.) Most currency pairs are quoted using five
digits. The placement of the decimal point depends on whether it’s a JPY currency pair — if it is,
there are two digits behind the decimal point. For all other currency pairs, there are four digits
behind the decimal point. In all cases, that last itty-bitty digit is the pip.
Here are some major currency pairs and crosses, with the pip underlined:
EUR/USD: 1.3053
USD/CHF: 1.0567
USD/JPY: 84.23
GBP/USD: 1.5085
EUR/JPY: 110.65
Focus on the EUR/USD price first. Looking at EUR/USD, if the price moves from 1.3053 to
1.3073, it’s just gone up by 20 pips. If it goes from 1.3053 down to 1.3003, it’s just gone down by
50 pips. Pips provide an easy way to calculate the P&L. To turn that pip movement into a P&L
calculation, all you need to know is the size of the position. For a 100,000 EUR/USD position, the
20-pip move equates to $200 (EUR 100,000 × 0.0020 = $200). For a 50,000 EUR/USD position,
the 50-point move translates into $250 (EUR 50,000 × 0.0050 = $250).
Whether the amounts are positive or negative depends on whether you were long or short for each
move. If you were short for the move higher, that’s a - (minus sign) in front of the $200; if you
were long, it’s a + (plus sign). EUR/USD is easy to calculate, especially for USD-based traders,
because the P&L accrues in dollars.

If you take USD/CHF, you’ve got another calculation to make before you can make sense of
it. That’s because the P&L is going to be denominated in Swiss francs (CHF), because CHF

is the counter currency. If USD/CHF drops from 1.0567 to 1.0527 and you’re short USD
100,000 for the move lower, you’ve just caught a 40-pip decline. That’s a profit worth CHF
400 (USD 100,000 × 0.0040 = CHF 400). Yeah, but how much is that in real money? To
convert it into USD, you need to divide the CHF 400 by the USD/CHF rate. Use the closing
rate of the trade (1.0527), because that’s where the market was last, and you get USD 379.98.

Factoring profit and loss into margin calculations
The good news is that online FX trading platforms calculate the P&L for you automatically, both
unrealized while the trade is open and realized when the trade is closed. So why did I just drag
you through the math of calculating P&L using pips? Because online brokerage platforms will start
calculating your P&L for you only after you enter a trade.

To structure your trade and manage your risk effectively (How big a position? How much
margin to risk?), you’re going to need to calculate your P&L outcomes before you enter the
trade. Understanding the P&L implications of a trade strategy you’re considering is critical to
maintaining your margin balance and staying in control of your trading. This simple exercise
can help prevent you from costly mistakes, like putting on a trade that’s too large, or putting
stop-loss orders beyond prices where your account falls below the margin requirement. At
the minimum, you need to calculate the price point at which your position will be liquidated
when your margin balance falls below the required ratio. (I cover this subject more
extensively in Chapter 13.) Fortunately, many online brokers provide a pip calculator
application that makes it even easier.

Understanding Rollovers and Interest Rates
One market convention unique to currencies is rollovers. A rollover is a transaction where an
open position from one value date (settlement date) is rolled over into the next value date.
Rollovers represent the intersection of interest-rate markets and forex markets. In short, you will
either earn or pay interest on open positions held overnight.

Currency is money, after all
Rollover rates are based on the difference in interest rates of the two currencies in the pair you’re
trading. That’s because what you’re actually trading is good old-fashioned cash. That’s right:
Currency is cold, hard cash with a fancy name. When you’re long a currency (cash), it’s like
having a deposit in the bank. If you’re short a currency (cash), it’s like having borrowed a loan.
Just as you would expect to earn interest on a bank deposit or pay interest on a loan, you should
expect an interest gain/expense for holding a currency position over the change in value.

The catch in currency trading is that if you carry over an open position from one value date to the
next, you have two bank accounts involved. Think of it as one account with a positive balance (the
currency you’re long) and one with a negative balance (the currency you’re short). But because
your accounts are in two different currencies, the two interest rates of the different countries will
apply.

The difference between the interest rates in the two countries is called the interest-rate
differential. The larger the interest-rate differential, the larger the impact from rollovers. The
narrower the interest-rate differential, the smaller the effect from rollovers. You can find
relevant interest-rate levels of the major currencies from any number of financial-market
websites, but www.reuters.com and www.bloomberg.com have especially good resources.
Look for the base or benchmark lending rates in each country.

So how do interest rates get turned into currency rates? After all, interest rates are in
percent and currency rates are, well, not in percent. The answer is that deposit rates yield
actual cash returns, which are netted, producing a net cash return. That net cash return is then
divided by the position size, which gives you the currency pips, which is the rollover rate.
The following calculation illustrates how this works. I’ve simplified matters by using just one
interest rate for each currency. In the real world, each currency would have a slightly different
interest rate depending on whether you’re borrowing or lending (depositing).
Position: Long AUD/USD 100,000 at 1.0200 (long AUD/short USD 102,000)
AUD interest rate: 4.75 percent per annum → 1 day = 0.0475 × (1 ÷ 365) = 0.01301 percent
AUD deposit earns: 100,000 × 0.0001301 = AUD +13.01
USD interest rate: 0.25 percent per annum → 1 day = 0.0025 × (1 ÷ 365) = 0.0006849 percent
USD loan costs: 102,000 × 0.000006849 = USD - 0.70
Because AUD/USD pips are denominated in USD, convert the AUD to USD: AUD 13.01 ×
1.0200 = USD 13.27.
Net the USD amounts 13.27- 0.70 = USD +12.57 ÷ 100,000 = 0.0001257
On a long AUD 100,000 position, the rollover earns 0.0001257 or +1.257 pips.

Value dates and trade settlement
When I talk about currency trading, I’m implicitly referring to trading the spot forex market.

A spot market is one that’s trading for immediate delivery of whatever security is being
traded. But in the real world, immediate means a few business days, to allow banks and
financial firms time to settle a trade (make payment, deliver/receive a security).
In forex markets, spot refers to trade settlement in two business days, which is called the value
date. That time is needed to allow for trade processing across global time zones and for currency
payments to be wired around the world.
The forex market operates on a 24-hour trade date basis beginning at 5 p.m. eastern time (ET) and
ending the next day at 5 p.m. ET. So if it’s a Monday, spot currencies are trading for value on
Wednesday (assuming no holidays). At 5 p.m. ET on Monday, the trade date becomes Tuesday and
the value date is shifted to Thursday. If you have an open position on Monday at 5 p.m. ET closing,
your position will be rolled over to the next value date, in this case from Wednesday to Thursday,
or a one-day rollover.
If you close your position the next day (Tuesday) and finish the trade date square, there are no
rollovers because you have no position. The same is true if you never carry a position through the
daily 5 p.m. ET close.
