
50

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

interpretation of a multitude of variables. In fact the unaided mind is able
to deal with only two or three variables in a configural fashion (see Part
Two). By failing to appreciate these limits, people easily assume that considering more variables (indicators) will lead to greater knowledge and a
more informed opinion.

I Can Handle That: The Illusion of Control
The illusion of control is an unwarranted belief in our ability to control
outcomes. People who feel in control are happier and more relaxed than
people who do not. 50 This cognitive distortion is fed by the self-attribution
bias and it, in tum, feeds the overoptimism bias.
According to Nofsinger, activities that are most likely to induce the illusion of control have the five following characteristics51 :
1. A high level of personal involvement
2. A large range of choice
3. A great amount of information available to consider (Knowledge
Illusion)
4. A high level of familiarity with the task
5. Early success in the activity
The first four clearly apply to subjective TA. A high level of personal
involvement is engendered by the frequent analysis of market data, the
creation of new indicators and new ways to interpret them, the drawing
and redrawing of trend lines, the counting and then recounting of Elliott
waves, and so forth. There is also a large degree of choice: which markets
to follow, which indicators to use, where to place a trend line, and so on.
The various methods used become familiar as they are studied and used
regularly. The fifth factor, early success, is a matter of chance. Some will
experience initial success and because of the self-attribution bias are
likely to attribute it to their expertise and the efficacy of the TA methods
rather than chance. All of these factors can induce and maintain an unjustified sense of control and an ability to earn market-beating returns.

The Hindsight Bias: I Knew Things Would Turn
Out That Way
The hindsight bias creates the illusion that the prediction of an uncertain
event is easier than it really is when the event is viewed in retrospect, after its outcome is known. Once we learn the upshot of an uncertain situation, such as which team won a football game or in which direction prices

51

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

moved, subsequent to a TA pattern, we tend to forget how uncertain we
really were prior to knowing the outcome. See Figure 2.6.
This cognitive distortion can be understood in terms of the way memories are stored in the brain. Past events are stored in categories of similar
events (e.g., sports events) rather than as a sequential temporal record.
For this reason sinlilar types of events that occurred at different times become intermixed. As a reSUlt, after the outcome of a football game becomes known, the pregame state of knowledge (uncertainty) becomes
intermixed with definitive postgame knowledge. Our state of knowledge
prior to the game was uncertain because of the ambiguous nature of the
pregame evidence. One could have made the case for either team winning.
The internlixing of pregame knowledge with postgame knowledge happens immediately and unconsciously, leaving us unable to recall what we
knew before the game or our state of doubt. Consequently, the pregame
evidence, which was in fact quite uncertain, seems less uncertain after the
winner became known. This creates a false sense of confidence in our
ability to make predictions. It is because of this very pitfall that scientists
are especially careful about defining procedures for making predictions
and evaluating their accuracy.
Subjective TA is especially prone to the hindsight bias because it
lacks clearly defined rules for pattern identification, forecast generation,

I wonder if I
should bet on
the jets?
The other team
is pretty good.

I knew the jet's
would win.
It was so obvious!!
Why didn't I bet?

NY jets Win
Football Game
'--

October 1

---J

October 2
Time

FIGURE 2.6 The hindsight bias.

-----------------------tV~
--~ ~;"

----------------------------

October 3

52

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

and prediction evaluation. In real time, the practitioner of subjective TA
faces a task of overwhelming ambiguity. A single chart contains a mindboggling number of possible predictive cues that range from the extremely bearish to the extremely bullish. However, when the same chart is
viewed in retrospect, the ambiguities that had faced the analyst trying to
make a prediction fade away because outcomes are known. This creates a
false credibility for subjective chart analysis.
Let's consider a hypothetical example illustrating how outcome
knowledge might minimize the true ambiguities in a chart, thus overstating the predictive power of subjective chart analysis. Consider Figure 2.7
and what was knowable as of time A. The pattern could be interpreted as
bullish: a prior uptrend with a bullish flag consolidation temporarily interrupting the uptrend.
Or the same chart could be interpreted as bearish: a head-andshoulder pattern, with a neckline breach and then a return rally providing an ideal time for a short sale. This interpretation is illustrated in
Figure 2.8. Note that both charts are identical up to point A, except for
the price swings that have been highlighted and the forecast made
based on the pattern.

Price

r"'"
CC!l)
,
,,
,

Time

A

FIGURE 2.7 Bullish conjecture.

53

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

r

"'"

~~~-------------Price

Time

A
FIGURE 2.8 Bearish conjecture.

In reality, at point A the chart is an ambiguous mixture of technical
features that could support either a bullish or bearish forecast. The true
uncertainty, which is depicted in Figure 2.9, explains why chartists shown
the same history will often express a variety of predictions
Now let's alter the situation by imagining how chartists might look at
the same chart at a later time, point B. We will look at two different outcomes paths subsequent to point A. This is intended to illustrate how the
hindsight bias can obscure the an1biguity that existed at time A, thereby
creating an illusion of validity for subjective chart analysis, irrespective of
which path prices actually took.
First consider an analyst's impression looking at the chart for the first
time at time B in Figure 2.10. This is the same chart shown previously with
an uptrend tacked on after point A. This observer knows an uptrend took
place between A and B. It is my contention that the hindsight bias would
encourage the subjective analysts to notice the bullish flag pattern rather
than the bearish head-and-shoulder pattern. In other words, the possession of outcome knowledge tends to make patterns that gave incorrect
predictions less noticeable while making patterns that predicted accurately more noticeable. What was in fact an ambiguous pattern to an observer only possessing knowledge up to point A appears as an obviously

54

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

p'kec@S

?•
Time

A
FIGURE 2.9 The true uncertainty of foresight.

..
.
•• I

Price

Bullish Flag
Obvious in Hindsight

..•• .
.

.: •• :

.:..

••••

r

I
I

i '"
._--------------~

--------------~
I
I
I
I

I
I
I
I Time

A
FIG RE 2.10 The false certainty of hindsight.

B

55

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

bullish bull flag to an observer looking back from point B. Similarly, the
outcome knowledge possessed by the observer at point B renders the
bearish head-and-shoulders pattern less noticeable. The observer at point
B comes away with the impression that the evidence on the chart supports the validity of chart analysis.
Alternatively, if the price path from time A to time B had been a downtrend, as depicted in Figure 2.11, I contend that the hindsight bias would
cause an observer at point B to notice a head-and-shoulders top pattern
that predicted successfully, but the observer would not notice the bullish
flag whose forecast proved erroneous.
These illustrations were contrived to make a point. Whatever the outcome, it is always possible to selectively notice chart features that seemingly predicted correctly, amongst what is truly an ambiguous mixture of
bullish and bearish cues. The vague manner in which subjective chart
patterns are defined, the lack of objective evaluation criteria, and the operation of the hindsight bias create an illusion of validity for subjective
chart analysis.
Who among us, upon first learning of the head-and-shoulder pattern,

,......,,,,,,

,

Bearish H&S
Obvious in Hindsight

---t----------------~~
:,
:

Price

I
I

I
I
I

o
o

••

•

. . .- .

-... e.

•o • •
I
••
•• I
0

0

00

J
I
I
I
I
I Time

A
FIGURE 2.11

The false certainty of hindsight.

B

56

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

did not peruse historical charts to find examples of the head-and-shoulders pattern to see if it worked as claimed? And who among us did not
come away with the impression, "This stuff actually works!" Were we
merely victims of the hindsight bias?
There is persuasive experimental evidence52 that people are afflicted
with hindsight bias. In one typical study, students were asked to rate the
probability of various outcomes in advance of President Nixon's trip to
China in 1972. For example, they were asked to predict if a meeting would
take place between President Nixon and chairman Mao Tse-tung and if the
United States would establish a diplomatic mission in China but not grant
the diplomatic recognition that China wanted. Both events were uncertain
prior to the trip. Two weeks after the trip, when the events that did take
place were known, the students were asked to recall what they had previously predicted. After a two-week interval, 67 percent of the students remembered their predictions as being more accurate than they actually
were. In other words, they were unable to recall their prior uncertainty.
After several months, the percentage of students afflicted with hindsight
bias jumped from 67 percent to 84 percent.
The hindsight bias has been found to operate powerfully in trial testimony. Witnesses believe they are giving accurate accounts, but their recall
of the order of events and of specific details are altered by knowing how
matters actually turned out. 53
The hindsight bias infects historical accounts. Historians, having the
benefit of hindsight, will often point out that the rise of the Third Reich
was quite predictable. They claim that the seeds of Nazism were obvious
in various writings that preceded the Third Reich. In actuality, the rise of
the Third Reich was only one of numerous possible interpretations that
could have been read into these accounts. The outcome, the rise of the
Third Reich, which seems so inevitable to the historians, when looked at
in retrospect, was merely one among an infinite number of possible paths
that history could have taken.
Other experimental evidence shows that strategies aimed specifically
at reducing the hindsight bias are not effective. 54 Even when people are
warned about hindsight bias and told to avoid it, it still occurs. It appears
to be beyond rational control. Not even professional expertise is helpful.
In one study, a group of doctors were asked to evaluate the diagnostic errors made by other doctors. The doctors doing the evaluations were
armed with the knowledge of the disease that was ultimately confirmed by
a pathology report. The evaluators were unable to understand how such
errors could have been made by a trained physician. Again, outcome
knowledge makes the past appear as if it should have been more predictable than it really was.
What cognitive processes are responsible for hindsight bias? Though

The IIlusorv Validitv of Subjective Technical Analvsis

57

the matter is not settled, it seems to go beyond a desire to see ourselves as
smart and in control. One conjecture that has received some support suggests that it has to do with the way memory works, or, better said, fails to
work. 55 In simplified terms, the recording of memories by the brain is not a
passive process in which events are stored in proper temporal sequence
ready for replay in that sequence. Rather, memory involves an active deconstruction of events for storage and then an active reconstruction of
events when they are recalled. As events are experienced, they are sliced
and diced and stored by associative categories, rather than by time of occurrence. An encounter with a dog last month at a friend's house in the
country is dissected and stored in distinct categories and neural locations;
memories of dogs, memories of friends, and memories of trips to the
country, all of which may have occurred at various times in the past. When
we attempt to recall the last month's visit to the country, the mind reconstructs the memory by splicing together bits of information stored in these
separate associative locations. Psychologists have speculated that our
brains evolved this way because it is generally effective and efficient.
However, because time of occurrence is not an important feature of the
storage system, it becomes difficult to recall the order of events. And it is
the order of events, such as when we received a bit of knowledge, that is
most critical when we are assessing our predictive abilities.
In the process of deconstructing events for storage, new experience
gets mixed in with old experience. Just as a drop of ink in a glass of clear
water becomes thoroughly and irreversibly intermixed, recently acquired
knowledge, such as the outcome of an uncertain event, becomes inextricably intermixed with what was known prior to the outcome. Post-outcome
knowledge becomes indistinguishable from pre-outcome knowledge and
seems as if it were known all along. This explains why it is so difficult for
people to reconstruct prior states of uncertainty.
Can subjective TA analysts overcome the hindsight bias? To answer
this question we must consider the analyst in the context of two different
tasks: (1) pattern research-the search for patterns with predictive power
in historical data, and (2) real-time forecasting-applying the patterns in
current time to make new predictions. The task of pattern research is exemplified by the early investigations of Charles H. Dow, originator of the
Dow theory, or of Ralph N. Elliott, originator of the Elliott Wave Principle.
In the process of formulating their ideas, they informally proposed and
tested various hypotheses about which chart patterns had predictive
power. The task of making real-time predictions by applying those patterns in current time would be exemplified by Dow theorist Richard Russell applying the Dow theory today or Robert Prechter, an Elliott-wave
expert, making a forecast today.
In the context of historical pattern research, I contend that hindsight

58

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

bias is unavoidable because it is impossible to shield oneself from outcome knowledge. Simply knowing the path that prices took biases the analyst's perception of the predictive power of whatever method is being
evaluated. Only objective TA methods offer the opportunity of avoiding
hindsight bias because only information known at a given point in time is
used to generate signals, and signals are evaluated in an objective manner.
In the context of current-time forecasting, subjective analysts could
protect themselves from hindsight bias if they were willing to make falsifiable forecasts. A forecast is falsifiable if, at the time a forecast is made,
the analyst specifies (1) outcomes that would constitute a forecast error,
or (2) the procedure that will be used to evaluate the forecast as well as
when the procedure will be employed. For example:
The maTket will be highe1" six months fr-om now, and within that
time fTame the maTket will not decline mOTe than 20 percent fr-om
current levels, aT

The maTket will advance 20 pe1"cent from current levels before it declines 20 pe1"cent fTom current levels.
A buy signal has been given. Hold long position until a sell signal is
given.
The first two forecasts specify outcomes that would clearly define a
forecast error. For example, if the market were to drop 20 percent before
it advanced 20 percent, the prediction would be wrong. End of story! The
third forecast, a signal, implies a clear procedure for evaluation-compute the gain or loss from date of the buy until the date of the sell signal.
Falsifiable forecasts would provide the analysts and their customers with
valuable feedback. Unfortunately, few subjective forecasters do this.

SECOND-HAND INFORMATION BIAS: THE POWER OF
A GOOD STORY
No one has the time, much less the expertise, to obtain all necessary
knowledge via direct experience. Therefore, by necessity, most of what
we know we learn secondhand from those who purportedly do know.
Among the myriad ways knowledge is communicated, the narrative
account or story is by far the most popular. Biologist Stephen Jay Gould
called humans "the story-telling primate." We have been sharing ideas this
way for thousands, perhaps millions of years. Consequently much of what

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

59

we know, even including how to do arithmetic, is stored in the mind in a
narrative format. 56
For this reason, good stories are more powerful persuaders than objective facts. Psychologists speculate that concrete, colorful, and emotionally interesting tales have a powerful impact on our beliefs because
such stories call to mind pre-existing mental scripts. 57 Concepts and abstractions simply cannot light up the brain's story networks the way a
lively tale can. Philosopher Bertrand Russell said that when we learn
things informally (nonscientifically), we are impacted by the "emotional
interest of the instances, not by their number"58 It is for this very reason
that scientists train themselves to react in exactly the opposite way, that is
to discount dramatic stories and pay attention to objective facts, preferably those that can be reduced to numbers.
Not all stories are equally compelling. To command attention, a story
must be interesting and understandable yet not bore us with what we already know. We are most captivated by vivid accounts about real people,
preferably people we know. Stories that speak to our emotional needs
while being entertaining and informative sell the best. A good tale not only
enlivens us, but it gains a life of its own, as it is told and retold over and
over again.
The Conflict between Truth and Tale

A conflict exists between our desire for knowledge and our desire that it
be delivered in the form of a good story. Humorist H. 1. Mencken put it
eloquently; "What ails the truth is that it is mainly uncomfortable and often dull. The human mind seeks something more amusing and more caressing." Reality tends to be full of inconsistencies, so an audience must
rely on the integrity of the storyteller to tell it like it is rather than how
they would like to hear it.
Regrettably, even when the primary intent of a secondhand account
is the delivery of knowledge, it is often biased to satisfy the audience's
appetite for an engaging story. Storytellers know full well that information delivered with too many qualifiers is unappealing. Consequently, inconsistencies and ambiguities are minimized while cohesive aspects are
amplified. 59 Although these editorial modifications make the account
more digestible, they can rob it of its essential truth. In the end, the audience comes away with an exaggerated impression of the information's
clarity and validity. This even occurs when the findings of scientific papers are summarized and communicated. Over numerous retellings, the
truth gets left further and further behind. What started out as a result
with possible significance may end up being reported as a discovery of
high significance.

60

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Especially persuasive are accounts that link events with the chain of
cause and effect. The perception of causal relationships is a natural cognitive capacity60 and causal chains satisfy our need to explain events in
the world around US. 61 Studies of jury decisions show that the best
causal narratives win in the courtroom. 62 The side offering the story that
best ties the evidence into a coherent and credible sequence often carries the day. 63
The problem is that cause-effect explanations that are, in fact, fallacious are hard to detect when they are plausible and appeal to a sense of
the ironic. One story that has been making the rounds since the 1950s is
as follows: "The Ten Commandments contain 297 words. The Declaration of Independence has 300 words, Lincoln's Gettysburg Address has
266 words, but a directive from the government's Office of Price Stabilization to regulate the price of cabbage contains 26,911 words." The
truth is the Office of Price Stability never made such a directive. Nevertheless, the tale had such appeal, it remained alive despite the agency's
efforts to convince the public it was false. Even the dissolution of the Office of Price Stability did not stop the story. It was merely modified so
that the directive was described as a "federal directive. "64 The story
would not die because of its irony and the plausibility of long-winded
bureaucrats.

Elliott's Tale
The power of a good story may explain the enduring appeal of the Elliott
Wave Principle (EWP), one of TA's more grandiose conjectures. The Elliott Wave Principle holds that price waves express a universal order and
fOffil that is found not only in the fluctuations of financial markets but
throughout the natural world, including the shapes of sea shells, galaxies,
pine cones, sunflowers, and numerous other natural phenomena.
According to EWP, market trends are fractal-a nested hierarchy of
waves sharing the same form but ranging in magnitude and duration
from microwaves that last only minutes to grand millennial macrowaves
that can last for thousands of years. 65 This shared form, called the Elliott
wave, is an eight-segment configuration of rising and falling price movements. In fact this universal pattern of growth and decay is alleged to describe not only the evolution of prices in financial markets; it is also
manifested in the evolution of trends in mass psychology, the rise and
fall of civilizations, cultural fashions, and other social trends. The theory
claims to describe just about anything that goes through cycles of
growth and change. Even the business career of Elliott wave's leading
advocate Robert Prechter, according to Prechter himself, has followed a
series of ups and downs that conform to the Elliott Wave Principle. This
