
1. Analyze the pattern of highs and lows. When rallies keep reaching higher levels
and declines keep stopping at higher levels, they identify an uptrend.The pattern
of lower lows and lower highs identifies a downtrend, and the pattern of irregular highs and lows points to a trading range (Figure 19.1).
2. Plot a 20- to 30-bar exponential moving average (see Chapter 22). The direction
of its slope identifies the trend. If a moving average has not reached a new high
or low in a month, then the market is probably in a trading range.

64

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

3. When an oscillator, such as MACD-Histogram (see Chapter 23) rises to a new
peak, it identifies a powerful trend and suggests that the latest market top is likely
to be retested or exceeded.
4. Several market indicators, such the Directional system (see Chapter 24), help
identify trends. The Directional system is especially good at catching early stages
of new trends (Figure 19.2).

Trade or Wait
Having identified an uptrend, you need to decide whether to buy immediately or
wait for a dip. If you buy fast, you’ll get in gear with the trend, but on the minus side,
your stops are likely to be farther away, increasing your risk.
If you wait for a dip, your risk will be smaller, but you’ll have four groups of
competitors: longs who want to add to their positions, shorts who want to get out
even, traders who never bought (such as yourself), and traders who sold too early
but are eager to buy again. The waiting areas for pullbacks are notoriously crowded!
Furthermore, a deep pullback may signal the beginning of a reversal rather than a
buying opportunity. The same reasoning applies to shorting in downtrends.
If the market is in a trading range and you’re waiting for a breakout, you’ll have
to decide whether to buy in anticipation of a breakout, during a breakout, or on a
pullback after a valid breakout. If you aren’t sure, consider entering in several steps:
buy a third of the planned position in anticipation, a third on a breakout, and a third
on a pullback.
Whatever method you use, remember to apply the key risk management rule:
the distance from your entry to the protective stop, multiplied by position size can
never be more than 2 percent of your account equity (see Chapter 50). No matter
how attractive a trade, pass it up if it would require putting more than 2% of your
account at risk.
Finding good entry points is extremely important in trading ranges. You have to
be very precise and nimble because the profit potential is limited. A trend is more
forgiving of a sloppy entry, as long as you trade in the right direction. Old traders
chuckle: “Don’t confuse brains with a bull market.”
Specific risk management tactics are different for trends and trading ranges.When
trend trading, it pays to put on smaller positions with wider stops. You’ll be less
likely to get shaken out by any counter-trend moves, while still controlling risk.You
may put on bigger positions in trading ranges but with tighter stops.

Conflicting Timeframes
Markets move in several timeframes at the same time (see Chapter 32). They move
simultaneously, and sometimes in the opposite directions on 10-minute, hourly, daily, weekly and monthly charts. The market may look like a buy in one timeframe but
a sell in another. Even indicator signals in different timeframes of the same stock may
contradict one another. Which will you follow?
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

20. KANGAROO TAILS

65

Most traders ignore the fact that markets move in different directions at the same
time in different timeframes. They pick one timeframe, such as daily or hourly, and
look for trades there. That’s when trends from other timeframes sneak up on them
and wreak havoc with their plans.
Those conflicts between signals in different timeframes of the same market are
one of the great puzzles in market analysis. What looks like a trend on a daily chart
may show up as a blip on a flat weekly chart. What looks like a flat trading range on a
daily chart shows rich uptrends and downtrends on an hourly chart, and so on.
The sensible course of action is this: before examining a trend on your favorite
chart, step back to explore the charts in a timeframe one order of magnitude greater
than your favorite. This search for a greater perspective is one of the key principles
of the Triple Screen trading system, which we’ll discuss in a later chapter.
When professionals are in doubt, they look at the big picture, while amateurs tend
to focus on the short-term charts. Taking a longer view works better —and is a lot
less nerve-wracking.

■■20. Kangaroo Tails
Just when you think a runaway trend will keep on going—pop!—a three-bar pattern forms a kangaroo tail that flags a reversal. A kangaroo tail2 consists of a single,
very tall bar, flanked by two regular bars, that protrudes from a tight weave of prices.
Upward-pointing kangaroo tails flash sell signals at market tops, while downwardpointing kangaroo tails occur at market bottoms (Figure 20.1).
While daily charts are shown in the illustration, you can find kangaroo tails on the
charts of all timeframes. The longer the timeframe, the more meaningful its signal:
a kangaroo tail on a weekly chart is likely to lead to a more significant move than a
tail on a 5-minute chart.
Kangaroo tails, also called “fingers,” are on my short list of reliable chart formations. They leap at you from the charts and are easy to recognize. If you doubt
whether a kangaroo tail is present, assume it is not. Real kangaroo tails are unmistakable. They occur in the broad market indexes as well as individual stocks, futures,
and other trading vehicles.
Markets constantly fluctuate, seeking levels that generate the highest volume of
trade. If a rally attracts no orders, the market will reverse and look for orders at
lower levels. If volume dries up during a decline, the market is likely to rally, seeking
orders at higher prices.
Kangaroo tails reflect failed bull or bear raids.
A kangaroo tail pointing up reflects a failed attempt by the bulls to lift the market.
They’re like a group of soldiers that take a hill from the enemy, only to discover that
the main force has failed to follow. Now they escape and run downhill for their lives.
Having failed to hold the hill, the army is likely to move away from it.
I am grateful to Margarita Volkova, my translator in Moscow, who came up with this name for the
pattern.

2

66

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

FIGURE 20.1â•… BIIB and FDO daily. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Kangaroo Tails
Biogen Idec, Inc (BIIB) was rising in a steady uptrend when it developed an upward kangaroo tail. The stock opened slightly below its previous close but then traced a very tall
bar, triple the average height. It reached a record new high but then slid, closing near its
opening price. The next day’s bar was of average height—it completed the kangaroo pattern and the trend reversed down.
The stock of Family Dollar Stores, Inc. (FDO) was falling when its decline sharply accelerated, producing a downward pointing bar several times the average bar height for this
stock. Notice that both opening and closing prices for that bar were well within the previous day’s range. That downward stab marked the end of the downtrend; the next bar was
of average height and after that the trend reversed up.

A kangaroo tail that points down reflects a failed bear raid. Bears aggressively sold
the market, pushing it lower—but low prices did not attract volume and bears retreated back into the range. What do you think the market is likely to do next, after
it failed to continue moving down? Since it found no orders below, it’s likely to turn
up and rally.
When markets recoil from kangaroo tails, they offer trading opportunities. It was
J. Peter Steidlmayer who pointed out years ago that a bar that looks like a finger sticking out of a tight chart pattern provides a valuable reference point for short-term
traders. A kangaroo tail shows that a certain price has been rejected by the market.
It usually leads to a swing in the opposite direction. As soon as you recognize a tail,
trade against it (Figure 20.2).
An experienced trader can recognize a kangaroo tail during its third bar, before it
closes. For example, you may see a range that held for several days on a daily chart,
but then on Monday the stock explodes in a very tall bar. If on Tuesday it opens near
the base of the Monday’s bar base and refuses to rally, consider selling short before
the market closes on Tuesday. If the market has been in a trading range for a week and
then traces a tall bar down on Wednesday, get ready on Thursday: if prices trade in
a narrow range near the top of the Wednesday bar, go long before the market closes
on Thursday.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

20. KANGAROO TAILS

67

FIGURE 20.2â•… IGT Daily. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Trading Kangaroo Tails.
Kangaroo tails mark the final splash of bullishness or bearishness, depending on their
direction. Here the kangaroo tail (marked with a red arrow) helped identify the end of an
uptrend in the stock of International Game Technology (IGT). Notice the bar is more than
double the usual height and is bracketed by shorter bars. If entering a short trade during
the third bar, place your stop about half-way up the tail. Putting a stop at the tip of the tail
would mean accepting too much risk.
Notice a tail pointing down, marked by a green arrow. It stopped the downtrend and
augured in a week-long rally.

Remember that trading against the tails is a short-term tactic; on the daily charts,
these signals fizzle out after a few days. Evaluate kangaroo tails against the background of the current market. For example, when running a long-term bullish campaign in a stock, be alert to kangaroo tails. A tail pointing up may well suggest profit
taking on existing positions, while a tail pointing down identifies a good spot to add
to long positions.
Using stops is essential for survival and success in the markets. Putting a stop at
the end of a tail would make your stop too wide, risking too much capital. When
trading against the tail, place your protective stop about halfway through the tail. If
the market starts “chewing its tail,” it is time to get out.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 4

Computerized
Technical Analysis
C

omputers were a novelty at the time I wrote Trading for a Living. My first computer for technical analysis was an Apple 2E desktop with a boxy modem and
two floppy drives. Each held a 300 KB diskette: one for the analytic program (Computrac, the first program for technical analysis) and the other for market data. When
the first hard drives came out, I had a choice of buying a 2-, 5- or 10-MB (not gigabyte!) drive. Ten megabytes seemed too huge for anyone to ever need, so I sprang for
a 5-MB hard drive. How technology has changed!
A trader without a computer is like a man traveling on a bicycle. His legs grow
strong and he sees a lot of scenery, but his progress is slow. When you travel on business and want to get to the point fast, you get a car.
Today, very few people trade without computers. Our machines help track and
analyze more markets in greater depth. They liberate us from the routine updating
of charts, freeing up time for thinking. Computers allow us to use more complex
indicators and spot more opportunities. Trading is an information game. A computer
helps you process more information. On the minus side, with computers we lose a
physical feel for price moves that comes from pencil and paper charting.

■■21. Computers in Trading
Computerized technical analysis is more objective than classical charting. You can
argue whether support or resistance is present—but there can be no argument about
an indicator’s direction. Of course, you still need to decide what to do after you
identify an indicator’s message.
69

70

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

Toolboxes
When working with wood or metal, you can go to a hardware store and buy a set
of tools that can help you work smartly and efficiently. A technical analysis toolbox
provides a set of electronic tools for processing market data.
When you decide to get into computerized technical analysis, begin by drawing a
list of tasks you want your computer to perform. This will take some serious thinking, but it’s much better than getting a package first and scratching your head later,
trying to figure out what it might do for you. Decide what markets you want to
track, what types of charts to view and what indicators to use.
A toolbox draws weekly, daily, and intraday charts; it splits the screen into several windowpanes for plotting prices and indicators. A good toolbox includes many
popular indicators, such as moving averages, channels, MACD, Stochastic, Relative
Strength Index, along with dozens if not hundreds of others. It allows you to modify
all indicators and even construct your own.
A good toolbox allows you to compare any two markets and analyze their spreads.
If you trade options, your toolbox must include an options valuation model. Advanced packages allow you to backtest trading systems.
Another feature of a good toolbox is its ability to scan stocks. For example, you
may want to find all stocks among the Nasdaq 100 whose exponential moving averages are rising, but whose prices are no more than 1% above their EMAs. Can your
software scan for that? Can it add fundamental parameters to your search, such as
rising earnings? Think what you want to find and then ask software vendors whether
their products can do it for you.
There are good toolboxes at all price levels. A beginner making his first steps may
sign up with an online service that offers a basic set of computerized tools for free;
you can upgrade to a paid level later. Most charts in this book are drawn using just
such a service, StockCharts.com, because I want you to see how much you can do
while spending very little. Some traders find that sufficient, while many of us buy
programs that reside on our computers, allowing greater customization. With prices
of software in a steady decline, you don’t have to worry too much. Buy something
simple and inexpensive and upgrade later—it’s a date, not a marriage.
Once you’ve decided what package to use, you may want to hire somebody who
already uses it to help you set it up on your machine. This can save a great deal of
time and energy for inexperienced users.
A growing number of brokerage firms offer free analytic software to their clients;
the price is right, but they tend to have two serious limitations. First, for legal reasons, they make their software very hard to modify and second, it only works online.
Traders often ask how to add my indicators to their brokerage software, and the
usual answer is—you can’t.
Most brokerage house programs enable you to place and change your orders using the same analytic software. This can be quite handy and useful for day traders,
but less important for longer-term traders. Be sure to disable a common feature that
shows your equity gains or losses in real time. Watching dollars jump up or down at
every tick is stressful and distracting. As the song goes, “…never count your money
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

21. COMPUTERS IN TRADING

71

while you’re sitting at the table—there’ll be time enough for counting when the
dealing’s done.” Focus on prices and indicators instead of watching dollars and thinking what you can buy with them.
Technical analysis software is constantly changing and evolving; a book is not the
right place for software recommendations. My firm Elder.com maintains a brief
Software Guide, which we periodically update and e-mail to any trader who asks for
it, as a public service.
As mentioned earlier in this book, most programs for technical analysis fall into
one of three groups: toolboxes, black boxes, and gray boxes. Toolboxes are for serious traders, black boxes are for people who believe in Santa Claus, and gray boxes
are in between. When considering a new software package, be sure to know which
group it belongs to.

Black Boxes and Gray Boxes
Black box software is pure magic: it tells you what and when to buy and sell without

telling you why. You download the data and push a button. Lights blink, gears click,
and a message lights up, telling you what to do. Magic!
Black boxes always come with impressive track records that show profitable past
performance. Every black box eventually self-destructs because markets keep changing. Even systems with built-in optimization don’t survive because we don’t know
what kind of optimization will be needed in the future. There is no substitute for
human judgment. The only way to make money from a black box is to sell one. Most
black boxes are sold by hustlers to gullible or insecure traders.
Each black box is guaranteed to fail, even if sold by an honest developer. Complex
human activities, such as trading, cannot be automated. Machines can help but not
replace humans.
Trading with a black box means using a slice of someone else’s intelligence, as it
existed at some point in the past. Markets change, and experts change their minds,
but a black box keeps churning out its buy and sell signals. It would have been funny
if it wasn’t so expensive for losers.
A gray box generates trading signals based on proprietary formulas. Unlike a black

box, it discloses its general principles and allows you to adjust its parameters to some
degree. The closer a gray box is to a toolbox, the better it is.

Computers
While online programs can run on any computer, most stand-alone programs are
written for the Windows environment. Some traders run them on Macs, using emulation software. There are even programs for tablets, such as iPads.
Technical analysis software tends to be not very demanding of processing power,
but still, it makes sense to get the most modern machine so that it remains useful
for years.
Many day traders like to use multiple screens for a multidimensional view of the
markets and the ability to watch several trading vehicles at once. Since I like to travel,

72

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

I carry a small external screen that helps me monitor markets and trade from the
road. It’s the size of my laptop but much thinner and attaches to it with a USB cable,
without a power cord.

Market Data
Swing and position traders enter and exit trades within days or weeks, while day
traders enter and exit within a few hours if not minutes. End-of-day data is sufficient
for position traders, but day traders need real-time data.
When you download the daily data for research, it pays to cover two bull-andbear-market cycles, or about 10 years. Whenever I approach a stock, I like to look
back at 12 years of trading history to see whether it is cheap or expensive relative to
its 12-year range.
Whenever you approach a trade, you must know your edge—what will help you
make money. The ability to recognize patterns is a part of my edge, but if a stock’s
history is too short, there are no reliable patterns to identify. That’s why I avoid trading very young stocks, those with less than a year’s history.
When collecting and analyzing data, don’t chase too many markets at once. Focus
on quality and depth rather than quantity. Begin by following the key market indexes,
such as the Dow, the NASDAQ, and the S&P. Many professional traders focus on a
relatively small number of stocks. They get to know them well and become familiar
with their behavior patterns.
You could start out by focusing on a dozen stocks. Many professionals limit themselves to fewer than 100 stocks, which they review every weekend and mark their
opinions in a fresh column of their spreadsheet.They may select fewer than 10 stocks
from that pool that look promising for the week ahead and focus on them. Build your
watch list gradually from the popular stocks of the year; add a few stocks from the
most promising industries and some stocks you’ve traded before. Building a watch
list is like gardening: you can’t get a beautiful garden in a single season, but you can
get there over several seasons.
Try to stick to the data in your own time zone.When I teach overseas, traders often
ask whether I trade in their country. I remind them that whenever you put on a trade,
you’re trying to take money out of some other trader’s pocket, while others are trying
to pick yours. This game is hard enough when you’re awake, but it is risky to trade in
a different time zone, allowing locals to pick your pockets while you sleep.This is why
I largely limit my trading to the U.S. markets. Many overseas traders complain that
they find their domestic markets too thin and ask whether it would make sense for
them to trade in the huge and liquid U.S. market. The answer depends on how different their time zone is from the U.S. market’s time zone. For example, the U.S.
markets are easy to trade from Europe where they open at 3:30 p.m. local time and
close at 10 p.m. It is much harder to do from Asia or Australia, but it can work if you
take a longer view and aim to catch longer-term trends.
Beginning traders should steer clear of day-trading. It demands instant decision
making, and if you stop to think, you’re dead. Learn to trade in a slower environment.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

21. COMPUTERS IN TRADING

73

Become a competent position or swing trader before you consider day-trading. If you
compare swing trading and day-trading, it is like playing the same video game at level
one or level nine.You run the same mazes and dodge the same monsters, but the pace
of the game is so fast at level nine that your reactions must be automatic. Learn to
analyze markets at level one—become a swing trader before attempting to day-trade.
We’ll return to this topic in Chapter 33, "Trading Timeframes."
A good place to get started is swing trading, i.e., holding positions for several
days. Select popular stocks that have good swings on a good volume. Start out by
following just a handful. Some swing traders who hold positions for only a few days
use real-time data for timing entries and exits, while others manage quite well with
end-of-day data.

Three Major Groups of Indicators
Indicators help identify trends and reversals. They are more objective than chart patterns and provide insight into the balance of power between bulls and bears.
A great challenge is that various indicators may contradict one another. Some
of them work best in trending markets, others in flat markets. Some are good
at catching turning points, while others are better at riding trends. That’s why it
pays to select a small number of indicators from various groups and learn to combine them.
Many beginners look for a “silver bullet”—a single magic indicator, but markets
are too complex to be handled with a single tool. Others try to poll a multitude of
indicators and average their signals.The results of such a “poll” will be heavily skewed
by the indicators you select.
Most indicators are based on the same five pieces of data: open, high, low, close,
and volume. Prices are primary; indicators are derived from them. Using ten, twenty,
or fifty indicators will not deepen your analysis because they share the same base.
We can divide indicators into three groups: trend-following indicators, oscillators, and miscellaneous. Trend-following indicators work best when markets are
moving, but the quality of their signals sharply deteriorates when the markets go flat.
Oscillators catch turning points in flat markets but give premature and dangerous
signals when the markets begin to trend. Miscellaneous indicators provide insights
into mass psychology. Before using any indicator, be sure to understand what it measures and how it works. Only then can you have confidence in its signals.
Trend-following indicators include moving averages, MACD Lines (moving average convergence-divergence), the Directional System, On-Balance Volume,
Accumulation/Distribution, and others. Trend-following indicators are coincident
or lagging indicators—they turn after trends reverse.
Oscillators help identify turning points. They include MACD-Histogram, Force
