Yet each nation releases its own LIBOR to accommodate interest rates
for their own interbank market. For example, Japan releases it’s TIBOR
at 11:00 a.m. Tokyo time, 11:00 p.m. eastern standard time. This rate is
released one hour after the Japanese stock market opens. It is a common convention for nations to release rates just after market openings. So the swap
point basis will change from nation to nation due to the rise and fall daily of
LIBOR within the various nations. Swap-point basis can be derived directly
from bid/ask spreads in the interbank market, LIBOR, or LIBID. What is
credited or debited to a rollover account can range from broker to broker
around the world. Some brokers list their swap points. Others factor the swap
rates and list to view on their trading screens.
Currency Fixing

When LIBOR is released by the BBA and when nations, through their top
bankers, release their own rates, this is called ﬁxing. Fixing times occur many

24

Inside the Currency Market

times throughout any trading day and represent at times trading opportunities. BBA ﬁxings represent one time and one ﬁx, the external unsecured
borrowing rate for a nation’s bank doing business in London, while each
nation must set its own ﬁx to represent its internal unsecured borrowing rate.
All times for the internal ﬁx of nations are different due to the various time
frames in which nations trade. Because these rates are the shortest and most
sensitive of all interest rates, trading opportunities may occur based on new
bids and offers.
For example, the fact that Tokyo releases its ﬁxing rates one hour after the
Japanese stock market opens is constructive for short-term gains. Markets will
reﬂect LIBOR immediately. Central banks that experience an interest-rate
change are another trading opportunity, because all interest rates short and
long must be reﬂected in the market through ﬁnancial instruments because
the cost to borrow, lend and liquidity needs changed. What is important is
that LIBOR must be priced to the currency. See Exhibit 2.2.
BBA LIBOR and internal nations’ LIBORs must be viewed as an offshore and onshore interest rate. The offshore rate allows business and trading
to be conducted overseas in a nation’s currency at a particular BBA rate while
the onshore rate is the rate priced to the currency in the home market. To
factor an interest rate for the home market, take BBA LIBOR and divide it
by the internal rate to obtain an effective interest rate. That rate will be the
basis to trade a currency pair in the home market while the market is open.
If a nation has two internal interest rates, as is the scenario among the major
pairs, divide the two internal rates to obtain an effective rate.
Factor Swap Points

In our Australian dollar/U.S. dollar example, factor closing price by the difference of interest between pairs divided by 360 multiplied by the number
of lots.
1.9336  0.04/360 days  100,000  $2.1484
Brokers may charge a fee, 10 percent for some, to handle this and any
rollover transaction. Why? Because brokers must employ a Tom/Next trade.
Tom/Next is the short-term terminology to mean Tomorrow Next. Tom/
Next rates are found in the interbank market and don’t widely vary from day
to day. Spot/next or spot/starts are further terms. In order for the account
to be debited or credited, the trade must be closed then reopened for the

25

11:00 a.m. Tokyo/
9:00 p.m. EDT

2:00 p.m. Wellington/
10:00 p.m. EDT

10:00 a.m. Toronto/
10:00 a.m. EDT

11:00 a.m./
11:00 p.m. EDT

11:00 a.m./
11:00 p.m. EDT

11:00 a.m. Frankfurt/
5:00 a.m. EDT

8:30 a.m. Zurich/
1:30 a.m. EDT
Noon Zurich/
5:00 a.m. EDT

11:00 a.m. London/
5:00 a.m. EDT

11:00 a.m. London/
5:00 a.m. New York

Japan

New Zealand

Canada

Hong Kong

Singapore

Europe

Switzerland

Great Britain

United States

TIBOR

Bank Bill Reference Rate

Rate Term

Overnight Money Market Financing Rate
also referred as CDOR, Canadian Dealers
Overnight Rate

4:00 p.m.

6:00 p.m. London,
11:00 a.m. EDT

6:00 p.m. Zurich/
11:00 a.m. EDT

6:00 p.m. Frankfurt/
11:00 a.m. EDT

5:00 p.m./
5:00 a.m. EDT

BBA LIBOR

BBA LIBOR

Swiss Average overnight Rate

Euro Interbank Offered Rate, called EURIBOR.
Euro Overnight Index Average

Singapore Interbank Offered Rate/Swap Offer
Rate

5:00 p.m. Hong Kong, Hang Seng Interbank Offered Rate
5:00 a.m. EDT

4:00 p.m. EDT

4:00 p.m. Wellington/ Bank Bill Reference Rate
10:00 p.m. EDT EDT

6:00 p.m. Tokyo/
6:00 a.m. EDT

10:00 a.m. Sydney time/ 4:45 p.m. Sydney
8:00 p.m. EDT
time, 6:45 a.m. EDT

Australia

Closing Time

Opening Fix

Country

EXHIBIT 2. 2 Internal LIBOR Currency Fixing Times by Nation

BBA LIBOR

BBA LIBOR

SIX Swiss Exchange

European Banking
Federation

Association of Banks in
Singapore

Hong Kong
Association of Banks

Bank of Canada never
releases survey

New Zealand Financial
Markets Association

Japanese Bankers
Association

Australia Financial
Markets Association

Market that Releases
Information

16

16

Unknown

42

17 (close estimate)

20 Banks
(close estimate)

Never released by the
BOC

8

16

8

Number of Banks
Involved in the Process

26

Inside the Currency Market

next day’s trade. If Tom/Next is not employed, a trader would have to take
delivery of the currencies in the account.
Day-Count Convention

The original example factored interest payments based on 365 days a
year. After the BBA administers LIBOR, the International Swap and
Derivatives Association (ISDA) sets the benchmark—since 1998—for ﬁxed
rates on interest-rate swaps and other instruments through its ISDAFIX.
They set rates for the euro, Hong Kong dollar, Japanese yen, Swiss franc,
British pound, and the U.S. dollar. For the U.S. dollar, they also provide
swap spreads. Day-count convention asks how to factor accrued interest
for traded instruments. The United States, Switzerland, and the euro
zone administer an actual/360 basis, Great Britain and commonwealth
nations administer an actual/365 basis. To factor leap years, actual/actual
is used. Other instruments such as bonds are factored on a 30/360 basis.
The formula is BBA LIBOR is equal to Interest equal to the principal sum
multiplied by the BBA LIBOR divided by 100 multiplied by the number
of days in the interest period divided by 360.
Accrued interest asks the question how are bond coupons factored? Japan,
Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada factor coupon payments
based on 365 days while the United States, Switzerland, and Europe employ
360 days. Financial instruments may trade based on different day-count
conventions.
For example, Japan factors TIBOR based on 365 days while Euroyen factors based on 360 days. It is the difference between an offshore and onshore
rate. Eurodollars trade based on a 360-day convention. Effective interest
must be factored.
Financial instruments quoted 360 converts to effective interest by 360
divided by 365 and 365 converts by multiplying 360 by 365.

Triple Rollover

Wednesdays are triple rollover days when accounts are debited or credited
with triple interest to account for the weekend and holidays. Rates are published on any trading station as they are released and when closing prices are
issued for the trading day so any trader can determine early and exactly how
much rollover rates pay for the day. Our rollover strategy is called the carry

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

27

trade and is popular to earn rollover on a daily or longer-term basis. Yet this
is only one aspect to the carry trade that will be addressed in later chapters.

Trade Strategy

Fix ﬂows are released by banks and research companies so market professionals
can gauge direction of interest rates. View the three-month LIBOR. Look for
crosses to determine where one nation’s rates trade above or below another.
For example, suppose U.S. dollar LIBOR traded above Japanese yen. This is a
sell U.S. dollar/Japanese yen trend trade because U.S. dollar rates are not only
higher, but they may be higher for purposes of expectations of future higher
benchmark interest rates or an economic boom to follow. Suppose three-month
U.S. dollar rates crossed above British pound rates. Buy British pound/U.S.
dollar. If U.S. dollar rates crossed below British pound, sell British pound/
U.S. dollar. View correlations from overnight rates to three month and
determine trends to ﬁnd good rollover rates plus capital appreciation. If rates
held steady for both overnight and three-month LIBOR for a particular pair,
chances are good that the trade is a range trade. So sell the range tops and buy
the range bottoms and always allow LIBOR to be the overall guide.

Swap Points versus Rollovers for World Wide Traders

Not all nations employ LIBOR or benchmark interest to credit rollover
accounts. It is important to understand how brokers factor rollover, what
instruments are employed, and how much is debited or credited.

Market Orders
Market orders are deﬁned as an entry order, an exit order, a limit order, an
order to hedge a trade, and a stop order to exit a position at a predetermined time. All historic market orders were changed by the National Futures
Association in 2009 due to Rule 2-43. Markets orders to enter and exit a
position were changed as well as rules to manage lot and lot rotation. Lot
rotation is managed by a system of ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out, which says that if 10
lots were bought to go long the British pound/U.S. dollar, the ﬁrst lot must
be addressed before the second lot, then third lot, up to the tenth lot. If a
proﬁt is earned on the tenth lot, a trader must rotate through the prior nine
lots before the tenth lot’s proﬁt is allowed to be taken from the market. Rules

28

Inside the Currency Market

to exit a position are done by a one-cancels-the-other order (OCO). This
means an order above or below the market must be entered in order to exit a
position. All rules apply to only U.S. traders in their own market. What was
once a standard and easily applied system to trade has now radically changed.
This convoluted system applies only to U.S. residents in U.S. markets. All
nations highlighted in this text are not subject to such convoluted rules in
their own nations of trade. The main polemic is that markets may run fast at
times, so proﬁts may be realized for ﬂeeting instances. This system can slow
down proﬁts in fast markets. Examples of each type of order are provided.

United States
• National Futures Association (NFA)—Regulates currency and other markets in the United States in conjunction with the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission. In April 2009 with issuance of Rule 2-43, order
rules were changed, hedging rules were changed, and rules were changed
for lot rotation.
• One cancels the other—Once a lot is bought or sold for any pair, an OCO
order must be entered to exit the trade. If the Australian dollar/U.S. dollar
was bought at 1.9336 and exited at 1.9376, a limit order must be placed
above the market at, say, 1.9386. If a short was entered at 1.9376 and
exited at 1.9336, a stop loss order must be entered at, say, 1.9326 to formally exit the trade.
• First in, ﬁrst out (FIFO)—If a trader bought 10 lots of any currency pair,
the ﬁrst lot must be addressed and settled before the second, then third,
and onward.
• Hedging—Traders can’t enter a buy or sell at the same time in the same
pair in the same account. To hedge, traders can hedge with two separate
accounts or hedge in another market. For example, the euro/U.S. dollar
can be hedged in the oil market, the currency option market, or the gold
market to name just a few examples.

National Futures Association and Currencies

The adverse decisions to traders and currency markets in particular may be
based on a number of factors. The NFA, as a regulator, has pondered the
question of what is a currency without asking what are currency pairs. Can
one currency be classiﬁed as a security or as a derivative, and how should it be
treated in relation to other traded instruments?

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

29

NFA regulators haven’t objectively answered these questions, so they treat
a currency as a security—a stock—and place limits on its trading ability just
as a stock would trade. To treat one currency as a derivative is just not objectionable either, due to the lack of an underlying instrument, so that concept
doesn’t exist unless the decisions were rendered based solely on the views of
the U.S. dollar Index, the only single-currency index.
A currency pair’s value is based on the corresponding pair it aligns to
in relation to the nation that it trades. Only the economic situation of a
nation can determine that value through the free markets. In economic terms,
this is called international parity conditions where interest rates, prices, and
exchange rates are linked to form the market-price model. Therefore, a currency cannot be viewed as a single entity in isolation because it detracts from
the concept of currency pairs as trading vehicles, funding mechanisms, and
a measured value of a nation’s economic conditions and worth. Further, a
currency pair is a money-market instrument and priced against other instruments in the money market. To hinder a currency-pair trade ability can only
hinder other priced instruments in the same money market.

Orders: Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong,
Japan, Switzerland, Canada, and England

Several nations are governed by their own NFA that sets policies and regulations according to the nation’s desires.
Japan has the Financial Services Authority; the United Kingdom has
the Financial Services Authority; Hong Kong has the Securities and Futures
Commission; New Zealand has the Securities Commission of New Zealand;
Switzerland is home to the Swiss Financial Markets Supervisory Authority;
and Canada has the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of
Canada.
The United States is the only nation that placed restrictions on currency trading. In other nations, hedging is allowed, straight limit orders are
allowed, stop orders are allowed, trailing stops are allowed, and there are no
restrictions to lot rotations and FIFO.
The recently passed 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act section 743 and 744 prevents account openings in the countries
listed previously for U.S. citizens. Any accounts held in these locations at the
time of passage were closed and funds repatriated. This says that traders anywhere in the world can trade U.S. markets as they desire but U.S. traders can’t
trade their own markets as they desire due to adverse restrictions.

30

Inside the Currency Market

Brokers: Yesterday and Today

Since 1998, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has allowed the
implementation of Electronic Communication Networks under Rule 600 b
23 of Regulation NMS and found in the Securities and Exchange Act of
1934, 11A (SEC 2010).
The National Market System (NMS) was formed to promote fair-market
competition and efﬁcient markets and is regulated by Congress and enforced
by the CFTC. The focus of NMS in its infancy addressed trade of stocks
when, for example, the 1975 rules facilitated linkages of systems that traded
stocks. All U.S. stock markets connected to one system. Time passed and
NMS was again the focus to ensure fair market access, order protection, intermarket price competition, fair price protection, and access rules, as was the
case with the 2005 updates (SEC 2006).
As new ﬁnancial instruments developed, retail brokers, traders, and
hedge funds developed with fast computers. NMS was again the subject of
debate and hearings in Congress. Congress, the SEC, and CFTC are currently
addressing the May 6, 2010 Flash Crash when Greece announced horrendous
economic news and the New York Stock Exchange dropped 1000 points on
the day. What will occur to further enhance efﬁcient markets or slow the
speed through the NMS system is a guess at this stage. The questions are
speed of computers and fair access.
Originally, networks facilitated trade through a network of buy and sell
orders routed through NASDAQ. All electronic communication networks
(ECNs) had to register with the SEC as a broker dealer and became subject
to regulation as an Alternative Trading System. Early debates included questions of access to the network and whether fees should be charged for access.
Questions of trading commissions came next, as well as fees for dormant
accounts.
As time progressed and old issues settled, the personal computer and
increased access to the networks allowed retail and professional traders access
to the markets. Today retail traders can trade many types of ﬁnancial instruments from futures to options to currencies to stocks on any exchange around
the world and even at the same time.
Currency brokers found their purpose as middlemen to support the trade
of currencies from retail traders to the interbank network. In the beginning,
they charged a ﬁxed price on a per-lot basis. With better and faster computers, the ﬁxed-lot price was reduced to a spread price as trading outside the
interbank market exploded.

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

31

Today the majority of currency brokers earn their revenue from the
spread. Traders must be aware of brokers that make markets in certain currencies. Their role changed from facilitator to dealer. Unsuspecting retail traders
in these instances trade against their own broker. As retail traders buy and
sell lots from these brokers, dealers facilitate separate trades for proﬁt in the
interbank market and may earn the same revenue twice.
Exchange Rates: The Impact of Keynes
and Mundell-Fleming

When one ponders the question of what is or what should be the price of one
currency in relation to another, the modern day and accepted answer is the
nominal or real exchange rate, the purchasing power parity, or balance of payment models. How these models were derived should be the question, as well
as their validity. A brief walk through history will help to explain.
Classical theorists focused their attention on monetary policy as it relates
to the level of prices in an economy in terms of the money supply. They
believed that as the money supply increased, price levels would increase along
with the exchange rate without any dramatic effects to an economy in terms
of growth and output. If growth in the money supply increases inﬂation,
interest rates and the currency price would reﬂect these economic variables
but still not affect an economy’s growth rates. Then John Maynard Keynes
turned this theory upside down.
No discussion of macroeconomics can neglect John Maynard Keynes.
Keynes believed that economies always move toward equilibrium. How equilibrium ﬁnds its place in an economy was the source of contested debate for
classical economists and Keynesians in the 1930s. This debate is continuous;
it is argued today on a higher order.
Building on this premise, 1972 Economic Nobel Laureate John Hicks in
1937 introduced the Investment Savings and Liquidity Preference for Money
Supply (IS/LM) Model. It is actually two equilibrium models linked together,
income to interest rates and expenditures to income. Equilibrium is the intersection of nominal interest rates to gross domestic product (GDP) or income.
The measure is not only economic equilibrium and interest rates, but the
proper output of goods and services. Aligned properly, one can determine
how an economy fully functions to its perfect capacity.
The IS curve measures interest rates on the vertical axis and income on
the horizontal axis. Income in 1937 was a measure of GDP, beyond 1937 it

32

Inside the Currency Market

measured, for example, exports, savings, and government spending. The IS
curve is a quantity of equilibrium as it relates to total spending to total output. It is measured by the equation:
YCI
The premise is that interest rates ebb and ﬂow with investment along the
curve. Higher interest rates equate to a higher return on investments. But if
investment in terms of proﬁtability is uncertain due to high interest rates, the
investment is scrapped. For these reasons, the IS curve is downward sloping.
The Liquidity Preference and Money Supply (LM) curve measures
demand for money on the vertical axis and the supply of money held by
banks on the horizontal axis. The measure is the demand for money and
investment. Equilibrium occurs when demand equals the supply on the
money markets. The positive is if money demand is uncertain, consumers
will be cautious. If money is cheap in terms of a low interest rate, consumers will buy assets. With high interest rates, they will sell assets. Two types of
money were identiﬁed by Keynes—speculative and uncertain.
Uncertain money is used for basic living, and speculative money is used
for investment. This equation is represented by M/P where M  the money
supply and P  the ﬁxed price level or interest rate. So
M/P  L(Y)  L2 (I)
L2 (I)  M/P  L1 (Y)
This curve points upwards.
Equilibrium occurs when IS is equal to LM and answers the question
where does supply equal demand in terms of money and interest rates? The
method of determination is to plot points to further specify the balance of
monetary policy. To accommodate for ﬁscal policy, Income is equal to consumer spending (Income minus Taxes) plus Investment multiplied by the
interest rate as a function of real interest rates plus government spending.
While this equilibrium model was presented in its basic form, inputs can
be mixed and matched, as the case has been since 1937, to determine equilibrium of an economy. The glue that held this model together and the method
employed to fully understand an amply functional economy is interest rates.
If this economy would have been fully functional today, a nation’s
economy would have been reﬂected in its currency price since interest rates,
above all, are what drive spot prices. Although this model and the classical
model may have an inward bias that determines a look at an economy at one

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

33

moment in time, it led to the understanding of the level of bond prices, asset
prices, and construction of yield curves. It was the beginning of understanding exchange rates but it wasn’t enough since only one side of a currency pair
was understood.
Robert Mundell and Marcus Fleming revolutionized the IS/LM Model in
1962 with an introduction of a balance of payments component that would
change not only the GDP income element of the model, but the money
supply, domestic versus global interest rate, government expenditures, and
exchange rates would all become important factors to determine an economy
in equilibrium. It completely altered what was understood for 25 years as an
economy in equilibrium and shifted the IS and LM curves exponentially to
form a new model.
The balance of payments net-export function would change the curves
due to the purchase and sale of foreign securities to complete transactions.
Income would change due to the factors of net exports and the cost of transactions in terms of interest-rate differentials. Both would affect the domestic
and global interest rate and all would affect government expenditures. For the
ﬁrst time in history, exchange rates and the proper balance of rates were tied
to a macroeconomic view of the world due to capital ﬂows across borders. No
longer would economies be viewed from an inward perspective without the
consideration of Mundell-Fleming. Robert Mundell would receive the Nobel
Prize in Economics in 1999 for this model, and would later become instrumental in the development of the forward market.
While these models were presented in their basic form to understand
the historical aspects of the development of exchange rates and all have their
critics because the gold standard was still in effect in 1962, Mundell-Fleming
set the world on a new course of study for governments, researchers, traders,
professionals, and academics to understand exchange rates in terms of the
balance-of-payment model. Nearly 50 years after this valuation model was
introduced, world governments and international organizations adopted a
reasonably uniform standard of a balance-of-payment model employed not
only to determine trade but to gauge the proper balance of exchange rates.
The effects of Mundell-Fleming are still a crucial element of the international
system today.
U.S. Current and Capital Account
