
I’ve never found a good trader or a great trader who was good at
every kind of market, and I know what my weaknesses are and I’m
going have those days once in a while. In the long run we are going
to have creeper days two or three days a month. I am going to have
another opportunity tomorrow or the next day. A lot of new traders
and a lot of people who are not trading anymore, they just know
they're right and know they've got to make one more trade and then
know they're going to have to win. Well, it doesn’t work that way.

Q Let's go back to the start of the career. You are trading for
about a year, day trading stocks, starting to hit the big NASDAQ
bear market. Your second year in the business what happens? What
happens with your stock trading?

A : I'd go in every morning and Id try to be done by 9:30 A.M.
my time which is 10:30 A.M. market time, and I'd typically leave

88


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

the office. I learned early on that I was a first-hour trader, so I
practiced going in for an hour and half, trading and leaving.

QO: You were trading for an hour and half and then just leaving?

A : Yes, because I was very, very good at the first half of the day.
It was a discipline that I learned that worked for me.

Q.- what would you do the rest of the day?

A : Sometimes that was a challenge. I did find that once I left the
office, and I couldn’t trade, I wasn’t tempted to go back and make
one more good gambling trade. I love to win. I learned to accept
that after the first hour, it wasn’t going to happen. $500 or $5 or
$5,000, walk away and string together those winners day after day
after day.

Qua that time did you create any kind of a monetary target for
yourself every day?

A: No. I still don’t do that.

Q.-do you think that is a dangerous game to play for traders?

A : Yes, and, as a matter a fact, I think it’s a huge mistake for
people to set monetary goals.

Q.: Because it forces unnatural trades to reach those goals, right?

A : That’s true and there are some days where there’s a lot more
opportunity. You can set a $500 goal, and you quit at $500, maybe
the day offered $5,000. It’s about going in and taking what the
market offers you. Making good trades.

89


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q:s0 you basically learned to win. The second year you obviously
started to have better profits, what happened next? You now have
two years under your belt as a day trader and obviously reached a
certain level of success. How do you discover stock index futures?

A : I was in a chat room, and one of the guys in there is always
commenting about trading futures. So I asked him in private if I
could call him and ask him why he did that, and I did. He said the
bottom line was if you go trade futures and you are successful at it,
you will never look back.

: Many of the equity day traders whom we’ve interviewed tell
us that stock index futures are where equity day traders go to die.
It’s the single most difficult market in the world to trade.

A : [ think that it is by far the most difficult in the world to trade,
but somebody makes money at it.

Q.:s0 he said once you get into futures, you'll never go back. So
what happened then?

A : [started dabbling in both. I was trading two stocks and I traded
the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq 100 futures. What was interesting is
that I was good at trading the S&P 500, and I typically would lose a
little money trading on the Nasdaq, so I stopped trading in Nasdaq
and started trading strictly the S&P 500. About three summers
ago, the volume in the ES (e-mini S&P 500) increased to such a
level that it didn’t want to move, which kind of lost its profitability.
So I started looking for something a little more volatile and the
ER [Authors’ note: ER is the futures instrument for the Russell
2000—an index of smaller capitalization companies that tends to
be much volatile than the S&P 500 or the Dow Jones index.] moves
about twice as much per day as the S&P 500. Which means you
either make money twice as fast or lose money twice as fast, right?

90


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

It is the hardest game in the world, but it’s also the best game in
the world.

Q..what makes stock trading and futures trading so different?

A : Volatility. Think about this: The Russell 2000 is trading at
around 730 and it represents $70,300 worth of stocks, but you're
only going to need a couple thousand dollars to buy the contract.
So for $2,000, you can buy $70,000 worth of stock. It’s very highly
leveraged. It is traded by the best of the best, and their objective
is to take your money, and theyre very good at it. I tell new
traders it’s like deciding you're going to play football and lining up
against a professional team your very first day. They're going to
kill you.

: What about the physical differences between the two mar-
kets? The fact that stocks have a Level 2 with various market makers
displaying a variety of bids and asks, whereas futures are traded
through a central anonymous book?

A : It’s been a while since I traded stocks and looked at Level 2.
There are probably fewer games played with futures. However,
that doesn’t mean that there aren't plenty of games played.

Q.- The anonymity of the book makes it advantageous to trade,
because it hides your own order flow. But it also makes it extraor-
dinarily difficult to read the true directionality of the instrument,
wouldn't you say?

A : I think that’s true. The other thing is, I hate for people to try
to read too much into what we're seeing in the book. If I were a
couple hundred contracts into a trade, and I wanted to sell them,
I certainly wouldn’t put them out for sale and show them. I would
try and hide what I’m doing, and I think that’s true of all the really

91


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

big traders and the really great traders. So I tell people, if it is not
on the inside of the bid and the offer it doesn’t mean a whole lot.

OQ: 50 what’s the basic protocol for you to try and read the price
action in futures?

A : Prior to being in a trade, I’m pretty much watching the chart.
I’m not watching order flow very much. Once I’m in a trade, I watch
the order flow a little better. I will watch for who’s refreshing on
the bid and the offer. But prior to that time, I’m pretty much a
chart trader.

Q: so you'll enter on a chart signal, but manage the trade, by
watching the book itself, the order flow?

A: Yes. Yes. I don’t know if that’s good or not, it’s just that I have
a difficult time watching the order flow if I don’t have anything at
risk.

Q.. what about the order flow catches your eye and makes you
say this is interesting, this is something I need to react to?

A : I think all traders probably follow order flow a whole lot
more when they're on the wrong side of the trade [laughter]. It’s
true, I really pay a lot more attention when I’m out of the money.
Every once in while you'll notice that someone continues to sell or
continues to buy at a certain level, and that’s a lot more obvious if
you are a few ticks out of the money. If I’m in the money, I don’t pay
much attention to it because I like to try and stay in the trade longer.

Q.; Are you going back and forth between the book and the
chart? Is the book itself overlaid on the chart so you can see both
the price action and the chart action at the same time?

A : No. These are two different programs on different PCs.

92


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

Q: Do you physically look at both screens, or do you really almost
forget the chart action once you're in trade and you just look strictly
at the price action?

A : Oh no, I watch the chart. But I guess the point is, prior to
being in a trade, I don’t pay a whole a lot of attention to the book
action.

Q.: De you use activity in one index as clue to a potential move-
ment in the other index?

Avyes.

: So if you see one index beginning to move, let’s say you see
the ES starting to move but the ER is stationary, is that enough
information for you to try a long trade?

A. Definitely.

Q.: Do you always add to positions, or are there some probative
trades where maybe it doesn’t go your way, you don’t have that
much confidence in your position, and you just simply say hey ’'m
wrong and I’m going to get out?

A : Lots of times.

Q._:s0 it’s not an ironclad rule that you're going to add to a
position continuously. A lot of times you'll just come in and out,
and take small hits if you're not really feeling it?

A : Sometimes I make a small trade just to get a better feeling for
the market.

93


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: when you make that kind of a small trade, and you say you
want to get a better feel for the market, what makes you feel the
market better by making that small trade?

A : Forces me to pay attention.

Q,: Forces you to focus. So the biggest benefit is that now you
have money on the line and you want to pay a lot more attention
to price action?

A: Yes.

: Could you give us an idea of your basic day? How do you
start it? What do you do?

A : One of the worst things for me is to go sit at my computer,
too soon. If I get up early and I go sit at my computer, by the time
8:30 or 9:30 market time I am so ready to trade that it’s bad for
my trading style. ’'m a whole lot better off to come in 15 minutes
before the market opens, look at the major headlines, look at the
chart structure. I don’t really pay attention to what happened over
night and make trades. The riskiest trade in the day is the first one,
in the first five minutes.

Q.-why is that the riskiest trade of the day?

A : You begin to see who the dominant forces are, whether they
are going to try to move the market up or down, and you want to
work hard in that first 45 minutes because that’s when the best
opportunities exist.

: What kind of clues do you see in price action that would make
you think—oh, they're going to start moving the market up today?

A : Actually this morning was a great example. The market gapped
down, they managed to push ER down a couple of points and it

94


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

was real obvious when you watched the book to see the buyers
move in, and they were willing to buy everything that was for sale
over and over again. So this morning was a pretty good example of
when we had the opportunity for the market to go down, the bulls
moved in and bought it up.

: So seeing that made you join the bid and come in with the
buyers, right?

Ayes.

: So you try to come in maybe 15 minutes before the open,
clearly focus on the first 45 to 90 minutes of trade, what happens
then?

A : Then I really want to get away from it for a while. The middle
of the day is not what I’m good at. I think most day traders would
tell you that is certainly not where they make most of their money.
1 like to leave my house and go do something else for a while.

Q.: can you give us an idea of your office setup?

A : Luse one PC for nothing but charting and it has four monitors
on it.

Q what kind of timeframes do you look at?

A : [Laughter.] It changes all the time. However, I will tell you
that I always have a 15-minute chart of ES and the ER. I have a
five-minute chart up of both and then I have another chart that I
continually play with. I am just like every other trader—I’m always
looking at different indicators. Il play around with them for a
while see if there’s anything to them. Most often there is not, and
I'll clean the chart off and I'll start over.

95


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: are there any indicators that are sentimental favorites or at
this point you almost look at a clean chart? You don’t even really
have indicators on it?

A. Treally am in favor of moving averages. What I use is something
called MoveTrend, which is very similar to a moving average. I
will always have those on my charts. Everything else is optional.
[Authors’ note: MoveTrend is a proprietary indicator that tries to
create a more timely moving average. |

Q.: Do you use that because it removes the noise and gives you
a cleaner view of the directionality of the move?

A : Exactly, and that’s why it’s also important to have a 15-minute
chart up looking back several days and see what the trend is. It’s
very easy to get focused in on a three-minute chart or a one-minute
chart or a five-minute chart and miss the big picture. The bigger
size is trading longer timeframe charts. You don’t want to fight

those guys.

Q.- to take that to the next step, if you're starting to see selling
action on the short-term chart, but on the longer-timeframe chart
it looks like it’s really an area of support, then it’s probably a good,
high probability trade to be a buyer at that point?

A : Yes, and I think that right now that is never more evident
than looking at a daily chart on the S&P 500, we’ve been in a long
uptrend. But we'll have two or three days in a row where it looks
like a bear market, and then the big boys move in and then it will
build up some more.

Q.: one computer with nothing but charts on it, what else is in
the trading room?

A : Well I guess that one trading PC has four monitors and I play
around with different charts. But I stick to the most basic 5- and

96


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

15-minute charts and they're always up there. On my other PC, I
have two monitors. One runs the execution platform through the
brokerage firm. I will keep a Web browser up so I can look at the
headlines on a couple of news sites. I’m not real big on news sites. I
look at Dow Jones, and I'll look at CBS Market Watch headlines. I
don’t dig much beyond that because I don’t care what’s happening
with individual stocks, I only really care about the direction the
market is moving. Then, as you well know, I run my own chatroom.

OQ: 50, overall this is enough to give you the flexibility you need?
A: It gives me everything I need.

Q.:Do you come back to the screen at around 3 P.M. East Coast
time?

A : In the last hour and half. I like the first 30 minutes to see
what the market is doing. The last hour of day is when the volume
picks up a little bit and, although I’m not nearly as good as an
end-of-the-day trader, I will come in and try and make a couple of
good trades.

Q.- would you say that, on balance, by the end of the day you're
going to try to maybe join the trend more than fade it? Of course,
every day being different—but if you see strength, do you usually
want to go with that strength?

A: yes.

Q.: and will you follow the same methodology if you see strength,
but there’s a little bit of retracement initially, you may add to the
position a couple of times just to stay true to that bias?

A : Yeah, I think that’s true. I guess the modification that I make
at the end of the day is that I am a lot less likely to fade the market.

97


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: But you'll still use those multiple-entry techniques to position
yourself?

A : Yes. I think you increase your chances of success several-fold
if you are willing to scale in and scale out.

Q : clearly, every trade is very different, but what would you say

is the average time span of your trades?

A : Less than 10 minutes. I have a lot of trades that last less than
two minutes.

Quis that difficult for you emotionally or mentally, since futures
markets can be extraordinarily fast? I mean, prices can literally go
up and down one or two points in a matter of 20 seconds. Do you
like that? Or do you find that discombobulating?

A : No that’s what I like. Give me the volatility, give me short
timeframe trades, that’s what I like.

Q.: The longer you're in a trade, the more antsy you get?

A : Well, if I am in it for 30 minutes, I’m probably on the wrong
side of it. If I was on right side of it, I would have taken the money
and moved on to the next trade.

Q.: Do you find that it’s the skill of your trade management that
really turns potentially bad trades into good trades?

A : I wish I could say I’m always on the right side and they always
go my way, but typically I’m early in my entries. So I expect them
to go against me a little bit. It would be nice to always go with the

98


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

momentum and have it always work out, but that’s not typically the
way it goes.

Q.: would you say that you're even sometimes surprised if your
first entry tends to be the turn trade?

A: I don’t know if I’m surprised, but I’m certainly happy about it.

: In futures you have a centralized book, first-come, first-serve
market. There is no discrimination between large and small players.
Is that a great attraction of the market for you?

A : Yes. It is very, very simple, very straightforward. It’s a very
difficult game, but very simple and I do not think that it helps us
to try to make it more complicated.

Quis that because basic price action is highly repetitive day in
and day out?

A : Yes. However, I think it’s important, even though we see
the same things over and over and over again, that most great
traders are going to find they are good at one or two things, and
they practice those same things over and over again. Although we
see the same patterns, you're not going to be good at trading all
patterns in all market situations.

Q what kind of patterns do you feel you're best at trading?

A. I’m best in a choppy, scalper’s market. I am worst in a trending,
creeping market. I could be better and take the middle out of the
momentum move or swing move. But it’s just not what I’m good
at. I’m much better at sensing the tops and bottoms and trading
those.

99


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.. we talked a bit about the fact that the futures market is the
most leveraged financial market outside of foreign exchange. [Au-
thors’ note: Leverage in futures can reach 50:1.] That could be very
advantageous, but also it can be very dangerous. Personally, how
much leverage do you think a trader should use trading futures?

A : I tell new traders two things: Number one, they should
have at least $10,000 in their account for every single contract
they trade, even though their broker will allow them to have far
less. I tell them if they want to be here next month, next year,
then they better have that much money to trade. You're going
to have days you lose money and you're going to make mistakes.
I also tell traders that if they do not start out with a $100,000,
their chances of making it in this business are very, very slim be-
cause they're going to run out of money. Their not going to make
money for the first year, and they're going to pay some tuition to
learn to do this. So, if they come into the market with $20,000
or $30,000 and a mortgage payment, a car payment, and a kid in
college, they might as well just give me their money because they'll
lose it.

Q.- Just to delve into that a little bit deeper, one of things that
most novice traders don’t quite appreciate about futures is the
commission cost that comes with the market. Even though com-
missions on a relative basis are extraordinarily cheap, the amount
of trading you do during the day can really add up. Can you give
us an idea of how many round turns you typically do during a day?

A : Well that’s a tough question, because it depends on your style.
If you’re going to be a momentum trader and trade three or four
contracts, you may only make three trades a day. If you are like
me, where I’m willing to take the money and trade size, it’s not
unusual for me to trade 20 times a day. Or even 25 or 30 times in
the first hour. However, on one move, I may make five or six trades
because I’m making multiple entries and multiple exits.

100


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

Q.: But all together let’s just say we take 20 round turns per
contract. That works out to basically be about $100 at retail prices,
perhaps a little bit less, maybe $70 on a deep discount basis per
day. That’s per one contract. So, if you're trading, let’s just say
five contracts, that’s $500 in commissions that you must overcome
every day aside from all the P&L issues? [Authors’ note: A typical
commission from a deep discount futures broker would cost $5 per
contract per round turn. So trading 5 contracts 20 times per day
would cost the trader $500 in commissions expenses alone. |
: Yes.

Q.: which means that in 10 days, that’s $5,000 and in a hundred
days, that’s $50,000 worth of commissions. So you are already in
the hole, even if you stay completely even on your P&L.

A : Exactly. If you take a person who comes to the market with
$250,000, the chances of them being there a year from now is
very high. If a trader starts with $30,000, the chances are very,
very low. It doesn’t have anything to do with their ability or their
discipline. It just has to do with what’s going to happen as they
learn to trade. Let me add one more thing. We were talking about
the decimalization of stocks, and I don’t know what stocks trade for
now—what? A tenth of a cent commission or something like that?

Quits about a half a penny.

A : Well, the nice thing about these futures is we have
decimalization—the SP 500 trades in quarters and Russell trades
in dimes. One tick will cover the commission. If you made one tick
[Authors’ note: A tick—the smallest incremental value that a fu-
tures contract would move—is worth $25 in the mini S&P contract
and $10 in the Russell 2000 contract. With commissions set about
$5 per contract, if the trader was able to net out just 1 tick at the
end of the day he would be profitable in those instruments] all day
long on any of those instruments, you will make money.

101


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

: Futures traders quite often don’t even think about points.
They talk about how many ticks did I make today. Do you do that
kind of internal accounting with yourself? Do you say I picked up
20 ticks, 10 ticks?

A : I don’t think about that at all. Instead, did I trade well today?
Did I do what I’m good at? Did I trade my plan? Did I take what
the market offered me? I don’t think in terms of ticks or points.

Q.: You said you've mentored some students. How many have
you mentored?

A::30.

Q.: out of those 30, how many have become profitable?

A : Four.

Q: so basically 10 percent?

A: Yes.

Q.-The odds never change, right?

A : The odds do not change, and what’s interesting is in the first
90 days you can tell whether or not a person is going to make it.

Q. what are some very strong clues that a person is not going to
make it? What are the key characteristics that just make a person
not cut out for trading?
