
tempted many writers to drown Frederick in the river Cydnus, in which Alexander so
imprudently bathed (Q. Curt. lib. iii. c. 4, 5.): but, from the march of the Emperor, I rather
judge that his Saleph is the Calycadnus, a stream of less fame, but of a longer course. -Gibbon] while he was overheated, and the Duke of Suabia took the command of the
expedition. The latter did not prove so able a general, and met with nothing but reverses,
although he was enabled to maintain a footing at Antioch until assistance arrived from
Europe.
Henry II. of England and Philip Augustus of France, at the head of their chivalry,
supported the Crusade with all their influence, until wars and dissensions nearer home
estranged them from it for a time. The two kings met at Gisors in Normandy in the month
of January 1188, accompanied by a brilliant train of knights and warriors. William of
Tyre was present, and expounded the cause of the Cross with considerable eloquence,
and the whole assembly bound themselves by oath to proceed to Jerusalem. It was agreed
at the same time that a tax, called Saladin's tithe, and consisting of the tenth part of all
possessions, whether landed or personal, should be enforced over Christendom, upon
every one who was either unable or unwilling to assume the Cross. The lord of every
feof, whether lay or ecclesiastical, was charged to raise the tithe within his own
jurisdiction; and any one who refused to pay his quota, became by that act the bondsman
and absolute property of his lord. At the same time the greatest indulgence was shown to
those who assumed the Cross; no man was at liberty to stay them by process of any kind,
whether for debt, or robbery, or murder. The King of France, at the breaking up of the
conference, summoned a parliament at Paris, where these resolutions were solemnly
confirmed, while Henry II. did the same for his Norman possessions at Rouen, and for
England at Geddington, in Northamptonshire. To use the words of an ancient chronicler,
[Stowe.] "he held a parliament about the voyage into the Holy Land, and troubled the
whole land with the paying of tithes towards it."
But it was not England only that was "troubled" by the tax. The people of France also
looked upon it with no pleasant feelings, and appear from that time forth to have changed
their indifference for the Crusade into aversion. Even the clergy, who were exceedingly
willing that other people should contribute half, or even all their goods in furtherance of
their favourite scheme, were not at all anxious to contribute a single sous themselves.
Millot ["Elemens de l'Histoire de France."] relates that several of them cried out against
the impost. Among the rest the clergy of Rheims were called upon to pay their quota, but
sent a deputation to the King, begging him to be contented with the aid of their prayers,
as they were too poor to contribute in any other shape. Philip Augustus knew better, and
by way of giving them a lesson, employed three nobles of the vicinity to lay waste the
church lands. The clergy, informed of the outrage, applied to the King for redress. "I will
aid you with my prayers," said the Monarch condescendingly," and will intreat those
gentlemen to let the church alone." He did as he had promised, but in such a manner, that
the nobles, who appreciated the joke, continued their devastations as before. Again the
clergy applied to the King. "What would you have of me?" he replied, in answer to their
remonstrances: "You gave me your prayers in my necessity, and I have given you mine in
yours." The clergy understood the argument, and thought it the wiser course to pay their
quota of Saladin's tithe without further parley.

This anecdote shows the unpopularity of the Crusade. If the clergy disliked to contribute,
it is no wonder that the people felt still greater antipathy. But the chivalry of Europe was
eager for the affray: the tithe was rigorously collected, and armies from England, France,
Burgundy, Italy, Flanders, and Germany, were soon in the field; The two kings who were
to have led it, were, however, drawn into broils by an aggression of Richard; Duke of
Guienne, better known as Richard Coeur de Lion, upon the territory of the Count of
Toulouse, and the proposed journey to Palestine was delayed. War continued to rage
between France and England, and with so little probability of a speedy termination, that
many of the nobles, bound to the Crusade, left the two Monarchs to settle their
differences at their leisure, and proceeded to Palestine without them.
Death at last stepped in and removed Henry II. from the hostility of his foes, and the
treachery and ingratitude of his children. His son Richard immediately concluded an
alliance with Philip Augustus, and the two young, valiant, and impetuous Monarchs,
united all their energies to forward the Crusade. They met with a numerous and brilliant
retinue at Nonancourt in Normandy, where, in sight of their assembled chivalry, they
embraced as brothers, and swore to live as friends and true allies, until a period of forty
days after their return from the Holy Land. With a view of purging their camp from the
follies and vices which had proved so ruinous to preceding expeditions, they drew up a
code of laws for the government of the army. Gambling had been carried to a great
extent, and had proved the fruitful source of quarrels and bloodshed, and one of their
laws prohibited any person in the army, beneath the degree of a knight, from playing at
any game for money. [Strutt's "Sports and Pastimes."] Knights and clergymen might play
for money, but no one was permitted to lose or gain more than twenty shillings in a day,
under a penalty of one hundred shillings. The personal attendants of the Monarchs were
also allowed to play to the same extent. The penalty in their case for infraction was that
they should be whipped naked through the army for the space of three days. Any
crusader, who struck another and drew blood, was ordered to have his hand cut off; and
whoever slew a brother crusader was condemned to be tied alive to the corpse of his
victim and buried with him. No young women were allowed to follow the army, to the
great sorrow of many vicious and of many virtuous dames, who had not courage to elude
the decree by dressing in male attire. But many high-minded and affectionate maidens
and matrons, bearing the sword or the spear, followed their husbands and lovers to the
war in spite of King Richard, and in defiance of danger. The only women allowed to
accompany the army in their own habiliments, were washerwomen, of fifty years
complete, and any others of the fair sex who had reached the same age.
These rules having been promulgated, the two monarchs marched together to Lyons,
where they separated, agreeing to meet again at Messina. Philip proceeded across the
Alps to Genoa, where he took ship, and was conveyed in safety to the place of
rendezvous. Richard turned in the direction of Marseilles, where he also took ship for
Messina. His impetuous disposition hurried him into many squabbles by the way, and his
knights and followers, for the most part as brave and as foolish as himself, imitated him
very zealously in this particular. At Messina the Sicilians charged the most exorbitant
prices for every necessary of life. Richard's army in vain remonstrated. From words they

came to blows, and, as a last resource, plundered the Sicilians, since they could not trade
with them. Continual battles were the consequence, in one of which Lebrun, the favourite
attendant of Richard, lost his life. The peasantry from far and near came flocking to the
aid of the townspeople, and the battle soon became general. Richard, irritated at the loss
of his favourite, and incited by a report that Tancred, the King of Sicily, was fighting at
the head of his own people, joined the melee with his boldest knights, and, beating back
the Sicilians, attacked the city, sword in hand, stormed the battlements, tore down the flag
of Sicily, and planted his own in its stead. This collision gave great offence to the King of
France, who became from that time jealous of Richard, and apprehensive that his design
was not so much to re-establish the Christian Kingdom of Jerusalem, as to make
conquests for himself. He, however, exerted his influence to restore peace between the
English and Sicilians, and shortly afterwards set sail for Acre, with distrust of his ally
germinating in his heart.
Richard remained behind for some weeks, in a state of inactivity quite unaccountable in
one of his temperament. He appears to have had no more squabbles with the Sicilians, but
to have lived an easy luxurious life, forgetting, in the lap of pleasure, the objects for
which he had quitted his own dominions and the dangerous laxity he was introducing into
his army. The superstition of his soldiers recalled him at length to a sense of his duty: a
comet was seen for several successive nights, which was thought to menace them with
the vengeance of Heaven for their delay. Shooting stars gave them similar warning; and a
fanatic, of the name of Joachim, with his drawn sword in his hand, and his long hair
streaming wildly over his shoulders, went through the camp, howling all night long, and
predicting plague, famine, and every other calamity, if they did not set out immediately.
Richard did not deem it prudent to neglect the intimations; and, after doing humble
penance for his remissness, he set sail for Acre.
A violent storm dispersed his fleet, but he arrived safely at Rhodes with the principal part
of the armament. Here he learned that three of his ships had been stranded on the rocky
coasts of Cyprus, and that the ruler of the island, Isaac Comnenus, had permitted his
people to pillage the unfortunate crews, and had refused shelter to his betrothed bride, the
Princess Berengaria, and his sister, who, in one of the vessels, had been driven by stress
of weather into the port of Limisso. The fiery monarch swore to be revenged, and,
collecting all his vessels, sailed back to Limisso. Isaac Comnenus refused to apologize or
explain, and Richard, in no mood to be trifled with, landed on the island, routed with
great loss the forces sent to oppose him, and laid the whole country under contribution.
On his arrival at Acre, he found the whole of the chivalry of Europe there before him.
Guy of Lusignan, the King of Jerusalem, had long before collected the bold Knights of
the Temple, the Hospital, and St. John, and had laid siege to Acre, which was resolutely
defended by the Sultan Saladin, with an army magnificent both for its numbers and its
discipline. For nearly two years the crusaders had pushed the siege, and made efforts
almost superhuman to dislodge the enemy. Various battles had taken place in the open
fields with no decisive advantage to either party, and Guy of Lusignan had begun to
despair of taking that strong position without aid from Europe. His joy was extreme on
the arrival of Philip with all his chivalry, and he only awaited the coming of Coeur de

Lion to make one last decisive attack upon the town. When the fleet of England was first
seen approaching the shores of Syria, a universal shout arose from the Christian camp;
and when Richard landed with his train, one louder still pierced to the very mountains of
the south, where Saladin lay with all his army.
It may be remarked as characteristic of this Crusade, that the Christians and the Moslems
no longer looked upon each other as barbarians, to whom mercy was a crime. Each host
entertained the highest admiration for the bravery and magnanimity of the other, and in
their occasional truces met upon the most friendly terms. The Moslem warriors were full
of courtesy to the Christian knights, and had no other regret than to think that such fine
fellows were not Mahomedans. The Christians, with a feeling precisely similar, extolled
to the skies the nobleness of the Saracens, and sighed to think that such generosity and
valour should be sullied by disbelief in the Gospel of Jesus. But when the strife began, all
these feelings disappeared, and the struggle became mortal.
The jealousy excited in the mind of Philip by the events of Messina still rankled, and the
two monarchs refused to act in concert. Instead of making a joint attack upon the town,
the French monarch assailed it alone, and was repulsed. Richard did the same, and with
the same result. Philip tried to seduce the soldiers of Richard from their allegiance by the
offer of three gold pieces per month to every knight who would forsake the banners of
England for those of France. Richard met the bribe by another, and promised four pieces
to every French knight who should join the Lion of England. In this unworthy rivalry
their time was wasted, to the great detriment of the discipline and efficiency of their
followers. Some good was nevertheless effected; for the mere presence of two such
armies prevented the besieged city from receiving supplies, and the inhabitants were
reduced by famine to the most woeful straits. Saladin did not deem it prudent to risk a
general engagement by coming to their relief, but preferred to wait till dissension had
weakened his enemy, and made him an easy prey. Perhaps if he had been aware of the
real extent of the extremity in Acre, he would have changed his plan; but, cut off from the
town, he did not know their misery till it was too late. After a short truce the city
capitulated upon terms so severe that Saladin afterwards refused to ratify them. The chief
conditions were, that the precious wood of the true cross, captured by the Moslems in
Jerusalem, should be restored; that a sum of two hundred thousand gold pieces should be
paid; and that all the Christian prisoners in Acre should be released, together with two
hundred knights and a thousand soldiers, detained in captivity by Saladin. The eastern
monarch, as may be well conceived, did not set much store on the wood of the cross, but
was nevertheless anxious to keep it, as he knew its possession by the Christians would do
more than a victory to restore their courage. He refused, therefore, to deliver it up, or to
accede to any of the conditions; and Richard, as he had previously threatened,
barbarously ordered all the Saracen prisoners in his power to be put to death.
The possession of the city only caused new and unhappy dissensions between the
Christian leaders. The Archduke of Austria unjustifiably hoisted his flag on one of the
towers of Acre, which Richard no sooner saw than he tore it down with his own hands,
and trampled it under his feet. Philip, though he did not sympathise with the Archduke,
was piqued at the assumption of Richard, and the breach between the two monarchs

became wider than ever. A foolish dispute arose at the same time between Guy of
Lusignan and Conrad of Montferrat for the crown of Jerusalem. The inferior knights were
not slow to imitate the pernicious example, and jealousy, distrust, and ill-will reigned in
the Christian camp. In the midst of this confusion the King of France suddenly
announced his intention to return to his own country. Richard was filled with indignation,
and exclaimed, "Eternal shame light on him, and on all France, if, for any cause, he leave
this work unfinished!" But Philip was not to be stayed. His health had suffered by his
residence in the East, and, ambitious of playing a first part, he preferred to play none at
all, than to play second to King Richard. Leaving a small detachment of Burgundians
behind, he returned to France with the remainder of his army; and Coeur de Lion, without
feeling, in the multitude of his rivals, that he had lost the greatest, became painfully
convinced that the right arm of the enterprize was lopped off.
After his departure, Richard re-fortified Acre, restored the Christian worship in the
churches, and, leaving a Christian garrison to protect it, marched along the sea-coast
towards Ascalon. Saladin was on the alert, and sent his light horse to attack the rear of the
Christian army, while he himself, miscalculating their weakness since the defection of
Philip, endeavoured to force them to a general engagement. The rival armies met near
Azotus. A fierce battle ensued, in which Saladin was defeated and put to flight, and the
road to Jerusalem left free for the crusaders.
Again discord exerted its baleful influence, and prevented Richard from following up his
victory. His opinion was constantly opposed by the other leaders, all jealous of his
bravery and influence; and the army, instead of marching to Jerusalem, or even to
Ascalon, as was first intended, proceeded to Jaffa, and remained in idleness until Saladin
was again in a condition to wage war against them.
Many months were spent in fruitless hostilities and as fruitless negotiations. Richard's
wish was to recapture Jerusalem; but there were difficulties in the way, which even his
bold spirit could not conquer. His own intolerable pride was not the least cause of the
evil; for it estranged many a generous spirit, who would have been willing to co-operate
with him in all cordiality. At length it was agreed to march to the Holy City; but the
progress made was so slow and painful, that the soldiers murmured, and the leaders
meditated retreat. The weather was hot and dry, and there was little water to be procured.
Saladin had choked up the wells and cisterns on the route, and the army had not zeal
enough to push forward amid such privation. At Bethlehem a council was held, to debate
whether they should retreat or advance. Retreat was decided upon, and immediately
commenced. It is said, that Richard was first led to a hill, whence he could obtain a sight
of the towers of Jerusalem, and that he was so affected at being so near it, and so unable
to relieve it, that he hid his face behind his shield, and sobbed aloud.
The army separated into two divisions, the smaller falling back upon Jaffa, and the larger,
commanded by Richard and the Duke of Burgundy, returning to Acre. Before the English
monarch had made all his preparations for his return to Europe, a messenger reached
Acre with the intelligence that Jaffa was besieged by Saladin, and that, unless relieved
immediately, the city would be taken. The French, under the Duke of Burgundy, were so

wearied with the war, that they refused to aid their brethren in Jaffa. Richard, blushing
with shame at their pusillanimity, called his English to the rescue, and arrived just in time
to save the city. His very name put the Saracens to flight, so great was their dread of his
prowess. Saladin regarded him with the warmest admiration, and when Richard, after his
victory, demanded peace, willingly acceded. A truce was concluded for three years and
eight months, during which Christian pilgrims were to enjoy the liberty of visiting
Jerusalem without hindrance or payment of any tax. The crusaders were allowed to retain
the cities of Tyre and Jaffa, with the country intervening. Saladin, with a princely
generosity, invited many of the Christians to visit Jerusalem; and several of the leaders
took advantage of his offer to feast their eyes upon a spot which all considered so sacred.
Many of them were entertained for days in the Sultan's own palace, from which they
returned with their tongues laden with the praises of the noble infidel. Richard and
Saladin never met, though the impression that they did will remain on many minds, who
have been dazzled by the glorious fiction of Sir Walter Scott. But each admired the
prowess and nobleness of soul of his rival, and agreed to terms far less onerous than
either would have accepted, had this mutual admiration not existed.[Richard left a high
reputation in Palestine. So much terror did his name occasion, that the women of Syria
used it to frighten their children for ages afterwards. Every disobedient brat became still
when told that King Richard was coming. Even men shared the panic that his name
created; and a hundred years afterwards, whenever a horse shied at any object in the way,
his rider would exclaim, "What! dost thou think King Richard is in the bush?"]
The King of England no longer delayed his departure, for messengers from his own
country brought imperative news that his presence was required to defeat the intrigues
that were fomenting against his crown. His long imprisonment in the Austrian dominions
and final ransom are too well known to be dwelt upon. And thus ended the third Crusade,
less destructive of human life than the two first, but quite as useless.
The flame of popular enthusiasm now burned pale indeed, and all the efforts of popes and
potentates were insufficient to rekindle it. At last, after flickering unsteadily, like a lamp
expiring in the socket, it burned up brightly for one final instant, and was extinguished
for ever.
The fourth Crusade, as connected with popular feeling, requires little or no notice. At the
death of Saladin, which happened a year after the conclusion of his truce with Richard of
England, his vast empire fell to pieces. His brother Saif Eddin, or Saphaddin, seized upon
Syria, in the possession of which he was troubled by the sons of Saladin. When this
intelligence reached Europe, the Pope, Celestine III. judged the moment favourable for
preaching a new Crusade. But every nation in Europe was unwilling and cold towards it.
The people had no ardour, and Kings were occupied with more weighty matters at home.
The only Monarch of Europe who encouraged it was the Emperor Henry of Germany,
under whose auspices the Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria took the field at the head of a
considerable force. They landed in Palestine, and found anything but a welcome from the
Christian inhabitants. Under the mild sway of Saladin, they had enjoyed repose and
toleration, and both were endangered by the arrival of the Germans. They looked upon
them in consequence as over-officious intruders, and gave them no encouragement in the

warfare against Saphaddin. The result of this Crusade was even more disastrous than the
last -- for the Germans contrived not only to embitter the Saracens against the Christians
of Judea, but to lose the strong city of Jaffa, and cause the destruction of nine-tenths of
the army with which they had quitted Europe. And so ended the fourth Crusade.
The fifth was more important, and had a result which its projectors never dreamed of -no less than the sacking of Constantinople, and the placing of a French dynasty upon the
imperial throne of the eastern Caesars. Each succeeding Pope, however much he may
have differed from his predecessors on other points, zealously agreed in one, that of
maintaining by every possible means the papal ascendancy. No scheme was so likely to
aid in this endeavour as the Crusades. As long as they could persuade the kings and
nobles of Europe to fight and die in Syria, their own sway was secured over the minds of
men at home. Such being their object, they never inquired whether a Crusade was or was
not likely to be successful, whether the time were well or ill chosen, or whether men and
money could be procured in sufficient abundance. Pope Innocent III. would have been
proud if he could have bent the refractory Monarchs of England and France into so much
submission. But John and Philip Augustus were both engaged. Both had deeply offended
the church, and had been laid under her ban, and both were occupied in important
reforms at home; Philip in bestowing immunities upon his subjects, and John in having
them forced from him. The emissaries of the Pope therefore plied them in vain; -- but as
in the first and second Crusades, the eloquence of a powerful preacher incited the
nobility, and through them a certain portion of the people, Foulque, Bishop of Neuilly, an
ambitious and enterprizing prelate, entered fully into the views of the Court of Rome, and
preached the Crusade wherever he could find an audience. Chance favoured him to a
degree he did not himself expect, for he had in general found but few proselytes, and
those few but cold in the cause. Theobald, Count of Champagne, had instituted a grand
tournament, to which he had invited all the nobles from far and near. Upwards of two
thousand knights were present with their retainers, besides a vast concourse of people to
witness the sports. In the midst of the festivities Foulque arrived upon the spot, and
conceiving the opportunity to be a favourable one, he addressed the multitude in eloquent
language, and passionately called upon them to enrol themselves for the new Crusade.
The Count de Champagne, young, ardent, and easily excited, received the cross at his
hands. The enthusiasm spread rapidly. Charles Count of Blois followed the example, and
of the two thousand knights present, scarcely one hundred and fifty refused. The popular
phrensy seemed on the point of breaking out as in the days of yore. The Count of
Flanders, the Count of Bar, the Duke of Burgundy, and the Marquis of Montferrat,
brought all their vassals to swell the train, and in a very short space of time an effective
army was on foot and ready to march to Palestine.
The dangers of an overland journey were too well understood, and the crusaders
endeavoured to make a contract with some of the Italian states to convey them over in
their vessels. Dandolo, the aged Doge of Venice, offered them the galleys of the
Republic; but the crusaders, on their arrival in that city, found themselves too poor to pay
even half the sum demanded. Every means was tried to raise money; the crusaders melted
down their plate, and ladies gave up their trinkets. Contributions were solicited from the
faithful, but came in so slowly, as to make it evident to all concerned, that the faithful of
