
P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

Historical Events in the FX Market

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

31

heavily to these breakdowns, as close personal relationships of borrowers
with high-ranking banking officials were well rewarded and surprisingly
common throughout the region. This aspect affected many of South Korea’s highly leveraged conglomerates as total nonperforming loan values
sky-rocketed to 7.5 percent of gross domestic product.
Additional evidence of these practices could be observed in financial
institutions throughout Japan. After announcing a $136 billion total in questionable and nonperforming loans in 1994, Japanese authorities admitted
to an alarming $400 billion total a year later. Coupled with a then crippled
stock market, cooling real estate values, and dramatic slowdowns in the
economy, investors saw opportunity in a depreciating yen, subsequently
adding selling pressure to neighbor currencies. When Japan’s asset bubble collapsed, asset prices fell by $10 trillion, with the fall in real estate
prices accounting for nearly 65 percent of the total decline, which was
worth two years of national output. This fall in asset prices sparked the
banking crisis in Japan. It began in the early 1990s and then developed into
a full-blown systemic crisis in 1997 following the failure of a number of
high-profile financial institutions. In response, Japanese monetary authorities warned of potentially increasing benchmark interest rates in hopes of
defending the domestic currency valuation. Unfortunately, these considerations never materialized and a shortfall ensued. Sparked mainly by an
announcement of a managed float of the Thai baht, the slide snowballed as
central bank reserves evaporated and currency price levels became unsustainable in light of downside selling pressure.

Currency Crisis
Following mass short speculation and attempted intervention, the aforementioned Asian economies were left ruined and momentarily incapacitated. The Thailand baht, once a prized possession, was devalued by as
much as 48 percent, even slumping closer to a 100 percent fall at the turn
of the New Year. The most adversely affected was the Indonesian rupiah.
Relatively stable prior to the onset of a “crawling peg” with the Thai baht,
the rupiah fell a whopping 228 percent from its previous high of 12,950 to
the fixed U.S. dollar. These particularly volatile price actions are reflected
in Figure 2.4. Among the majors, the Japanese yen fell approximately
23 percent from its high to its low against the U.S. dollar in 1997 and 1998,
as shown in Figure 2.5.
The financial crisis of 1997–1998 revealed the interconnectivity of
economies and their effects on the global currency markets. Additionally, it showed the inability of central banks to successfully intervene in
currency valuations when confronted with overwhelming market forces
along with the absence of secure economic fundamentals. Today, with the

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

32

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

FIGURE 2.4 Asian Crisis Price Action

FIGURE 2.5 USD/JPY Asian Crisis Price Action

assistance of IMF reparation packages and the implementation of stricter
requirements, Asia’s four little dragons are churning away once again. With
inflationary benchmarks and a revived exporting market, Southeast Asia is
building back its once prominent stature among the world’s industrialized
economic regions. With the experience of evaporating currency reserves

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

Historical Events in the FX Market

33

under their belts, the Asian tigers now take active initiatives to ensure that
they have a large pot of reserves on hand in case speculators attempt to
attack their currencies once again.

INTRODUCTION OF THE EURO (1999)
The introduction of the euro was a monumental achievement, marking the
largest monetary changeover ever. The euro was officially launched as an
electronic trading currency on January 1, 1999. The 11 initial member states
of the European Monetary Union (EMU) were: Belgium, Germany, Spain,
France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, and
Finland. Greece joined two years later. Each country fixed its currency
to a specific conversion rate against the euro, and a common monetary
policy governed by the European Central Bank (ECB) was adopted. To
many economists, the system would ideally include all of the original 15
European Union (EU) nations, but the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark decided to keep their own currencies for the time being. Euro notes
and coins did not begin circulation until the first two months of 2002. In
deciding whether to adopt the euro, EU members all had to weigh the pros
and cons of such an important decision.
While ease of traveling is perhaps the most salient issue to EMU citizens, the euro also brings about numerous other benefits:

r It eliminates exchange rate fluctuations, thereby providing a more stable environment to trade within the euro area.

r The purging of all exchange rate risk within the zone allows businesses
to plan investment decisions with greater certainty.

r Transaction costs diminish (mainly those relating to foreign exchange
operations, hedging operations, cross-border payments, and the management of several currency accounts).
r Prices become more transparent as consumers and businesses can
compare prices across countries more easily. This, in turn, increases
competition.
r The huge single currency market becomes more attractive for foreign
investors.
r The economy’s magnitude and stability allow the ECB to control inflation with lower interest rates thanks to increased credibility.
Yet the euro is not without its limitations. Leaving aside political
sovereignty issues, the main problem is that, by adopting the euro, a nation
essentially forfeits any independent monetary policy. Since each country’s
economy is not perfectly correlated to the EMU’s economy, a nation might

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

34

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

find the ECB hiking interest rates during a domestic recession. This is especially true for many of the smaller nations. As a result, countries try to rely
more heavily on fiscal policy, but the efficiency of fiscal policy is limited
when it is not effectively combined with monetary policy. This inefficiency
is only further exacerbated by the 3 percent of GDP limit on budget deficits,
as stipulated by the Stability and Growth Pact.
Some concerns also exist regarding the ECB’s effectiveness as a central bank. While its target inflation is slightly below 2 percent, the euro
area’s inflation edged above the benchmark from 2000 to 2002, and has
of late continued to surpass the self-imposed objective. From 1999 to late
2002, a lack of confidence in the union’s currency (and in the union itself)
led to a 24 percent depreciation, from approximately $1.15 to the dollar in
January 1999 to $0.88 in May 2000, forcing the ECB to intervene in foreign
exchange markets in the last few months of 2000. Since then, however,
things have greatly changed; the euro now trades at a premium to the dollar, and many analysts claim that the euro will someday replace the dollar
as the world’s dominant international currency. (Figure 2.6 shows a chart
of the euro since it was launched in 1999.)

FIGURE 2.6 EUR/USD Since Inception

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

18:17

Printer: Yet to come

Historical Events in the FX Market

35

There are 10 more members slated to adopt the euro over the next
few years. The enlargement, which will grow the EMU’s population by
one-fifth, is both a political and an economic landmark event: Of the new
entrants, all but two are former Soviet republics, joining the EU after 15
years of restructuring. Once assimilated, these countries will become part
of the world’s largest free trade zone, a bloc of 450 million people. Consequently, the three largest accession countries, Poland, Hungary, and the
Czech Republic—which comprise 79 percent of new member combined
GDP—are not likely to adopt the euro anytime soon. While euro members
are mandated to cap fiscal deficits at 3 percent of GDP, each of these three
countries currently runs a projected deficit at or near 6 percent. In a probable scenario, euro entry for Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic are
likely to be delayed until 2009 at the earliest. Even smaller states whose
economies at present meet EU requirements face a long process in replacing their national currencies. States that already maintain a fixed euro exchange rate—Estonia and Lithuania—could participate in the ERM earlier,
but even on this relatively fast track, they would not be able to adopt the
euro until 2007.
The 1993 the Maastricht Treaty set five main convergence criteria for
member states to join the EMU.
Maastricht Treaty: Convergence Criteria
1. The country’s government budget deficit could not be greater than

3 percent of GDP.
2. The country’s government debt could not be larger than 60 percent

of GDP.
3. The country’s exchange rate had to be maintained within ERM bands
without any realignment for two years prior to joining.
4. The country’s inflation rate could not be higher than 1.5 percent above
the average inflation rate of the three EU countries with the lowest
inflation rates.
5. The country’s long-term interest rate on government bonds could not
be higher than 2 percent above the average of the comparable rates in
the three countries with the lowest inflation.

P1: JYS
c02
JWBK299-Lein

October 3, 2008

18:17

36

Printer: Yet to come

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 3

What Moves the
Currency Market
in the
Long Term?

here are two major ways to analyze financial markets: fundamental
analysis and technical analysis. Fundamental analysis is based on underlying economic conditions, while technical analysis uses historical
prices in an effort to predict future movements. Ever since technical
analysis first surfaced, there has been an ongoing debate as to which
methodology is more successful. Short-term traders prefer to use technical
analysis, focusing their strategies primarily on price action, while mediumterm traders tend to use fundamental analysis to determine a currency’s
proper valuation, as well as its probable future valuation.
Before implementing successful trading strategies, it is important to
understand what drives the movements of currencies in the foreign exchange market. The best strategies tend to be the ones that combine both
fundamental and technical analysis. Too often perfect technical formations
have failed because of major fundamental events. The same occurs with
fundamentals; there may be sharp gyrations in price action one day on the
back of no economic news released, which suggests that the price action
is random or based on nothing more than pattern formations. Therefore,
it is very important for technical traders to be aware of the key economic
data or events that are scheduled for release and, in turn, for fundamental traders to be aware of important technical levels on which the general
market may be focusing.

T

37

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

38

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
Fundamental analysis focuses on the economic, social, and political forces
that drive supply and demand. Those using fundamental analysis as a trading tool look at various macroeconomic indicators such as growth rates,
interest rates, inflation, and unemployment. We list the most important economic releases in Chapter 12 as well as the most market-moving pieces of
data for the U.S. dollar in Chapter 4. Fundamental analysts will combine
all of this information to assess current and future performance. This requires a great deal of work and thorough analysis, as there is no single set
of beliefs that guides fundamental analysis. Traders employing fundamental analysis need to continually keep abreast of news and announcements
that can indicate potential changes to the economic, social, and political
environment. All traders should have some awareness of the broad economic conditions before placing trades. This is especially important for day
traders who are trying to make trading decisions based on news events because even though Federal Reserve monetary policy decisions are always
important, if the rate move is already completely priced into the market,
then the actual reaction in the EUR/USD, say, could be nominal.
Taking a step back, currency prices move primarily based on supply
and demand. That is, on the most fundamental level, a currency rallies because there is demand for that currency. Regardless of whether the demand is for hedging, speculative, or conversion purposes, true movements
are based on the need for the currency. Currency values decrease when
there is excess supply. Supply and demand should be the real determinants
for predicting future movements. However, how to predict supply and demand is not as simple as many would think. There are many factors that
contribute to the net supply and demand for a currency, such as capital
flows, trade flows, speculative needs, and hedging needs.
For example, the U.S. dollar was very strong (against the euro) from
1999 to the end of 2001, a situation primarily driven by the U.S. Internet
and equity market boom and the desire for foreign investors to participate
in these elevated returns. This demand for U.S. assets required foreign investors to sell their local currencies and purchase U.S. dollars. Since the
end of 2001, when geopolitical uncertainty rose, the United States started
cutting interest rates and foreign investors began to sell U.S. assets in
search of higher yields elsewhere. This required foreign investors to sell
U.S. dollars, increasing supply and lowering the dollar’s value against other
major currencies. The availability of funding or interest in buying a currency is a major factor that can impact the direction that a currency trades.
It has been a primary determinant for the U.S. dollar between 2002 and
2005. Foreign official purchases of U.S. assets (also known as the Treasury

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?

39

international capital flow or TIC data) have become one of the most important economic indicators anticipated by the markets.

Capital and Trade Flows
Capital flows and trade flows constitute a country’s balance of payments,
which quantifies the amount of demand for a currency over a given period
of time. Theoretically, a balance of payments equal to zero is required for a
currency to maintain its current valuation. A negative balance of payments
number indicates that capital is leaving the economy at a more rapid rate
than it is entering, and hence theoretically the currency should fall in value.
This is particularly important in current conditions (at the time of
this book’s publication) where the United States is running a consistently
large trade deficit without sufficient foreign inflow to fund that deficit. The
Japanese yen is another good example. As one of the world’s largest exporters, Japan runs a very high trade surplus. Therefore, despite a zero
interest rate policy that prevents capital flows from increasing, the yen has
a natural tendency to trade higher based on trade flows, which is the other
side of the equation. To be more specific, here is a detailed explanation of
what capital and trade flows encompass.

Capital Flows: Measuring Currency Bought
and Sold
Capital flows measure the net amount of a currency that is being purchased
or sold due to capital investments. A positive capital flow balance implies
that foreign inflows of physical or portfolio investments into a country
exceed outflows. A negative capital flow balance indicates that there are
more physical or portfolio investments bought by domestic investors than
foreign investors. Let’s look at these two types of capital flows—physical
flows and portfolio flows.
Physical Flows Physical flows encompass actual foreign direct investments by corporations such as investments in real estate, manufacturing,
and local acquisitions. All of these require that a foreign corporation sell
the local currency and buy the foreign currency, which leads to movements
in the FX market. This is particularly important for global corporate acquisitions that involve more cash than stock.
Physical flows are important to watch, as they represent the underlying changes in actual physical investment activity. These flows shift in
response to changes in each country’s financial health and growth opportunities. Changes in local laws that encourage foreign investment also serve
to promote physical flows. For example, due to China’s entry into the World

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

40

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Trade Organization (WTO), its foreign investment laws have been relaxed.
As a result of its cheap labor and attractive revenue opportunities (population of over 1 billion), corporations globally have flooded China with investments. From an FX perspective, in order to fund investments in China,
foreign corporations need to sell their local currency and buy Chinese renminbi (RMB).
Portfolio Flows Portfolio flows involve measuring capital inflows and
outflows in equity markets and fixed income markets.
Equity Markets As technology has enabled greater ease with respect
to transportation of capital, investing in global equity markets has become
far more feasible. Accordingly, a rallying stock market in any part of the
world serves as an ideal opportunity for all, regardless of geographic location. The result of this has become a strong correlation between a country’s
equity markets and its currency: if the equity market is rising, investment
dollars generally come in to seize the opportunity. Alternatively, falling equity markets could prompt domestic investors to sell their shares of local
publicly traded firms to capture investment opportunities abroad.
The attraction of equity markets compared to fixed income markets
has increased across the years. Since the early 1990s, the ratio of foreign
transactions in U.S. government bonds over U.S. equities has declined from
10 to 1 to 2 to 1. As indicated in Figure 3.1, it is evident that the Dow Jones
Industrial Average had a high correlation (of approximately 81 percent)
Dow Jones Industrial Average and USD/EUR
12500

1.15

11500

1.10
1.05

10500
1.00

9500
0.95

8500
0.90

7500
0.85

6500
0.80

5500

0.75

4500

0.70

INDU Index Px Last

USD/EUR Currency

3500

0.65

1/31/94 6/30/94 11/30/94 4/28/95 9/29/95 2/29/96 7/31/96 12/31/96 5/30/97 10/31/97 3/31/98 8/31/98 1/29/99 6/30/99 11/30/99

FIGURE 3.1 Dow Jones Industrial Average and USD/EUR

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?

41

with the U.S. dollar (against the deutsche mark) between 1994 and 1999.
In addition, from 1991 to 1999 the Dow increased 300 percent, while
the U.S. dollar index appreciated nearly 30 percent for the same time
period. As a result, currency traders closely followed the global equity
markets in an effort to predict short-term and intermediate-term equitybased capital flows. However, this relationship has shifted since the tech
bubble burst in the United States, as foreign investors remained relatively
risk-averse, causing a lower correlation between the performance of the
U.S. equity market and the U.S. dollar. Nevertheless, a relationship does
still exist, making it important for all traders to keep an eye on global
market performances in search of intermarket opportunities.
Fixed Income Markets Just as the equity market is correlated to exchange rate movement, so too is the fixed income market. In times of global
uncertainty, fixed income investments can become particularly appealing,
due to the inherent safety they possess. As a result, economies boasting
the most valuable fixed income opportunities will be capable of attracting
foreign investment—which will naturally first require the purchasing of the
country’s respective currency.
A good gauge of fixed income capital flows are the short- and longterm yields of international government bonds. It is useful to monitor the
spread differentials between the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note
and the yields on foreign bonds. The reason is that international investors
tend to place their funds in countries with the highest-yielding assets. If
U.S. assets have one of the highest yields, this would encourage more investments in U.S. financial instruments, hence benefiting the U.S. dollar.
Investors can also use short-term yields such as the spreads on two-year
government notes to gauge short-term flow of international funds. Aside
from government bond yields, federal funds futures can also be used to estimate movement of U.S. funds, as they price in the expectation of future
Fed interest rate policy. Euribor futures, or futures on the Euro Interbank
Offered Rate, are a barometer for the euro region’s expected future interest
rates and can give an indication of euro region future policy movements.
We cover using fixed income products to trade FX further in Chapter 10.

Trade Flows: Measuring Exports versus Imports
Trade flows are the basis of all international transactions. Just as the investment environment of a given economy is a prime determinant of its
currency valuation, trade flows represent a country’s net trade balance.
Countries that are net exporters—meaning they export more to international clients than they import from international producers—will experience a net trade surplus. Countries that are net exporters are more likely

P1: JYS
c03
JWBK299-Lein

42

September 15, 2008

13:10

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

to have their currency rise in value, since from the perspective of international trade, their currency is being bought more than it is sold: international clients interested in buying the exported product/service must first
buy the appropriate currency, thus creating demand for the currency of the
exporter.
Countries that are net importers—meaning they make more international purchases than international sales—experience what is known as a
trade deficit, which in turn has the potential to drive the value of the currency down. In order to engage in international purchases, importers must
sell their currency to purchase that of the retailer of the good or service; accordingly, on a large scale this could have the effect of driving the currency
down. This concept is important because it is a primary reason why many
economists say that the dollar needs to continue to fall over the next few
years to stop the United States from repeatedly hitting record high trade
deficits.
To clarify this further, suppose, for example, that the U.K. economy is
booming, and that its stock market is rallying as well. Meanwhile, in the
United States, a lackluster economy is creating a shortage of investment
opportunities. In such a scenario, the natural result would be for U.S. residents to sell their dollars and buy British pounds to take advantage of the
rallying U.K. economy. This would result in capital outflow from the United
States and capital inflow for the United Kingdom. From an exchange rate
perspective, this would induce a fall in the USD coupled with a rise in the
GBP as demand for USD declines and demand for GBP increases; in other
words, the GBP/USD would rise.
For day and swing traders, a tip for keeping on top of the broader economic picture is to figure out how economic data for a particular country
stacks up.
