years. Which number—the sudden $3 or the steady 50 cents—is more likely
to represent a sustainable trend? At 25 times the $3 it earned in the most
recent year, the stock would be priced at $75. But at 25 times the average
earnings of the past seven years ($6 in total earnings, divided by seven,
equals 85.7 cents per share in average annual earnings), the stock would
be priced at only $21.43. Which number you pick makes a big difference.
Finally, it’s worth noting that the prevailing method on Wall Street today—
basing price/earnings ratios primarily on “next year’s earnings”—would be

160

The Intelligent Investor

The striking thing about growth stocks as a class is their tendency toward wide swings in market price. This is true of the
largest and longest-established companies—such as General Electric and International Business Machines—and even more so of
newer and smaller successful companies. They illustrate our thesis
that the main characteristic of the stock market since 1949 has been
the injection of a highly speculative element into the shares of companies which have scored the most brilliant successes, and which
themselves would be entitled to a high investment rating. (Their
credit standing is of the best, and they pay the lowest interest rates
on their borrowings.) The investment caliber of such a company
may not change over a long span of years, but the risk characteristics of its stock will depend on what happens to it in the stock market. The more enthusiastic the public grows about it, and the faster
its advance as compared with the actual growth in its earnings, the
riskier a proposition it becomes.*
But is it not true, the reader may ask, that the really big fortunes
from common stocks have been garnered by those who made a
substantial commitment in the early years of a company in whose
future they had great confidence, and who held their original
shares unwaveringly while they increased 100-fold or more in
value? The answer is “Yes.” But the big fortunes from singlecompany investments are almost always realized by persons who

anathema to Graham. How can you value a company based on earnings it
hasn’t even generated yet? That’s like setting house prices based on a
rumor that Cinderella will be building her new castle right around the corner.
* Recent examples hammer Graham’s point home. On September 21,
2000, Intel Corp., the maker of computer chips, announced that it expected
its revenues to grow by up to 5% in the next quarter. At first blush, that
sounds great; most big companies would be delighted to increase their
sales by 5% in just three months. But in response, Intel’s stock dropped
22%, a one-day loss of nearly $91 billion in total value. Why? Wall Street’s
analysts had expected Intel’s revenue to rise by up to 10%. Similarly, on
February 21, 2001, EMC Corp., a data-storage firm, announced that it
expected its revenues to grow by at least 25% in 2001—but that a new caution among customers “may lead to longer selling cycles.” On that whiff of
hesitation, EMC’s shares lost 12.8% of their value in a single day.

+20.3

–17.7
– 4.7

106 smaller growth funds—group A

38 smaller growth funds—group B

These figures are supplied by Wiesenberger Financial Services.

+ 2.9

+ 8.7

Dow Jones Industrial Average

a

+13.8
+16.1

–14.2
+ 3.5%

15 funds with “growth” in their name

Standard & Poor’s composite

+23.2

+23.2%

– 7.5%

17 large growth funds

5 years
1966–1970

1 year
1970

TABLE 7-1 Average Results of “Growth Funds,” 1961–1970 a

+ 83.0

+104.7

+ 97.4

+106.7

+102.1

+121.1%

10 years
1961–1970

3.7

3.4

1.7

1.4

1.6

2.3%

1970
Dividend
Return

162

The Intelligent Investor

have a close relationship with the particular company—through
employment, family connection, etc.—which justifies them in placing a large part of their resources in one medium and holding on
to this commitment through all vicissitudes, despite numerous
temptations to sell out at apparently high prices along the way.
An investor without such close personal contact will constantly
be faced with the question of whether too large a portion of
his funds are in this one medium.* Each decline—however temporary it proves in the sequel—will accentuate his problem; and
internal and external pressures are likely to force him to take what
seems to be a goodly profit, but one far less than the ultimate
bonanza.4

Three Recommended Fields for “Enterprising Investment”
To obtain better than average investment results over a long pull
requires a policy of selection or operation possessing a twofold
merit: (1) It must meet objective or rational tests of underlying
soundness; and (2) it must be different from the policy followed by
most investors or speculators. Our experience and study leads us
to recommend three investment approaches that meet these criteria. They differ rather widely from one another, and each may
require a different type of knowledge and temperament on the part
of those who assay it.

* Today’s equivalent of investors “who have a close relationship with the particular company” are so-called control persons—senior managers or directors who help run the company and own huge blocks of stock. Executives
like Bill Gates of Microsoft or Warren Buffett of Berkshire Hathaway have
direct control over a company’s destiny—and outside investors want to see
these chief executives maintain their large shareholdings as a vote of confidence. But less-senior managers and rank-and-file workers cannot influence
the company’s share price with their individual decisions; thus they should
not put more than a small percentage of their assets in their own employer’s
stock. As for outside investors, no matter how well they think they know the
company, the same objection applies.

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

163

The Relatively Unpopular Large Company
If we assume that it is the habit of the market to overvalue common stocks which have been showing excellent growth or are
glamorous for some other reason, it is logical to expect that it will
undervalue—relatively, at least—companies that are out of favor
because of unsatisfactory developments of a temporary nature.
This may be set down as a fundamental law of the stock market,
and it suggests an investment approach that should prove both
conservative and promising.
The key requirement here is that the enterprising investor
concentrate on the larger companies that are going through a
period of unpopularity. While small companies may also be
undervalued for similar reasons, and in many cases may later
increase their earnings and share price, they entail the risk of a
definitive loss of profitability and also of protracted neglect by
the market in spite of better earnings. The large companies thus
have a double advantage over the others. First, they have the
resources in capital and brain power to carry them through adversity and back to a satisfactory earnings base. Second, the market is
likely to respond with reasonable speed to any improvement
shown.
A remarkable demonstration of the soundness of this thesis is
found in studies of the price behavior of the unpopular issues in
the Dow Jones Industrial Average. In these it was assumed that an
investment was made each year in either the six or the ten issues
in the DJIA which were selling at the lowest multipliers of their
current or previous year’s earnings. These could be called the
“cheapest” stocks in the list, and their cheapness was evidently the
reflection of relative unpopularity with investors or traders. It was
assumed further that these purchases were sold out at the end of
holding periods ranging from one to five years. The results of these
investments were then compared with the results shown in either
the DJIA as a whole or in the highest multiplier (i.e., the most popular) group.
The detailed material we have available covers the results of
annual purchases assumed in each of the past 53 years.5 In the early
period, 1917–1933, this approach proved unprofitable. But since
1933 the method has shown highly successful results. In 34 tests

164

The Intelligent Investor

TABLE 7-2 Average Annual Percentage Gain or Loss on Test
Issues, 1937–1969
10 LowMultiplier
Issues

10 HighMultiplier
Issues

30 DJIA
Stocks

1937–1942

– 2.2

–10.0

– 6.3

1943–1947

17.3

8.3

14.9

1948–1952

16.4

4.6

9.9

1953–1957

20.9

10.0

13.7

1958–1962

10.2

– 3.3

3.6

1963–1969 (8 years)

8.0

4.6

4.0

Period

made by Drexel & Company (now Drexel Firestone)* of one-year
holding—from 1937 through 1969—the cheap stocks did definitely
worse than the DJIA in only three instances; the results were about
the same in six cases; and the cheap stocks clearly outperformed
the average in 25 years. The consistently better performance of the
low-multiplier stocks is shown (Table 7-2) by the average results
for successive five-year periods, when compared with those of the
DJIA and of the ten high-multipliers.
The Drexel computation shows further that an original investment of $10,000 made in the low-multiplier issues in 1936, and
switched each year in accordance with the principle, would have
grown to $66,900 by 1962. The same operations in high-multiplier
stocks would have ended with a value of only $25,300; while an
operation in all thirty stocks would have increased the original
fund to $44,000.†
The concept of buying “unpopular large companies” and its

* Drexel Firestone, a Philadelphia investment bank, merged in 1973 with
Burnham & Co. and later became Drexel Burnham Lambert, famous for its
junk-bond financing of the 1980s takeover boom.
† This strategy of buying the cheapest stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average is now nicknamed the “Dogs of the Dow” approach. Information on
the “Dow 10” is available at www.djindexes.com/jsp/dow510Faq.jsp.

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

165

execution on a group basis, as described above, are both quite simple. But in considering individual companies a special factor of
opposite import must sometimes to be taken into account. Companies that are inherently speculative because of widely varying
earnings tend to sell both at a relatively high price and at a relatively low multiplier in their good years, and conversely at low
prices and high multipliers in their bad years. These relationships
are illustrated in Table 7-3, covering fluctuations of Chrysler Corp.
common. In these cases the market has sufficient skepticism as to
the continuation of the unusually high profits to value them conservatively, and conversely when earnings are low or nonexistent.
(Note that, by the arithmetic, if a company earns “next to nothing”
its shares must sell at a high multiplier of these minuscule profits.)
As it happens Chrysler has been quite exceptional in the DJIA
list of leading companies, and hence it did not greatly affect the the
low-multiplier calculations. It would be quite easy to avoid inclusion of such anomalous issues in a low-multiplier list by requiring
also that the price be low in relation to past average earnings or by
some similar test.
While writing this revision we tested the results of the DJIAlow-multiplier method applied to a group assumed to be bought at

TABLE 7-3 Chrysler Common Prices and Earnings, 1952–1970
Year

Earnings Per Share

1952

$ 9.04

H 98

1954

2.13

L 56

1955

11.49

H 101 ⁄2

8.8

1956

2.29

L 52 (in 1957)

22.9

1957

13.75

H 82

6.7

1958

(def.) 3.88

L 44 a

—

1968

24.92b

H 294b

11.8

1970
a
b

def.

1962 low was 371⁄2.
Adjusted for stock splits. def.: Net loss.

High or Low Price

P/E Ratio
10.8
26.2

1

b

L 65

—

166

The Intelligent Investor

the end of 1968 and revalued on June 30, 1971. This time the figures
proved quite disappointing, showing a sharp loss for the lowmultiplier six or ten and a good profit for the high-multiplier selections. This one bad instance should not vitiate conclusions based
on 30-odd experiments, but its recent happening gives it a special
adverse weight. Perhaps the aggressive investor should start with
the “low-multiplier” idea, but add other quantitative and qualitative requirements thereto in making up his portfolio.
Purchase of Bargain Issues
We define a bargain issue as one which, on the basis of facts
established by analysis, appears to be worth considerably more
than it is selling for. The genus includes bonds and preferred stocks
selling well under par, as well as common stocks. To be as concrete
as possible, let us suggest that an issue is not a true “bargain”
unless the indicated value is at least 50% more than the price. What
kind of facts would warrant the conclusion that so great a discrepancy exists? How do bargains come into existence, and how does
the investor profit from them?
There are two tests by which a bargain common stock is
detected. The first is by the method of appraisal. This relies largely
on estimating future earnings and then multiplying these by a factor appropriate to the particular issue. If the resultant value is sufficiently above the market price—and if the investor has confidence
in the technique employed—he can tag the stock as a bargain. The
second test is the value of the business to a private owner. This
value also is often determined chiefly by expected future earnings—in which case the result may be identical with the first. But in
the second test more attention is likely to be paid to the realizable
value of the assets, with particular emphasis on the net current
assets or working capital.
At low points in the general market a large proportion of common stocks are bargain issues, as measured by these standards. (A
typical example was General Motors when it sold at less than 30 in
1941, equivalent to only 5 for the 1971 shares. It had been earning
in excess of $4 and paying $3.50, or more, in dividends.) It is true
that current earnings and the immediate prospects may both be
poor, but a levelheaded appraisal of average future conditions

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

167

would indicate values far above ruling prices. Thus the wisdom of
having courage in depressed markets is vindicated not only by the
voice of experience but also by application of plausible techniques
of value analysis.
The same vagaries of the market place that recurrently establish
a bargain condition in the general list account for the existence of
many individual bargains at almost all market levels. The market is
fond of making mountains out of molehills and exaggerating ordinary vicissitudes into major setbacks.* Even a mere lack of interest
or enthusiasm may impel a price decline to absurdly low levels.
Thus we have what appear to be two major sources of undervaluation: (1) currently disappointing results and (2) protracted neglect
or unpopularity.
However, neither of these causes, if considered by itself alone,
can be relied on as a guide to successful common-stock investment.
How can we be sure that the currently disappointing results are
indeed going to be only temporary? True, we can supply excellent
examples of that happening. The steel stocks used to be famous
for their cyclical quality, and the shrewd buyer could acquire
them at low prices when earnings were low and sell them out in
boom years at a fine profit. A spectacular example is supplied by
Chrysler Corporation, as shown by the data in Table 7-3.
If this were the standard behavior of stocks with fluctuating
earnings, then making profits in the stock market would be an easy
matter. Unfortunately, we could cite many examples of declines in

* Among the steepest of the mountains recently made out of molehills:
In May 1998, Pfizer Inc. and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
announced that six men taking Pfizer’s anti-impotence drug Viagra had died
of heart attacks while having sex. Pfizer’s stock immediately went flaccid,
losing 3.4% in a single day on heavy trading. But Pfizer’s shares surged
ahead when research later showed that there was no cause for alarm; the
stock gained roughly a third over the next two years. In late 1997, shares of
Warner-Lambert Co. fell by 19% in a day when sales of its new diabetes
drug were temporarily halted in England; within six months, the stock had
nearly doubled. In late 2002, Carnival Corp., which operates cruise ships,
lost roughly 10% of its value after tourists came down with severe diarrhea
and vomiting—on ships run by other companies.

168

The Intelligent Investor

earnings and price which were not followed automatically by a
handsome recovery of both. One such was Anaconda Wire and
Cable, which had large earnings up to 1956, with a high price of 85
in that year. The earnings then declined irregularly for six years;
the price fell to 231⁄2 in 1962, and the following year it was taken
over by its parent enterprise (Anaconda Corporation) at the equivalent of only 33.
The many experiences of this type suggest that the investor
would need more than a mere falling off in both earnings and price
to give him a sound basis for purchase. He should require an indication of at least reasonable stability of earnings over the past
decade or more—i.e., no year of earnings deficit—plus sufficient
size and financial strength to meet possible setbacks in the future.
The ideal combination here is thus that of a large and prominent
company selling both well below its past average price and its past
average price/earnings multiplier. This would no doubt have
ruled out most of the profitable opportunities in companies such as
Chrysler, since their low-price years are generally accompanied by
high price/earnings ratios. But let us assure the reader now—and
no doubt we shall do it again—that there is a world of difference
between “hindsight profits” and “real-money profits.” We doubt
seriously whether the Chrysler type of roller coaster is a suitable
medium for operations by our enterprising investor.
We have mentioned protracted neglect or unpopularity as a second cause of price declines to unduly low levels. A current case of
this kind would appear to be National Presto Industries. In the bull
market of 1968 it sold at a high of 45, which was only 8 times the
$5.61 earnings for that year. The per-share profits increased in both
1969 and 1970, but the price declined to only 21 in 1970. This was
less than 4 times the (record) earnings in that year and less than its
net-current-asset value. In March 1972 it was selling at 34, still only
51⁄2 times the last reported earnings, and at about its enlarged netcurrent-asset value.
Another example of this type is provided currently by Standard
Oil of California, a concern of major importance. In early 1972 it
was selling at about the same price as 13 years before, say 56. Its
earnings had been remarkably steady, with relatively small growth
but with only one small decline over the entire period. Its book
value was about equal to the market price. With this conservatively

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

169

favorable 1958–71 record the company has never shown an average annual price as high as 15 times its current earnings. In early
1972 the price/earnings ratio was only about 10.
A third cause for an unduly low price for a common stock may
be the market’s failure to recognize its true earnings picture. Our
classic example here is Northern Pacific Railway which in 1946–47
declined from 36 to 131⁄2. The true earnings of the road in 1947 were
close to $10 per share. The price of the stock was held down in
great part by its $1 dividend. It was neglected also because much of
its earnings power was concealed by accounting methods peculiar
to railroads.
The type of bargain issue that can be most readily identified is a
common stock that sells for less than the company’s net working
capital alone, after deducting all prior obligations.* This would
mean that the buyer would pay nothing at all for the fixed assets—
buildings, machinery, etc., or any good-will items that might exist.
Very few companies turn out to have an ultimate value less than
the working capital alone, although scattered instances may be
found. The surprising thing, rather, is that there have been so many
enterprises obtainable which have been valued in the market on
this bargain basis. A compilation made in 1957, when the market’s
level was by no means low, disclosed about 150 of such common
stocks. In Table 7-4 we summarize the result of buying, on December 31, 1957, one share of each of the 85 companies in that list for
which data appeared in Standard & Poor’s Monthly Stock Guide,
and holding them for two years.
By something of a coincidence, each of the groups advanced in
the two years to somewhere in the neighborhood of the aggregate
net-current-asset value. The gain for the entire “portfolio” in that
period was 75%, against 50% for Standard & Poor’s 425 industrials.
What is more remarkable is that none of the issues showed significant losses, seven held about even, and 78 showed appreciable
gains.
Our experience with this type of investment selection—on a

* By “net working capital,” Graham means a company’s current assets (such
as cash, marketable securities, and inventories) minus its total liabilities
(including preferred stock and long-term debt).

170

The Intelligent Investor

TABLE 7-4 Profit Experience of Undervalued Stocks,
1957–1959
Number of
Companies

Aggregate Net
Current Assets
Per Share

Aggregate
Price
Dec. 1957

Aggregate
Price
Dec. 1959

New York S.E.

35

$ 748

$ 419

$ 838

American S.E.

25

495

289

492

Midwest S.E.

5

163

87

141

Location of
Market

Over the counter
Total

20

425

288

433

85

$1,831

$1,083

$1,904

diversified basis—was uniformly good for many years prior to
1957. It can probably be affirmed without hesitation that it constitutes a safe and profitable method of determining and taking
advantage of undervalued situations. However, during the general
market advance after 1957 the number of such opportunities
became extremely limited, and many of those available were showing small operating profits or even losses. The market decline of
1969–70 produced a new crop of these “sub-working-capital”
stocks. We discuss this group in Chapter 15, on stock selection for
the enterprising investor.
Bargain-Issue Pattern in Secondary Companies. We have
defined a secondary company as one that is not a leader in a fairly
important industry. Thus it is usually one of the smaller concerns
in its field, but it may equally well be the chief unit in an unimportant line. By way of exception, any company that has established
itself as a growth stock is not ordinarily considered “secondary.”
In the great bull market of the 1920s relatively little distinction
was drawn between industry leaders and other listed issues, provided the latter were of respectable size. The public felt that a
middle-sized company was strong enough to weather storms and
that it had a better chance for really spectacular expansion than one
that was already of major dimensions. The depression years
1931–32, however, had a particularly devastating impact on the
companies below the first rank either in size or in inherent stability.
As a result of that experience investors have since developed a pro-
