
85

86

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
 The more times a trendline’s touched, the stronger the support or
resistance of that line. A break of a trendline that had been tested
several times indicates a serious change in the trend.
 The longer the trendline (measured by time), the more meaningful it
is. The staying power of the trend is measured, in part, by how long the
trendline has been in effect.
If you find yourself drawing and redrawing trendlines (on your charting
program, not by hand), then you’re misusing them.
Don’t waste too much time drawing trendlines. Instead, identify support and
resistance levels, which are often horizontal lines. Then look for an uptrend
or downtrend line that you can draw through the lows or highs to establish a
rate of ascent.
In the following sections, I share how to distinguish and use different trendlines.

Uptrend lines: Support for
the stubborn bulls
Uptrend lines connect several lows and form a support area for the bulls —
the bulls’ line in the sand, if you will. They indicate the rate of ascent that
buyers have maintained over a certain period of time. If your charts are
arithmetically scaled, then the rate of ascent is measured in dollars per time
period. If your charts are semi-log or plotted on a log scale, then the rate of
ascent represents a percentage change per time period.
You want to draw your uptrend line through the lows, but don’t take it to an
extreme. If the line intersects prices slightly, that’s okay. Consider Figure 4-22,
which shows an uptrend line of shares of Sandisk (symbol: SNDK). The uptrend
line is drawn through the lows and touches several price points. On an extreme
day in the beginning of August, prices fell below the line but basically remained
above the trendline. Hence, the trendline stayed intact.
Uptrend lines can be good long entry points for your swing trading. Not only
do they offer an entry price but they also offer a clear risk-cutting price. Place
a stop loss right below the trendline so that you exit shares if the trendline
breaks.
Uptrend lines have another important characteristic: These support lines
become resistance lines after being breached. Look again at Figure 4-22. In
mid-August, shares of Sandisk broke below the uptrend line that began in
June. When shares rallied in September, that support line became a resistance
area. After shares rallied to that trendline, they immediately turned around
and began declining.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market

Figure 4-22:
This chart
of SNDK
shows an
uptrend line
and a
downtrend
line.

Downtrend lines: Falling resistance
Downtrend lines connect a series of peaks and represent an area of resistance. Think of them as the line in the sand for the bears. And like uptrend
lines, covered in the preceding section, they’re more meaningful the more
times they’re touched by security prices and the longer they’ve been in
effect. Figure 4-23 depicts a downtrend line that occurred shortly after a
breakaway gap down in shares of Broadcom (symbol: BRCM).
Because a break of a trendline doesn’t necessarily mean the beginning of a
new trend, you shouldn’t buy or short a security because of a trade trendline
break. If you own shares in a stock that’s rising and then suffers a break, selling may be warranted. However, don’t look to suddenly short because of the
break.

Figure 4-23:
In this chart,
the downtrend line
is touched
several
times,
signaling its
importance.

87

88

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Horizontal lines: Working to
both support and resist
Horizontal trendlines depict a stationary support or resistance level. After
either of these levels is broken, a trend usually develops. Alternatively, the
security may enter a new trading range with horizontal support and resistance
levels.
Some common horizontal trendlines you’ll encounter as you swing trade
are ascending triangles (a horizontal level of resistance) and the Darvas box
(a horizontal trendline of support and a horizontal trendline of resistance).
These patterns are both described in earlier sections of this chapter.

Chapter 5

Asking Technical Indicators
for Directions
In This Chapter
 Knowing how to make the most of technical indicators in your swing trading
 Identifying popular indicators and using them with chart patterns
 Understanding how to use indicators to determine your desired ratio of short

and long positions

S

wing trading used to be far more difficult before the advent of charting
programs — many of them now free and online — that calculate technical indicators so that you never need to pick up a pencil and figure them out
by hand. In keeping with the technological times, this chapter doesn’t linger
on how to calculate indicators beyond the basic knowledge necessary to analyze them effectively and understand how price, volume, or both impact their
direction. Instead, it introduces you to the popular indicators you can apply
to your charts — whether you trade trends, ranges, or both.
No indicator can consistently yield profitable results on all securities under
all time frames. That’s why this chapter begins with an explanation of what
technical indicators are based on and when you should use them. This chapter also helps you grasp the power of combining technical indicators and
chart patterns so that you can swing trade successfully.
Even when you know which technical indicators you want to use, you have
to know which inputs to use with which indicator. Throughout this chapter,
I explicitly state what input variables you should use with the indicators I
cover. In most cases, the inputs are the standards most charting programs
use. Some of them, however, are different, because they’re based on what’s
most appropriate for a swing trader.

90

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

All You Need to Know about Analyzing
Indicators Before You Start
Before you dive into the sea of technical indicators, you must remember a
few important things, which I run through in this preliminary section.

You must apply the right type of indicator
Often, traders apply trending indicators haphazardly to all security price
charts. The problem with this approach is that trending indicators always
assume a market is in a trend, and they give false signals when applied to
non-trending markets, which are characterized by oscillation between two
price levels: a support level and a resistance level. The trending indicator
generates false signals because it incorrectly assumes that a price moving to
a support or resistance level indicates the beginning of a new trend (when, in
fact, these movements are simply normal price fluctuations within an established range value). Therefore, you shouldn’t apply trending indicators to
markets that oscillate.
Just as trending indicators wreak havoc when applied to non-trending
markets, the reverse also holds true. If you apply a non-trending indicator to a trending market, the indicator continually flashes red lights due to
an extreme overbought or oversold level. Non-trending indicators, unlike
their trending counterparts, assume price stability. The lack of price stability means that non-trending indicators always assume mean reversion (the
theory that prices will return to the mean, or average). Mean reversion
doesn’t occur in trending markets.
Figure 5-1 highlights the problems that can arise when you misapply indicators. The figure compares the correct application of a trending indicator (a
moving average) in a trending security and the incorrect application of a
non-trending indicator (stochastic, located at the bottom of the chart) to the
same security. Notice how the moving average keeps the swing trader in for
most of the trade, while the non-trending indicator gives premature sell signals. During trending markets, non-trending indicators give false signals.

Not all price swings are meaningful
Technical indicators can go haywire, turning that significant price swing into
nothing. Sometimes a price swing on a chart can reflect a data error (which
happens more often than you may think), or your charting software provider
may fail to account for a stock split. Now and then the price swing is due to an
unsubstantiated rumor. That’s why you must intelligently judge all price swings.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions

Figure 5-1:
Applying a
non-trending indicator
to a trending
security
leads to
premature
sell or buy
signals.

Figure 5-2 provides an example of how a data error can throw a technical indicator off the mark. Shares of SPX Corporation (symbol: SPW) showed a wild price
swing on January 22, 2008, when they supposedly opened at $89.50, traded
down to $73.31, and then closed at $95.23. However, the intraday chart shows a
bad tick (an incorrect price) at $73.31. A technical indicator that looks solely at
the closing price wouldn’t be affected by this price error. However, an indicator that incorporates the highs and lows of the day would be affected.

Figure 5-2:
A data error
can cause
indicators to
yield incorrect signals.

In this case, the Directional Movement Index, or DMI (see “The compass of indicators: Directional Movement Index (DMI),” later in this chapter, for details on
this indicator) assumes that sellers are in control of shares of SPX Corporation
due to the negative price swing. As the company’s share price rises, the DMI
fails to track this strength due to the data error.

91

92

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
You have a few options to protect yourself from getting messed up by a data
error:
 Rely on an indicator that doesn’t incorporate the data error.
 Ignore that security for trading purposes.
 Turn to other technical tools, such as chart patterns and candlesticks.
 Report the data error to the trading system administrator, who can
usually correct the error in a day or two.

Prices don’t reflect volume, so
you need to account for it
Together, price and volume form an important picture for you as a swing
trader. Any new information that any single person may possess about a
security — be it good or bad — can only be acted upon by buying or selling
shares of a security. That buying and selling is reflected on the ticker tape —
the price and the volume.
Basing an indicator on price alone does make intuitive sense. After all, a security’s price is believed to contain all known information. However, volume
explains traders’ commitment, which price can’t do. Light volume can signal
indifference, whereas heavy volume is usually associated with meaningful
moves. Also, a security rising on increasing volume has more staying power
than a security rising on decreasing volume, and an indicator that looks only
at price (that is, the vast majority of indicators) can’t distinguish between the
two movements. That’s why you should have at least one indicator in your
arsenal that incorporates volume.
But even if an indicator does look at price and volume, there’s always the
possibility of an event occurring outside all market participants’ knowledge.
For example, a company’s headquarters may be destroyed due to a hurricane
or fire, an incident no one can predict.

An indicator’s accuracy isn’t
a measure of its value
Indicators, like all trading techniques, aren’t always accurate. Keep an eye out
for whipsaws, when prices move violently and throw indicators off, and be
sure to plan for and incorporate the possibility that an indicator’s signal is a
false positive. The simplest way to protect yourself from inevitable whipsaws
is to have a risk management system that helps you exit early when a particular trade doesn’t go your way.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions
That said, indicators don’t have to be foolproof to be profitable, so accuracy’s
not a good way to judge whether a particular indicator is valuable. An indicator can generate so-called correct results 30 percent of the time and still be
profitable — if the profitable trades far outweigh the losing trades. Consider
the trading system of fictitious Trader Josh. He relies on two technical indicators in his trading system. However, his system’s usually wrong; the trades he
places lose money 70 percent of the time. Is this system worth following?
That question can’t be answered without additional information. Swing traders who rely on riding strong trends may be wrong more often than they’re
right but still generate sizeable profits. Trader Josh’s trading log (shown
in Figure 5-3) displays his profits, losses, and net gains or losses over the
course of ten trading days in January. During this time, Trader Josh lost
money on seven days. What a lousy trader, right?

Josh’s Trading Log
Beginning Account Value: $100,000
Profit
Figure 5-3:
This trading
log shows
profits and
losses over
the course
of ten days.

January 5, 2009
January 6, 2009
January 7, 2009
January 9, 2009
January 12, 2009
January 13, 2009
January 15, 2009
January 20, 2009
January 21, 2009
January 22, 2009
Total

$0
$300
$3,000
$150
$290
$3,500
$100
$320
$350
$3,200

Loss
–$400
–$500
–$200
–$500
–$350
–$250
–$150
–$450
–$500
–$250

Net Gain/Loss
–$400
–$200
$2,800
–$350
–$60
$3,250
–$50
–$130
–$150
$2,950
$7,660

Not so fast. Trader Josh made money on three trading days out of the ten.
And those three days made up for all the losses and much more. Trader Josh
actually generated net profits of $7,660 in those ten trading days — a strong
return on a beginning account value of $100,000.

Two to three indicators are enough
Adding an indicator is as simple as clicking your mouse and being dazzled by
the charts of many colors that appear quite easily. This simplicity leads some
swing traders to incorporate five, six, or even more indicators to a single
security. But doing so isn’t wise.

93

94

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
The more indicators you add to a system, the more likely your system will
fail to generate consistent signals. Rarely do all indicators point in the same
direction, because all indicators are based on price, volume, or both. This
principle doesn’t change, regardless of how many indicators you add to your
system. When you apply five or six technical indicators to a security’s price
chart simultaneously, you amplify the amount of noise (unimportant information). Or you wind up not trading anything because the indicators never all
point in the same direction.
Stick to three indicators or fewer. Having more than three doesn’t add any
significant value.
If you’re still not convinced, consider the world of regression analysis, which
reinforces this point. A regression is simply a model that depicts how well one
factor or many factors explain something else. For example, housing prices
may be a function of location, the number of rooms in the house, and interest
rates. Think of housing prices as a security’s price, and think of the factors
used to predict prices as technical indicators. As a swing trader, you’re trying
to forecast the direction of prices based on the information contained in the
indicators. A model that explains housing prices well is useful for forecasting.
One way to improve a regression’s ability to explain the variable you’re trying
to predict is to add additional factors. In this example, you may add the color
of the house or the number of garages to the model. If the additional factor
doesn’t add value, the model’s ability to forecast remains unchanged. But if
the additional factor adds some value — regardless of how minute — the model’s effectiveness improves. But that doesn’t mean you should forecast using
25 variables when 3 key ones explain most of the variability in housing prices.
The same holds true with technical indicators.

Inputs should always fit your time horizon
Practically every technical indicator has settings that can be adjusted. Moving
averages, for example, can be set to short-term lengths (4 days and 9 days) or
long-term lengths (50 days and 200 days). The smaller the number, the quicker
an indicator responds to changes in price. The downside to such quick reflexes
is an increased number of whipsaws, when prices move violently and throw
indicators off. The larger the input figure used in an indicator, the fewer the
number of whipsaws.
However, you can’t use an unresponsive indicator. Trading based on the
200-day moving average may generate two or three signals a year, and that
doesn’t help when you’re looking to trade in and out of shares over the next
week. The input you use should always fit your time horizon.
Some swing traders experiment with each indicator on each security, testing
the historical effectiveness of an indicator on a particular security. They may
even adjust the technical indicator’s inputs for each security they trade. I

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions
don’t recommend this approach. Besides being complex and time consuming,
it doesn’t provide a clear payoff in the long run. Customizing indicators for each
security also may lead to curve fitting. Curve fitting occurs when you try additional input numbers until one of them produces the so-called best fit. But those
factors may be the result of chance and have little relevance for future trading.

Divergences are the strongest
signals in technical analysis
Divergences represent low-risk entry points — or exits if you’re holding a
position contradictory to the technical indicator — because the market
crowd is convinced that either buyers or sellers are stronger than the other,
when in fact the opposite is true. Divergences don’t always lead to profitable
results, but they’re more accurate than most signals coming from indicators.
When a technical indicator, like stochastics, diverges from the price chart, an
alert should go off in your mind (ideally relating to the chart you’re examining),
because divergences represent a contradiction of sorts between the exterior
and interior of a security (sounds deep, doesn’t it?). The contradiction comes
about when prices move in one direction and the indicator moves in another.
Well-respected technical analysts, such as Alexander Elder or John Murphy,
have said that divergences are the strongest signals in technical analysis.
Unfortunately, divergences are difficult to screen for. You can ask your technical analysis software program to search for securities where this indicator
crossed over that one. But divergences usually require an interpretive eye, so
score one for humankind versus the machines!

Determining Whether a
Security Is Trending
To swing trade successfully, you need to know whether a security is trending
so you can apply the right indicator. Because of the importance of correctly
applying trending indicators to trending markets and non-trending indicators
to non-trending markets, the next logical question you should ask yourself is:
How do I know whether the market I’m looking at is trending?
You can answer this question in two ways. Both approaches should yield the
same answer if done correctly, so the approach you choose to use doesn’t
make a huge difference.

95

96

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
One way of determining whether a trend exists is to eyeball a security’s
chart. If you see a series of higher highs and higher lows or a series of lower
highs and lower lows, you know a trend exists. Black and white signals don’t
exist when it comes to eyeballing a security’s price chart and calling a trend
or non-trend (that is, trading range). The onus is on you to recognize trending markets and non-trending ones.
When eyeballing a chart, the first question you should ask is: Do I see a series
of higher lows and higher highs or a series of lower lows and lower highs? If
the answer is yes to either question, then you’re working with a security that’s
trending. If the answer’s no, then your next question is: Do I see a clear support area that prices consistently rise from and a clear resistance area that
prices consistently fall from? If the answer’s yes, you’re working with a security that’s non-trending or in a trading range. Note: If the answers to the first
and second questions are no, then the security you’re looking at can’t be classified and should be avoided.
Timeframe affects what you see. You may observe a security’s price chart
that’s set to hourly bars and see a clear trend but switch to a daily bar chart
and see an obvious trading range. As a swing trader, you should rely on hourly
and daily bar charts. Anything longer is appropriate only for position traders
or buy-and-hold investors.
If eyeballing isn’t your cup of tea, have no fear — a technical indicator can come
to your rescue. The most popular indicator that shows whether a security is
trending is the Average Directional Index (ADX), which actually measures the
strength of a trend rather than its direction. Part of the Directional Movement
Index (DMI; see the later section on DMI for details on this indicator), ADX
 Can be plotted by itself
 Oscillates between the values of 0 and 100
 Is the average difference between the two other components of the DMI
(covered in more detail later in this chapter)
All ADX examples in this chapter calculate the indicator over a period of 14
days, the standard setting for this popular indicator.
If a security’s ADX reading is 20 or below, that security is in a trading range. If the
ADX reading is 30 or higher, consider that security to be in a trend. Readings
between 20 and 30 are ambiguous. When I see a reading between 20 and 30, I
incorporate the direction of the ADX into my analysis to help me determine
whether the security’s trending. For example, if ADX is rising and above 20,
then I consider that as a sign that the security’s trending. On the other hand,
if the ADX value is below 30 and falling, I consider that as a sign the security
may be in or may be entering a trading range.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions
Figure 5-4 shows ADX applied to a price chart for shares of MEMC Electronic
Materials (symbol: WFR). This security experienced a strong uptrend in late
2006 through mid-2007. The ADX indicator was solidly above 20 during this
period. However, MEMC Electronic Materials entered into a trading range in
May 2007. On May 9, 2007, the ADX indicator fell below 20, a move that signaled a period when non-trending indicators should’ve been applied.

Figure 5-4:
The ADX
indicator
applied to
shares of
WFR.
