
The downside gap filled pattern
The downside gap filled pattern rounds out my discussion of the bearish
three-stick trending patterns. It’s the most tradeworthy of all the patterns
in this section because its close is higher than the others. It also calls for
some pretty tight stops, so you’ll know quickly whether the pattern is going
to succeed or fail.

Recognizing the downside gap filled pattern
As you can see in Figure 10-28, the downside gap filled pattern starts off with
a down day in a downtrend. Like the other trending patterns in this chapter,

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 243

Chapter 10: Trading with Bearish Three-Stick Patterns
the second day is a gap down, and it’s bearish. At first the gap between the
first and second day isn’t filled and remains on the chart. On the third and
final day there’s a lower open, but then the bulls push the price higher over
the course of the day. The gap between the first and second day is then filled.
However, at some point the bears decide it’s time to take over again and the
rise in prices stops, usually in the lower half of the first day’s trading range.
The downtrend is still in place.

Figure 10-28:
The
downside
gap filled
pattern.

Trading the downside gap filled pattern
To give you an idea of how you can trade the downside gap filled pattern,
I provide the example in Figure 10-29. It’s a chart of Ingersoll Rand (IR), a
manufacturer of various commercial and consumer machinery goods. The
company is tied to the overall economy, so the stock can experience periods
of volatility that present ample trading opportunities.
The downside gap filled pattern appears at the upper end of the downtrend,
beginning with a black candle for the first day. There’s a gap down opening
for the second day, and the gap isn’t filled as the day progresses bearishly.
The third day completes the pattern with an up day that fills in the gap, and
the downtrend continues after that.
If you shorted using this pattern, you’d be pleased to see some bearish action
that continues for a while after the pattern is completed. However, after a few
weeks, a bullish reversal pattern emerges. There’s a doji followed by an up
day in a downtrend, which is usually an indication that prices have reached a
bottom. That would mean that it’s time to exit your short position and walk
away with your profits.

243

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 244

244 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

Figure 10-29:
The
downside
gap filled
pattern
predicts a
downtrend
continuation
on a chart
of IR.

Failing to signal a continuing downtrend
I hate to end the chapter on a down note, but I do feel obligated to present
you with a failing example of the downside gap filled pattern. For that I turn
to Figure 10-30, a chart of DuPont (DD).
The pattern emerges in a downtrend, with a black candle that’s followed by a
gap down, which is eventually filled on the third day. All is as it should be in
terms of pattern formation, but if you look closely, you can see an indication
that the pattern may not hold up for too long. The strength of the downtrend
appears to be moderating, and because the trend has been in place for a long
time, it may lead you to believe that a reversal is on deck. These indications
prove to be true when the trend turns upward over the course of the next
couple of weeks. The high of the pattern is violated, rendering it null, void,
and more than a little annoying.

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 245

Chapter 10: Trading with Bearish Three-Stick Patterns

Figure 10-30:
The
downside
gap filled
pattern
provides a
dud signal
on a chart
of DD.

245

16_178089 ch10.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 246

246 Part III: Making the Most of Complex Patterns

17_178089 pp04.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 247

Part IV

Combining
Patterns and
Indicators

17_178089 pp04.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

S

Page 248

In this part . . .

ometimes I get worried that my vocal cords are going
to give out because I spend so much time singing the
praises of candlestick charts. In Part IV, though, I sing a
different tune. No, I don’t discourage you from using candlestick charts — far from it — but I do show you how to
combine candlestick charts with other types of technical
indicators and encourage you to use those combinations
in your trading strategy.

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 249

Chapter 11

Using Technical Indicators
to Complement Your
Candlestick Charts
In This Chapter
 Taking advantage of trendlines
 Using moving averages to inform your decisions
 Appreciating the relative strength index
 Adding stochastics to your bag of tricks
 Jumping on the Bollinger band bandwagon

Y

ou can use nothing but candlestick patterns when trading, and some
traders have proven that to be a profitable route. But that shouldn’t make
you think twice about combining candlesticks with other technical indicators.
You can take advantage of a wide range of indicators to confirm the conclusions
you draw from your candlestick charts, and your results are often more reliable
and profitable. You may very well find that you can’t live by candlesticks alone!
Many candlestick patterns — from single sticks to complex multiple-stick
formations — depend on the market context in which they appear. For example, a bullish signal in a bearish market sparks skepticism and may even be
ignored. But what constitutes a bull or bear market? (As I write this, I have a
financial TV show on in the background and two market professionals are vigorously debating whether we’re in a bull or bear market. If these market pros
can’t agree on the nature of the market, how are individuals supposed to
figure it out?) It’s simple: use technical analysis! More specifically, use indicators that attempt to define the market trend.
Traders use many different types of technical indicators to enhance and complement their trading styles. Traders are always trying to come up with the
perfect combination of indicators and signals. (I confess to walking around
with old business cards and a pen so I can jot down trading ideas when they
pop in my head.) You never know when inspiration will strike! That brilliant

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 250

250 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
new way to incorporate candlestick charting in a new trading scheme may
reveal itself at any moment.
Technical indicators share one of a couple of goals. The first is to define the
current trend, whether up, down, or even sideways (more on that later). To
quote a popular trading saying, “The trend is your friend.” The other indicators try to identify market extremes or reversals. That information allows a
trader to “fade the market,” or go against the trend in hopes that the trend
will soon fade out and reverse. There are heated arguments over whether
trading with the trend or trying to profit from reversals is the key to successful trading, and as long as traders are still making a living (and losing their
shirts) using both styles, the debate will continue.
There are more complex indicators than you can shake a (candle)stick at. (In
fact, Technical Analysis For Dummies, by Barbara Rockefeller [Wiley] covers
them extensively.) In this chapter, I clue you in on a few tried-and-true indicators that you can use to determine the trend of the market and make your
candlestick-based decisions even more reliable. These indicators include
trendlines, moving averages, relative strength index (RSI), stochastics, and
Bollinger bands.

Using Trendlines
Trendlines can be the most basic of all technical indicators. A trendline is
exactly what it sounds like: a line on a chart that shows the general direction
a stock is trending. If a stock is moving up in price, its trendline slopes
upward from left to right. If a stock is trending down in price, its trendline
slopes downward from left to right.
In this section, you discover how to draw a trendline on a chart. Also, some
hints on how to determine the direction (up or down) are given. Finally there’s
a quick overview of how machines (a computer) can draw trendlines for you.

Drawing trendlines
Trendlines seem pretty straightforward, but drawing a trendline can be
tricky. Based on how you think a stock is performing, you draw a line of support (in a bullish case) or a line of resistance (in a bearish case).
You can construct a trendline with nothing more than a printed out chart, a
ruler, and a pencil. If you can’t find a ruler, just close this book and use the
spine. Anything that allows you to draw a straight line between two points will
do. To draw a trendline, simply draw a line that connects two or more low
price points (for an upward trending line) or two or more high price points (for
a downward trending line). Figure 11-1 shows a prime example of a trendline.

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 251

Chapter 11: Using Technical Indicators to Complement Your Candlestick Charts
Don’t let the ease of trendline construction fool you into thinking that trendlines are simple or cut-and-dried. In fact, it’s difficult to refer to a trendline on
a chart as a technical indicator because the drawing of the line is such a subjective task. Much like the market experts debating on TV, it’s very likely that
two traders can come up with completely different lines when asked to draw
what they consider the most significant trendline on a chart. If a trader happens to be biased against a certain stock for some reason, she may be more
inclined to look at a chart and find a downtrend.
Despite all the subjectivity involved with drawling trendlines, some very successful traders rely heavily on them for their buy and sell decisions. When I
began my career as a runner in the cattle trading pits 15 years ago, a very
successful trader I knew based decisions on nothing more than daily charts
and trendlines that he’d drawn during his train ride every morning. I’ve heard
that he’s still using the same method today.

Considering trendline direction
Although different trendlines drawn on the same chart may differ a bit, you’ll
usually find that at least the direction of the trendlines are the same. Trendlines
can trend up, down, or not at all. For simplicity’s sake, Figure 11-1 has an obvious up (bullish) trend. (I say it’s obvious, but I wonder how many of my colleagues will insist I’m wrong!) After you determine that a trend is bullish, you
may consider it with a bullish candlestick pattern and look to buy. On the other
hand, if you witness a bearish candlestick pattern, you may be inclined to
ignore it, or at least to take caution before implementing a sell signal.

Figure 11-1:
A chart
showing a
trendline
with a
positive
trend.

251

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 252

252 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Taking trendline direction into consideration helps you determine the status
of the market. Understanding the market helps you use the most appropriate
candlestick pattern — one that makes your trading decisions more effective
and profitable. Trendlines can be subjective, but there’s no easier or quicker
way to define a trend.

Taking advantage of automated trendlines
You can take some of the subjectivity out of trendline drawing by using a software package that constructs trendlines for you. All you have to do is choose
your preferred time frame, and the software does the rest. Even Microsoft
Excel includes this option in its charting function. (In Chapter 4, I explore
how to use Excel for charting, but for now, I point out the way Excel determines a trendline for the data presented.)
Figure 11-2 displays the same data as Figure 11-1, but instead of the handdrawn approach, this trendline was generated by Excel. The placement of the
line is a bit different than in Figure 11-1, but the trend is still clearly positive.
Using software cuts down on the subjective nature of trendlines, but it doesn’t
completely remove subjectivity. There’s still a subjective component to
software-drawn trendlines. The user still determines the time frame for the
trendline, which can have a definite impact on the type of line that’s generated. As with any computer program that involves user input, the data you
get out is only as good as what you put in.

Figure 11-2:
A chart with
an
automated
trendline
placed on it.

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 253

Chapter 11: Using Technical Indicators to Complement Your Candlestick Charts

Utilizing Moving Averages
When it comes to technical analysis, it doesn’t get much easier than drawing
a trendline. But what if you’re in need of a slightly more complex indicator?
The next step up from drawing trendlines is calculating moving averages. Put
simply, a moving average is the average of the closing prices of a stock over a
certain period of time. You can compare a closing price with a moving average to help you determine a trend.
Like most technical indicators, there are several different types of moving
averages, and I explain a few in this section. First, though, it’s important that
you understand how to make good choices about the time frames you use
when calculating your moving averages.

Selecting appropriate moving
average periods
The time frames of your moving averages are determined by the number of
closing prices you include. To decide on that number, consider the types of
trading decisions you make based on your moving average. Pick a time frame
that’s appropriate for the amount of time you intend to have a trade on. For a
trade that’s to be held for only a day or two, a five- to ten-day moving average
will suffice.
For instance, the five-day example in Figure 11-3 is very short-term and is
most useful for traders who trade for a day or two, or even for less than a
day. I trade a system based on a moving average that uses data from only the
two previous days’ closing prices. The holding period for this system is just
half a day, so the short moving average makes perfect sense.
The range of moving averages I’ve seen used on charts varies from 2 days to
200. A 200-day moving average is very long-term, but in many circles it’s considered very significant when determining a stock’s long-term trend. In fact,
the common definition of a long-term bull or bear market can be whether an
index is trading above (bull) or below (bear) its 200-day moving average.

Using simple moving averages
The most basic type of moving average is the simple moving average. It’s also
the easiest to calculate and the most common — so common, in fact, that the
word “simple” is often left off when a simple moving average is displayed on a

253

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 254

254 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
chart. Look at Figure 11-4, where a five-day simple moving average is calculated by using the closing prices from five previous days. It can’t be much
easier: The five closing prices are added up and divided by five. If you keep
the number of closing prices in your simple moving averages low, you can
easily work them out with a calculator.
The five-day simple moving average in Figure 11-4 comes out at 114.20, and
the closing price on the fifth day is 113.87. Some technical analysts would
say that indicates a downtrend, because the close on the final day is lower
than the moving average. That can be very useful information if you’re working on a short-term trade.

Figure 11-3:
A chart with
a five-day
moving
average
on it.

Day

Close

1
2
3
4
5

114.70
114.73
114.14
113.56
113.87

Figure 11-4:
A quick
calculation
of a five-day
moving Total
average.
Total / 5

571.00
114.20

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 255

Chapter 11: Using Technical Indicators to Complement Your Candlestick Charts
But if you’ve got a longer term trade in mind, it wouldn’t make much sense to
fret over the fact that a closing price dipped below a five-day moving average.
There just aren’t enough data points (closing prices, in this case) involved —
a relatively minor change in a closing price can have a sizable impact on the
average. A moving average calculated over a longer period of time (with
many more closing prices) — say, 100 days or more — is less likely to reveal
any closing prices that cross the average.
The longer your time horizon for a trade (or even an investment), the longer
the moving average you need.
Figures 11-5a and 11-5b contain the same pricing data, but Figure 11-5a has a
5-day moving average, while Figure 11-5b uses a 20-day moving average.
Notice the extreme differences in trends between the two charts.

Using other types of moving averages:
What have you done for me lately?
Two fairly common deviations on the simple moving average are the weighted
moving average and the exponential moving average. These types of moving
averages are calculated in different ways, but they both have the same goal:
to place more emphasis on recent prices.
Why would a trader want to explore more complex moving averages? Well,
the major advantage one of these more complicated moving averages has
over the simple moving average is that it’s better at revealing a change in
trend more quickly. Being able to detect trend changes faster helps to make
you a more agile trader. Also, traders (especially short-term traders), have
very short memories. Ask me what the market did yesterday, and I’m pretty
sure I can give you a quick answer. Ask me what it did two Fridays ago, and I
would be quickly pulling up a chart (a candlestick chart, of course!) to get
you an answer. Because a short-term trader places more emphasis on more
recent price action, using a charting method that does the same typically
works better for shorter term styles of trading. Weighted and exponential
moving averages both emphasize recent price action, and the only substantial difference between the two is the method of calculation.
If you were to rank the three most commonly used types of moving averages —
simple, weighted, and exponential — according to their emphasis on recent
price action, exponential moving averages, which place a lot of emphasis on
recent prices, would top the list. Weighted moving averages would be a close
second and simple moving averages a distant last.

255

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 256

256 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators

a

Figure 11-5:
A 5-day and
20-day
moving
average
compared
together.
b

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 257

Chapter 11: Using Technical Indicators to Complement Your Candlestick Charts
Calculating a weighted moving average
To calculate a weighted moving average, multiply the most recent stock price
by the total number of prices in your chosen time frame. Then multiply the
second most recent stock price by the total number of prices minus one, and —
using the same method — work your way back to the first price in your time
frame.
For Figure 11-6, I’ve taken the same five-day data used for the simple moving
average in Figure 11-4 and calculated a weighted moving average. Note: For
Day 5, the weighted close is equal to 5 × 113.87 or 569.35, while the weighted
close for Day 1 is simply the closing price × 1 (114.70). To determine the
weighted moving average, the weighted closing prices are added up and
divided by the sum of the weights. In this case, that number is
[(1 × Day 1 closing price) + (2 × Day 2 closing price) + (3 × Day 3 closing
price) + (4 × Day 4 closing price) + (5 × Day 5 closing price)] ÷ 15.

Figure 11-6:
A
calculation
of a 5-day
weighted
moving
average.

Day

Close

Weighted Close

1
2
3
4
5

114.70
114.73
114.14
113.56
113.87

114.70
229.46
342.42
454.24
569.35

15 Total

1710.17

Total / 15

114.01

Refer to Figure 11-4 and Figure 11-6 for the difference between the simple
moving average and the weighted moving average. There’s a pretty significant difference! The lower recent prices mean that the weighted moving average is quite a bit lower.

Calculating an exponential moving average
You can calculate an exponential moving average in a handful of different
ways, and I suggest that you use . . . none of them. The math involved in the
calculations is a bit complex, and for your purposes, I recommend leaving the
hard work to a charting package. (See Chapter 4 for more info on popular
charting software.)

257

18_178089 ch11.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 258

258 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Combining two moving averages
Comparing closing prices with moving averages is a great way to use moving
averages to determine a trend, but it’s not the only way. You can also combine and compare two moving averages to define the current trend. For
example, you may calculate both a 5- and 20-day moving average for a stock,
and then compare them to spot a trend. To do so, work your way though the
following steps:
1. Calculate the two moving averages, using the process described earlier in this chapter.
2. Determine which of your two moving averages is fast, and which is
slow.
The fast moving average is always the one with the fewest number of
data points (closing prices). It’s labeled “fast” because its small number
of data points makes it prone to change much more quickly (completely
different than the reasons someone gets labeled “fast” in high school).
The slow moving average is slower to change because of its heftier
number of data points.
3. Compare your moving averages to spot a trend.
If the fast moving average is higher than the slow moving average, that
indicates an uptrend. The logic is exactly the same as comparing a closing price to a moving average to determine trend, but the fast moving
average takes the place of the closing price.
If you notice this type of trend, be more inclined to follow a bullish
candlestick pattern and consider buying. If the fast moving average is
lower than the slow moving average, that indicates a downtrend. If that’s
what you see, you should follow a bearish candlestick pattern and look
to sell.
Take a look at Figure 11-7, which contains the same data as the previous
charts in this chapter, but overlays both a 5- and 20-day moving average. The
5-day moving average is represented by the solid line, while a dashed line is
used for the 20-day moving average. You can clearly see the higher volatility
of the 5-day moving average compared to the 20-day. And you can also see
that the chart indicates an uptrend!
Experts often use a combination of the 5- and 200-day moving averages to
define a long-term bull or bear market. These choices may seem somewhat
arbitrary, but they’ve been cemented as rules of thumb in the market.
