
Aggressive-Defense Cycles
The markets cycle between periods that favor rapid profit production
and periods when it’s hard to put a single dime into your pocket. Lowhanging fruit, public participation, and a balance between buyers and
sellers characterize the aggressive phase of this cycle. Whipsaws, traps,
illiquidity, and an absence of buyers and sellers characterize the defensive
phase. The defensive phase tends to last longer than the aggressive phase,
but there are notable exceptions, like the runaway bull market in the
summer of 2003 or the runaway bear market in the late summer and fall
of 2008.
Our trading strategies need to shift gears as quickly as possible when
the cycle evolves from one phase into the other. Unfortunately, it’s often
hard to recognize this atmospheric shift until it’s well under way. You have
one major clue, however, that will smack you across the face and tell you
“things are different.” Playing one side of the cycle after the other side has
taken control invariably triggers a string of losses, because your market
approach stops working. Presumably, traders realize that something has
changed after getting hit over the head a few dozen times by these inexplicable losses.

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

71

Trading the defensive phase effectively is more important to annual
profitability and long-term survival than making money during the
aggressive phase. To prove my point, look back at a bad year and notice
how your losses in losing months far outweighed your profits in winning
months because you were trying to outthink the market. Invariably, overtrading is the main culprit on the loss side, as frustration mounts and you
feed the market beast, hoping to catch a wave or a play or anything else
that fills the hole you’re digging for yourself. Defensive phases often correspond with seasonal impulses, like the dog days of August, but they
can occur at any time of year. In fact, when a well-telegraphed, seasonally
aggressive phase like the January Effect fails to materialize on schedule, the
defensive phase can kick in with a vengeance.
These periods also follow the natural strength and weakness in our
trading plans. Traders are an extremely diverse group, with momentum
players, trend followers, fading specialists, and scalpers all holding
lifetime membership cards. Each of us gravitates naturally toward a customized strategy that matches our intellectual prowess as well as the
realities of our emotional state. That’s why some traders choose to sell
short exclusively, while the practice sends shivers down the backs of
otherwise savvy market players. Each strategy capitalizes upon narrow
segments within the pattern cycle structures of individual instruments
and the broader indices. Conversely, the “tweener” periods between these
points of perfect alignment trigger defensive phases for that specific trader,
which will persist until the next favorable segment arrives. These personalized aggressive-defensive phases can converge or diverge with largerscale aggressive-defensive phases. With this in mind, you can understand
why the greatest periods of profitability come when personal and broadscale aggressive phases combine in a synergistic impulse. Conversely,
the greatest danger arrives when a personal tweener period aligns with a
broad-scale defensive phase.
T A B L E

3 .1

Typical Aggressive-Defensive Phase Alignment

Player/Phase	Aggressive	Defensive
Momentum
Scalper
Short seller
Day trader

Runaway market
High volatility
Downtrend
Trading range

Price channel
Low volatility
Oversold bounce
Trend day

72

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

Shock Spirals
Large-scale market disruptions, like the Paulson panic in September and
October 2008, trigger shock spirals in which volatility spikes through the
roof, price bars expand rapidly, and the broad indices surge like magnets
toward large-scale support or resistance levels. Trap gaps (in the opposite
direction of the prior close) and violent reversals characterize these events,
which can build or destroy equity accounts in a very short time period.
Traders are naturally attracted to these periods, like moths to a flame,
but the majority fails to recognize the extreme risk and incurs near-catastrophic losses.
I’m an advocate for standing aside during turbulent times and waiting
for the dust to settle, but the advice does a disservice to risk-conscious
day traders who can book windfall profits while the world markets are
careening from one volatile level to another. While price patterns caught
in shock spirals routinely torture intermediate-term traders, they work
extremely well in short-term and long-term time frames. In other words,
5-minute, 15-minute, and weekly charts will carve out actionable breakout
and breakdown patterns during these historic periods, while chaos and
risk obliterate opportunities on 60-minute and daily charts. This dichotomy
is especially dangerous for swing traders who utilize one- to three-day
holding periods because high volatility overwhelms the narrowly defined
support and resistance levels utilized in those setups. As a result, capital
preservation is vitally important for this segment of the trading population
during shock spiral events.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) introduced VIX
futures in March 2004. VIX pattern structure has improved substantially
since that time, with the derivative dog wagging the tail of the classic
indicator. This takes on added significance during shock spirals, when
traders are placing large bets on volatility expansion and contraction. The
interconnection between markets, heightened by program algorithms that
trade VIX futures, generates inverse lockstep movement between VIX and
the major equity indices.
Watching a 15- or 60-minute VIX chart during a crisis period is an
essential element of market survival. Place 50-bar and 200-bar EMAs on
these charts and line out the most obvious support and resistance levels.
Then stick a 5-3-3 Stochastics under the chart and follow short-term cycles.
You’ll note how a VIX rally into resistance offers a good time to buy a
pullback or to cover a short sale, while VIX dropping into support denotes
a smart place to take a long-side profit. Act cautiously when VIX hovers

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

F I G U R E

73

3.5

Use volatility patterns to track the evolution of rallies, selloffs, and shock spiral events. CBOE Market Volatility
Index (VIX) takes off in a well-organized rally that corresponds with an equally powerful equity decline. Note
how the indicator prints a continuation gap (1) exactly halfway through the event, bounces off the 50-bar EMA
(2), and posts a high at 33.08. It then rolls over in a pullback that holds 200-bar EMA support (3) for two sessions.
The subsequent breakdown (4) triggers a reliable signal to come off the sidelines and buy stocks.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

near resistance at the end of the trading day and refuses to roll over. These
high pivots often signal impending breakouts, which correspond with
major gap downs on the equity indices. VIX then basing at new support,
after a breakout, can trigger follow-through to even higher levels, yielding
a major equity decline. We saw this happen repeatedly in the fourth quarter
of 2008. In a similar vein, watch closely when the storm clouds pass, the
major indices move higher, and VIX drops into longer-term support, like

74

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

the 200-day EMA. A failure to bounce at these levels often precedes a VIX
breakdown that triggers a momentum rally in the equity markets.
The longer-term direction of VIX is more important than the shortterm price level because the indicator moves through broad cycles of
expansion and contraction roughly corresponding with equity bull and
bear markets. It can also drop into a sideways pattern that lasts for months
or years, whether it begins at 15 or 45. These compression phases tend to
correspond with base-building in the equity indices. Trend-minded traders
are advised to stalk these patterns, for months if required, because the
transition into the next up wave or down wave should correspond with
a larger-scale bull or bear equity cycle. Not surprisingly, long-term VIX
swings are intimately related to index relative strength, which I’ll discuss
in Chapter 12.
Trading ranges established on the major indices during shock
spirals can persist for many months. Consider what happened to the Dow
Industrials after the 1987 crash. The index traded to a cycle low at 1616
on October 19 and then bounced up to 2164 on October 20. It then held
within those boundaries, except for one brief rally to 2193, until January
1989. This compression illustrates the massive supply and demand shift
that takes place during historic market disruptions. They also set up
important levels to watch, like we saw after the October 2008 crash.
Although old timers might disagree, that shock spiral was far more complex than the 1987 plunge, with posttraumatic trading ranges that were
easier to visualize on big liquid equities than on the underlying indices.
Shock spiral dynamics work equally well on minicrashes and bubbles that unfold on individual equities. Of course, we don’t have access to
specialized VIX in this smaller arena and need to rely exclusively on individual price patterns. Gap levels become critically important in analyzing
these smaller scale events, which are often driven by earnings releases
and other company-specific news. I’ll talk more about gap strategies and
intraday gap management in Part Five.

4

C

H

A

P

TE

R

relative strength

L

ong-term profitability demands skillful market timing. Market timing
depends upon four key elements: trend relativity, holding period,
market day, and seasonality. Each of these factors is equally important in
buying or selling at the best time and most advantageous price. Notably,
it’s relatively easy to be right on price or time when executing a trade, but
it’s very hard to be right on both at the same time. That’s why getting both
things right, consistently, denotes a powerful and profitable edge.
Getting the best price, but not time, forces traders into a waiting
game and exposes their stops to market noise. Swing traders rely on
price-based entry because the majority of their signals depend on contact
with specific price levels. Opportunity-cost deteriorates over time in this
scenario because capital is tied up while waiting for the trend to get under
way. More importantly, the reward:risk profile mutates, so the trade you
took might not be the trade you get by the time the market moves in your
favor. On the flip side, getting in at the right time but not at the best price
raises the odds for an immediate profit, but at the risk of an outsized loss
75

76

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

when you’re proven wrong. Momentum traders rely on time-based entry
because their signals depend on standing aside until patterns shift into
trending mode. Both opportunity and cost rise to elevated levels in this
scenario because the strategy routinely incurs big profits and big losses.
The most skillful market timer combines price and time precision,
yielding trade entries at low risk levels that move immediately in their
favor. This is accomplished through careful alignment with a broad and
bewildering variety of relative strength cycles. It takes a great deal of experience to accurately interpret the crazy quilt of relative strength through
multiple time frames and instruments, but the rewards are plentiful for
the handful of traders who finally master this intricate market puzzle.
Relative strength, a.k.a. buy-sell cycles, comes in many varieties and
incarnations. Trade management demands intimate knowledge of this
bipolar energy, so it’s urgently important that we incorporate as many
variants as possible into our daily routine. While Stochastics and Wilder’s
RSI form the popular core of these technical tools, there are literally dozens
of methodologies and processes to gather this type of information. For
example, every market day generates a list of outperforming and underperforming sectors. Sorting these groups by percentage gain and loss generates a relative strength snapshot that tells traders what to buy, what to
sell, and what to avoid during that specific session.
Buy-sell cycles are continuous, often repeating in regular intervals
that can be predicted with incredible accuracy. To complicate matters, these
cycles evolve through all time frames, generating a plethora of strategic
convergence-divergence relationships. While most traders find the interpretation of these interweaving cycles to be a daunting task, the smart
ones realize it’s a meal ticket upon which an entire career can be built.
Relative strength cycles provide continuous feedback, which means
it’s foolish to limit data gathering to narrow intervals, popularly known
as crossovers and overbought-oversold signals. Each tick of relative
strength depends upon convergence-divergence mechanics because it’s
built on a comparison between two market-related numbers. Analysis is
then extended over time to generate a flowing graph, percentile rank, or
leadership list. Taken in sum, relative strength exposes the endless battle
between bulls and bears and tells us which side is in control of the tape at
a specified point in time.
All trading strategies rely on relative strength interpretation. It’s a
big subject because the market is chock full of cycles, each capable of controlling price action at a moment’s notice. While it’s impossible to track
every oscillation, we must take notice when relative strength has the

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

77

power to affect our positions. To accomplish this task, place a 5-3-3 Stochastics under each chart on your trading screen and manage watch lists
with a database tool, like the Price vs. 200-day EMA sort. Complete your
relative strength toolbox with a smoothed (14, 7) Wilder’s RSI that captures
monthly cycles and an ETF/sector list that tracks daily percentage gain/
loss in real time.

Three Relative Strength Tools
Stochastics tracks the flow of buying and selling pressure in all time
frames. This cyclical alternation, from overbought to oversold and back
again, is akin to a ball game in which one side is given the opportunity to
score but must use its time wisely. It’s our job to sit in the stands, watch as
this game unfolds, and take predatory advantage of the losing side. This is
especially true in the intraday markets, where index futures emit buy-sell
cycles in regular 60- to 90-minute intervals. There’s no need to trade these
cycles directly. Rather, they work in tandem with the opportunities we’ve
already identified for that session, telling us the most favorable times to
buy, sell, take profits, or take losses. In addition, convergence-divergence
relationships between index patterns and their Stochastics cycles add predictive power because we can use the information to measure which side
of the market is winning or losing that day’s biggest battle.
The Stochastics cycle of the individual setup generates a convergencedivergence relationship that tells us whether the favored stock, futures
contract, or currency is relatively stronger or weaker than the underlying indices, at least for that session. It also indicates whether the instrument’s buy-sell cycle is moving ahead of, in sync with, or behind the
broader market. By itself, this piece of data supports a myriad of trading
strategies because it can uncover setups that will move higher or lower
with the indices but are acting on a time delay because their cycles haven’t
turned yet.
Stochastics represents the classic overbought-oversold oscillator.
Unfortunately, most traders don’t understand how to correctly interpret
the valuable information it provides. For example, the worst thing you
can do is to jump ship when Stochastics hits a high or low extreme
because the most reliable profits are booked in the early stages of an overbought or oversold market (above the 80 or below the 20 line). Instead, use
simple double top or double bottom patterns to pinpoint reversals driven

PART TWO

78

F I G U R E

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

4.1

Stochastics double top breakdowns trigger reliable sell signals. Research in Motion rallies more than 15 points
in a month and tops out above 85 in June. The last phase of the uptrend carves out a lower high (1) on Stochastics, which breaks to the downside (2) just two days later. A short sale entry on the failed bounce (3) into the gap
in the following session would have netted an excellent profit.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

by overbought or oversold conditions. The best signals unfold when Stochastics makes a lower high (or higher low) near the 80-20 line and then
expands in the opposite direction. This type of pattern will often trigger an
entry or exit signal just ahead of price movement and should be acted
upon without further confirmation.
Realistically, it doesn’t matter which Stochastics settings you choose
because the indicator will print valid patterns with any set of inputs. As
noted in The Master Swing Trader, I favor a 5-3-3 setting, which I apply to
all time frames. Different inputs will emit similar cycles but will vary in

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

79

the level of market noise. The wisdom here is to match your settings
with your trading style. For example, day traders capitalize on subtle
shifts in market direction, which can be visualized more clearly using my
shorter-term settings. On the flip side, the longer-term setting of 14-7-7
will help position traders to hold firm through endless whipsaws and
shakeouts.
Stochastics can’t help us if we choose the wrong stocks to trade in the
first place. Our carefully managed watch lists need to turn out profitable
candidates that align with the most active pattern cycles which, not surprisingly, also mark out major relative strength cycles. To this end, traders
need to build stock lists with data sorts that identify the strongest or
weakest opportunities. The Price vs. 200-day MA sort offers a powerful
tool for relative strength examination. You’ll find the long side of this
output overlaps with the popular IBD 100 list from Investor’s Business Daily
but uses no fundamental data. It can also be updated on a daily basis to
find out what’s hot and what’s not in that particular market environment.
Traders using Worden TeleCharts are familiar with this technical sort
because it’s been part of that product for almost two decades, but other
software can easily accommodate this simple relative strength formula.
The TeleCharts version uses percentile rank vs. the entire stock
market. Since that involves calculus, I’ll stick with the simpler raw value,
which will sort just as easily.

Price vs. 200-Day MA (EMA Preferred)
Formula
([C – 200-day MA]/200-day MA) × 100 = percent above/below the
200-day MA
Example #1: A stock closes at 45, with a 200-day MA at 40.
([45 – 40]/40) = .125 × 100 = 12.5% above the 200-day MA
Example #2: A stock closes at 35, with a 200-day EMA at 40.
([35 – 40]/40) = –.125 × 100 = –12.5% = 12.5 below the 200-day MA
It’s too much work to sort the entire market, so filter your list with
formulae that limit output to stocks near 52-week highs for a strength
list and 52-week lows for a weakness list.

80

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

Filter (strength)
(1 + [(C – 52-week high)/52-week high]) × 100 = % of the 52-week
high
Example: If a stock closes at 50, with the 52-week high at 60.
(1 + [(50 – 60)/60]) = (1 + [–.17]) × 100 = 83% of the 52-week high
Filter (weakness)
(1 + [(C – 52-week low)/52-week low]) × 100 = % of the 52-week
low
Example: If a stock closes at 35, with the 52-week low at 30.
(1 + [(35 – 30)/30]) = (1 + [.17]) × 100 = 117% of the 52-week high
Run the 52-week high or low scan first, creating a list that contains just
stocks in the top 25% for a strength list or bottom 25% for a weakness
list. Run this list through the Price vs. 200-day MA scan, and your
work is done. Scanning output in both directions reveals active
momentum plays rather than pullbacks or narrow range setups. Also
keep in mind these scans are just a starting point because you’ll still
need to stalk the most promising candidates and wait until they grind
out favorable patterns and low-risk entry points.

Long-cycle indicators fill out a versatile relative strength toolbox. I
prefer a 14-day Wilder’s RSI, smoothed by 7 periods, but many real-time
quoting systems don’t let you smooth this classic indicator without playing
with their custom formula functions. So, if you’re not adept at program
language, I recommend an ultra slow 17-17-1 Stochastics as a substitute.
Slow moving relative strength indicators highlight buy-sell swings in the
lunar or monthly time frame. Although nonastrologers might disagree,
the financial markets tend to oscillate in 21- or 28-day cycles of strength
and weakness. The best long-side opportunities for position trades tend to
appear at the bottom of this cycle, while the best short sales come at the
top. A longer-term relative strength indicator exposes these turning points
early in a new swing, often before price confirms the reversal through an
index breakout or breakdown.

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

F I G U R E

81

4.2

Use longer-term relative strength indicators to identify swings in weekly and monthly cycles. Although not
perfect, 17-17-1 Stochastics pinpointed the majority of major turning points in the SPDR Gold Trust ETF between
October 2008 and July 2009. That’s a fantastic record, considering this period marked one of the most volatile
trading environments in the last 20 years.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

In addition to marketwide relative strength, individual stocks,
futures contracts, and currencies also tend to oscillate in regular time
intervals. For example, when you see a series of 21-day downswings on
Apple or Research in Motion, expect a 20- to 22-day downswing the next
time that long-term relative strength rolls over from the overbought level.
This is incredibly valuable data in trade management because it facilitates reward and risk targeting as well as supporting a plethora of early
entry strategies. Long-cycle indicators also act as primary filters at major
turning points, both in the major indices and individual stocks. Emotions
