
$5,000
$6,000
$7,000
$8,000
$11,000
$15,000
$20,000
$26,000
$33,000

4.20
4.40
4.60
4.80
5.00
5.20
5.40
5.60
5.80

4.00
Long 1
–$ 1,000
4.20
Long 2
–$ 1,000
4.40
Long 3
$
0
4.75
Long 4
+$ 1,000
4.95
Long 5
+$ 4,000
5.15
Long 6
+$ 7,500
5.40
Long 7
+$14,000
5.50
Long 8
+$16,000
——————–Take Profits——————

Position

Risk

Results

0
+$ 1,000
+$ 3,000
+$ 6,000
+$10,000
+$15,000
+$21,000
+$28,000
+$36,000

myself out with profits. By adding one contract each time the market advanced 20 cents, I wound up with eight contracts when prices reached
$5.60. When the price moved from $5.40 to $5.60, for example, I had seven
contracts working for me, earning $7,000 in profits.
At the point of taking profits, my account balance (not including the
transaction costs and commissions) would be near $41,000 ($36,000 plus the
original starting amount of $5,000). Buying one contract at $4.40 and holding it until $6.00 would have resulted in a gain of only $8,000 for a balance
of $13,000 before commissions and fees.
I could have added more than one position, liquidated half of the positions at any time, or let the market ride and continued to trail the stops. There
are many variables that could be done with the add-one technique. Play
around with the numbers yourself and discover how pyramiding works.
Another variation of pyramiding is to buy several contracts at the $4.20
level and scale back on the number of contracts with every purchase above
your initial entry level (Table 12.2). This style of pyramiding is what most
people feel is the more standard method because you are long more positions
from the bottom of the market so it’s like the base of an actual pyramid rather
than an equal amount as in the previous example. The problem is that you
will be risking nearly your whole account if the market stops you out in the
first stage of the trade.
One other point is the stops are trailed or adjusted as the market moves
upward. The trader has to set stops based on varying factors such as prior
support and resistance levels or profits or losses accrued in the account.
Some investors will move a stop up just to protect a profit, which in this
style of trading is usually against the main principle of the let-it-ride type of
mentality that is necessary for pyramiding.

209

Pyramiding

TABLE 12.2

Soybean Pyramid Plan Variation

Starting
Equity

Entry Level

$ 5,000
$ 9,000
$16,000
$25,000
$35,000
$45,000
$55,000
$65,000
$75,000

4.20
4.40
4.60
5.00
5.20
5.40
5.60
5.80
6.00

Stop Loss

Add On

Position

Risk

4.00
Long 4
–$ 4,000
4.20
Add 3
Long 7
–$ 3,000
4.40
Add 2
Long 9
+$ 2,000
4.70
Add 1
Long 10
+$12,500
4.90
Long 10
+$24,000
5.00
Long 10
+$29,000
5.40
Long 10
+$49,000
5.50
Long 10
+$54,000
——————–Take Profits——————––––––

Results

0
+$ 4,000
+$11,000
+$29,000
+$39,000
+$49,000
+$59,000
+$69,000
+$79,000

This is a specific game plan strategy that requires discipline and the
ability to be able to risk the entire account value to achieve the targeted results. I use the stop placements here as both a reasonable capital preservation maneuver and as a responsible trader looking to take money out of the
market. Always remember, though, that stops do not guarantee anything
due to market conditions, as discussed previously.
Extremely large profits can accrue quickly with very little investment
capital. However, you can lose it just as quickly. Several events could happen
and need to be addressed: Stops need to be adjusted carefully. You might be
tempted to continue to add positions beyond a top indicated by your analysis. The exchange could raise the margin requirements while you are in the
trade, forcing you to deposit additional funds or liquidate some or all of your
positions earlier than you would want.
Certainly no trade is ever this predictable, and a move in soybean futures from $4.40 to $6.00 was a tremendous price move for a short period
of time. These are some factors that I did not include in my example, so do
a reality check of the market you are trading when you estimate how high
a market could rally in a specific time period. You need to control your
greed factor as well and trail those stops. Just try to develop a game plan
before you trade and see for yourself if this trading tactic could help in your
knowledge of trading futures and options. Even if you apply a portion of
this technique in another market and a smaller move occurs, you may boost
your trading capital better than you expected.
Whatever you do, you do not want to get into a reverse pyramid arrangement where you get cocky after the market goes up and gives you money to

210

THE TACTICAL TRADER: Tips and Techniques That Work

work with. You may be tempted to add multiple contracts at higher and
higher price levels, setting up a situation where even a small price setback
could wipe out all of your profits.

SCALE TRADING
Scale trading is another popular style of trading that tries to capitalize on a
market that is at historically low price levels. It involves entering multiple
contracts and staggering your positions at different entry levels. Some analysts and professional traders prefer to use this method with physical futures
contracts rather than financial products because with physical futures there
are finite price levels that affect supply/demand, and there will always be
demand for the product at some price. Financial products are paper assets
with no real physical value and are susceptible to complete devaluation.
Charts for physical commodity futures will show an absolute low value
from an historical price perspective as well as from a cost of production
point of view. It is that belief and theory that gives scale traders confidence
not to get scared out of a market but to increase their holdings and to cost
average as prices move lower. Coffee may be an example of a market that
has gotten about as low as it can go in the early 2000s (Figure 12.3).
Prices could trade lower or stay at a low level for an extended period
of time, but I don’t believe coffee producers will give their product away for
free. It costs too much in labor, delivery, and storage to harvest a single coffee bean at too low a price. When the burlap bag it is carried in costs more
than the raw product, producers, exporters, or roasters will be forced to
shut down their operations. The result will be that supplies will tighten, and
prices would then tend to rise to ration demand.
After all, isn’t that what happened to crude oil in 1999 when prices
were trading near $9.80 per barrel? A cut in production by the Organization
of Petroleum Exporting Countries and continued strong global demand
caused a spike in prices, a great example that shows how prices go from one
extreme to another. In less than two years crude oil prices went from below
$10 to nearly $36 a barrel (Figure 12.4). Some analysts call this supply complacency, a phase that occurs when end users believe prices will always remain low and don’t commit to buying and holding supplies.
Scale trading generally takes the guesswork out of timing when to go
long a market—to a certain degree—especially when prices are near historic
lows. If you want to be a scale trader, you need to lay out a plan and have a
large reserve of trading capital while you wait for your plan to work.
The idea in scale trading is to set a base price at a point near previous
lows or when prices seem to be about as “low as they are likely to go.” You
begin buying at that price. You may be early and prices go lower, but instead

Scale Trading

211

FIGURE 12.3

Coffee: Setup for a scale plan? (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

of getting out of your position, you set up your plan to buy more contracts
at specified increments below your starting price—like averaging down in
buying stocks. You do not use stops. You keep buying on the way down until
prices hit a bottom and begin to turn back up. They do have to go back up,
don’t they? Once the market price rebounds, you simply sell positions back
to the market that you have accumulated from lower levels.
On the oil chart (Figure 12.4), for example, you might have started buying on a scale trading plan at $15, below the 1995 low. You bought more at
$14, more at $13, more at $12, more at $11, more at $10—who ever expected
prices to go that low? Eventually your plan paid off, but you can imagine how
much money you would have had to put up to hold your positions.
In addition to large amounts of reserve capital, one hazard of scale trading is market timing. You may have to roll out of one contract month into
another multiple times before prices begin to move up, and the new contract
may be at a different price level. Undercapitalized trading accounts can experience large drawdowns in equity, and you could be blown out of positions
by not meeting margin calls.

212

FIGURE 12.4

THE TACTICAL TRADER: Tips and Techniques That Work

Oil: Foundation for a scale? (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

OTHER TACTICS AND TECHNIQUES
There is certainly never a guarantee that any trading strategy will produce
substantial, if any, profits, but it is a good idea to understand the techniques
and the methods behind what other traders may be doing.
Here are some other techniques and tactics I have used or observed in
recent years. The amazing thing is they continue to work with relatively little notoriety, meaning not many people discuss these trading tactics. That’s
good because by the time the news is out about them, things will change.
• Utilize the S&P 500 Friday 10:30 a.m. rule. This is a directional time rule.
The trend from 10:30 a.m. until 12 noon will be the trend going into the
close of business on Fridays. My suspicions for the reason behind this
phenomenon is that I believe traders are determined to follow the trend
right into the close of business for the week. Traders don’t want to be
the last one holding the proverbial bag over the weekend. The trend that
starts at 10:30 could be due to Fed time (when the Federal Reserve

Other Tactics and Techniques

213

makes adjustments in the banking system by adding or depleting funds
with its borrowing program) or margin call liquidation time (margin
calls that are not met are discovered when wire transfers are not received). The trend of the day is sometimes reversed from the day session open until 10:30. Sometimes the trend starts out on a strong up
note but then drifts and reverses lower. In any case, the trend that forms
from 10:30 until noon is the trend that continues through the close. Day
traders may want to wait until that time to trade with the established intraday trend. The S&P daily chart (Figure 12.5) illustrates 12 weekly
closes when the market closed darn near the actual low or high of the
daily trading range session. All but two examples are picture perfect.
Those two were holiday trading sessions (July 3 was a Thursday rather
than a Friday trading day because the market was closed on Friday).
• Chart patterns are hard to visualize for some traders. When you are having a hard time interpreting bullish or bearish patterns, turn the chart
around and upside down. You may gain a different perspective that will
enable you to visually identify a particular formation.

Market tends to trend in one direction into
the close on Fridays more times than not.

Thursday July 3rd;
Friday closed for
Fourth of July holiday.

FIGURE 12.5
permission.)

S&P trends on Fridays. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

214

THE TACTICAL TRADER: Tips and Techniques That Work

• Watch your entry prices on stops. Be careful not to place stops at certain levels—for example, 08/32nds, 16/32nds, or 24/32nds in bonds and
10-year notes. These numbers are equal to quarter, half, and three-quarters. You generally want to put your buy stops above these levels and
your sell stops below those levels as those prices can act as support
and resistance on an intraday basis. Grain markets act the same way.
Do not use 0.5 or 1-cent levels for stops. In meats, 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75
act in the same manner.
• Whenever you have a signal that is so strong that you think it can’t fail—
I mean, 10 different indications—and you are so sure the market just
can’t go the opposite way, then use a stop reversal. Odds are if the market looks that good, it probably looks that good to every other trader.
What everyone else knows isn’t worth knowing sometimes. If the market fails and stops you out, then it will fill you on a reversing stop, and
the momentum of the price move could help offset a loss in the original
position.
• Trade in multiple contracts, and get out of half of your positions when
the market gives you a decent profit. That way, if it continues in your
direction, you still have half of your contracts that can participate in the
continuation move. If the market fails, then move your stop to breakeven so you have a chance to break even on the other half of the trade.
Because you booked a profit on the first half, it becomes difficult to lose
money on a winning trade. This strategy requires action to maintain
your position. Buy-and-hold strategies make it hard to build capital in
some markets.
• Compare market analysis and cycle analysis to see if they correspond
with each other. In some economic environments you will see bonds go
up and equity prices decline. Know your markets. This is a great technique, especially when trying to verify a position or strategy that may not
be working out.
• Be aware of first notice day tricks. Brokers often want speculators out
of markets before first notice day, because of the inability of the small
speculator to make or take physical delivery from a financial standpoint.
More times than not, prices move in agriculture markets on the day after
first notice day. Floor and professional traders, realizing that the pie
will be smaller to share once the retail investors are out of the market,
are willing to take the risk of trading a market in a delivery period. Their
secret is that if they are long a market, they “freshen up their entry
dates.” Deliveries are made against positions based on the oldest dates
of those long positions. If you get out of a long position two days before
first notice day and reestablish your position the next morning, your
chances of getting a delivery notice are slim. The exchanges release

Other Tactics and Techniques

215

these dates of notice every morning so traders can gauge how long they
can ride the market without risk of getting a delivery notice. This is not
a tactic for everyone, but if you believe the fundamentals exist for a
supply shortage in the nearby futures contract and prices will carry
higher, then it may help you. Take up this technique with your broker.
These tips and techniques are updated in my advisory service.

CHAPTER 13

Options
A Primer

There is no future in any job. The future lies in
the man who holds the job.
—George Crane

believe George Crane captures the reason why so many people are interested in trading: They want to take control of their own financial destiny. After all, you are your own boss when it comes to trading. You hold
your own future in your hands because you hold your own job as a trader.
You have the opportunity to succeed.
If you are interested in becoming that trader who controls his or her
own destiny but are still concerned about the volatility and risk in futures,
one way to trade that may be more palatable to you is with options, an alternative that might fit your trading style better. If used at certain times,
buying options can be a great and powerful investment tool for any trader.
If you are right about market direction, very few, if any, investments in
a government-regulated trading vehicle can offer the leverage and profitability with limited downside risk that buying options offers. The possibility exists for tremendous gains, especially with the increasingly volatile
market moves.
However, options do have a negative connotation for many investors.
Many industry experts estimate that 80 percent to 90 percent of the time,
options expire worthless. Many individual investors who have traded them
have found that to be true—the hard way, of course. However, if you think
about it, a wrong opinion about market direction will result in a loss any
way you look at it, whether it is in a futures position or an options position.
Some believe that when you are wrong about the market, trading futures is

I

217

218

OPTIONS: A Primer

like a quick death while buying options can be like a slow “bleeding to death”
type of trade due to the time until expiration. But, wrong is wrong, any way
you look at it.
So I think options may have been given a bad rap and abused by traders.
If 80 percent to 90 percent of the options expire worthless and traders lose
their premium money, the answer must be to do the opposite—that is, you
must write or sell options to make money eight out of ten times by selling
option premium. The probabilities seem to be in your favor.
However, there is one glitch when writing options: Your profit potential
is limited and your risk is unlimited. Therefore, options writing usually involves more risk capital, as there are generally margin requirements that
have to be met. It is the two times out of ten when you are wrong that selling options can kill you and wipe away any trading profits.
Of course, no method can be guaranteed to trade profitability. The unpredictability of the markets and the severity of market moves require investors to be more knowledgeable and diverse in their trading techniques
when they trade options. At the very least, though, traders should become
familiar with options.
The key to making money in any investment, first of all, is to be in the
market and to establish a position before the market moves. Timing the entry
or exit is most of the battle; having the right amount of contracts is the rest.
Again, the important element is timing. Being in the market before it moves
and participating with a good balance of instruments relative to your risk
capital is considered establishing a position. In futures and options, that
could be two positions for small traders. For an extremely large trader, it
could mean having a thousand positions. For an investor in options, timing
is one of the key elements in calculating the value of an option. Being in the
market too early will result in an option expiring worthless.
Positioned properly, options can be very helpful in certain situations. In
the following pages, I explain some of the basics of using options on futures,
give examples of different strategies, and demonstrate how options can be
combined with a futures position to act like an insurance policy.

OPTIONS 101
To start, there are two types of options: calls and puts. You can be a buyer
or a seller. The price at which an option is bought or sold is called the
premium.
A buyer or long option holder of a call has the right, but not the obligation, to be long a futures position at a specific price level for a specific period of time. For that right, the buyer of a call pays the premium. A buyer or
long option holder of a put has the right, but not the obligation, to be short

Options 101

219

a futures position at a specific price level for a specific period of time. Again,
for that right, the buyer of a put pays a premium.
For option buyers, the premium is a nonrefundable payment, unlike the
good-faith deposits or performance bonds required for a futures contract.
Premium values are subject to constant changes as dictated by market conditions and other variables.
A seller or option writer of a call or put grants the option buyer the
rights conveyed by that option. The seller receives the premium that has
been paid by the buyer. Sellers have no rights to that specific option except
that they receive the premium for the transaction and are obligated to deliver the futures position if assigned according to the terms of the option. A
seller can cover his or her position by buying back the option or by spreading off the risk in other options or in the underlying futures market if market conditions permit.
A buyer of an option has the right to either offset the long option or to
exercise the option at any time during the life of the option. When a buyer
exercises the option, he or she gets the specific market position (long for
calls and short for puts) in the underlying futures contract at the specific
price level as determined by the strike price. Options are generally exercised
when they are in the money. In fact, in the futures market, if an option settles
in the money at expiration, it will automatically be exercised for the buyer
unless the buyer gives an order to abandon the option. In that case, the option premium will be lost, and the option writer will be released from his or
her obligation to accept the opposite position.
Three major factors determine an option’s value or premium:
1. Time Value. Time value is the difference between the time you enter

the option position and the life the option holds until expiration. An option that has a longer life ahead is worth more than an option that is
soon to expire, other things being equal. The reason why the term
wasting asset refers to an option is because as the option gets closer to
its expiration, it is worth less than it was when it had more time value.
2. Intrinsic Value. Intrinsic value refers to the distance between the strike
price of the option and the price of the underlying futures contract. If
an option’s strike price is closer to the underlying futures contract, it will
be more expensive than an option that is further away from the strike
price. For example, a call option, which gives the buyer the right to be
long the market, will cost more if the strike price is lower or closer to
the actual futures price. The reverse is true for put options. A put option
will be more expensive if the strike price is higher and closer to the actual futures price. If the strike price of a call is above the price of futures
or if a put price is below the price of futures, the options are considered
to be out of the money because neither is worth exercising. When the

220

OPTIONS: A Primer

strike price of a call is below the price of futures or the strike price of
a put is above the price of futures, these options are in the money. A
5.00 soybean call is out of the money when the futures price is $4.45, for
example, but a 5.00 put would be considered in the money.
3. Volatility Rate. Volatility is based on price fluctuations in the activity
