
The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

61

all ties in with a sequence of numbers called the Fibonacci series and
the golden ratio phi, which does have many fascinating mathematical
properties. 66
However, that which purports to explain everything explains nothing.
The Elliott Wave Principle, as popularly practiced, is not a legitimate theory but a story, and a compelling one that is eloquently told by Robert
Prechter. 67 The account is especially persuasive because EWP has the
seemingly remarkable ability to fit any segment of market history down to
its most minute fluctuations. I contend this is made possible by the
method's loosely defined rules and the ability to postulate a large number
of nested waves of varying magnitude. This gives the Elliott analyst the
same freedom and flexibility that allowed pre-Copernican astronomers to
explain all observed planet movements even though their underlying theory of an Earth-centered universe was wrong. The analogy between the
medieval astronomer fitting epicycle upon epicycle to their data and EWP
analysts fitting wave within nested wave to market data is strong. Thus,
even if the fundamental notion of EWP is wrong, the method of analysis
will still be able to obtain a very good fit to past data. 68
In fact, any sufficiently flexible model can fit a prior set of observations with perfection. For example, a polynomial function with a sufficient
number of terms (equal in number to the number of data points) can also
produce a perfect retrofit. However, a model or method with an unlimited
ability to fit past observations but which cannot make testable (falsifiable 69) predictions of future observations is neither meaningful nor useful.
Though the Elliott Wave Principle is said to hold even the heavens,
where galaxies conform to the logarithmic spiral, its performance here on
earth has been less than stellar. 7o What then, explains its enduring appeal?
I contend that it is attributable to the fact that EWP is a comprehensive
cause-effect story that promises to decipher the market's past and divine
its future better than any other TA method. Some stories are too good to
let die.
Stories Shaped by Self-Interest

Self-interest can motivate distortion in secondhand accounts. People with
an ideological or theoretical position tend to selectively sharpen some aspects of a story and minimize others to bring it into better alignment with
their point of view. Purveyors of specific TA methods or of TA in general
have clear ideological and financial interests at stake.
This charge can be leveled at me 71 or any author arguing a position.
However, when the storyteller is constrained by objective evidence and
repeatable procedures, there is less leeway for the distorting effects of
self-interest to operate.

62

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

CONFIRMATION BIAS: HOW EXISTING BELIEFS FILTER
EXPERIENCE AND SURVIVE CONTRADICTING EVIDE CE
"Once a belief forms, we filter information in ways that sustain it."72 The
confirmation bias is the tendency to view as credible new evidence that
confirms our prior beliefs but to view as incredible evidence that contradicts them. 73 This tendency inhibits learning from new experience and
stifles the elimination of incorrect ideas. The confirmation bias explains
why we get stuck with erroneous beliefs.
The Confirmation Bias Has a Rational Basis

In many instances it is rational to give weight and preference to evidence
that supports an existing belief and to view with skepticism that which
contradicts it. Beliefs would be highly unstable without such a rule.
The use of prior knowledge as an interpretive filter is a mark of human intelligence, so long as the prior knowledge is well supported. Scientists were justifiably skeptical of a claim that nuclear fusion had been
achieved at room temperatures in an apparatus constructed from parts
available at the local hardware store. 74 Their doubts were subsequently
borne out by objective tests that were unable to reproduce the so-called
cold-fusion effect. Few of us would accept at face value the supermarkettabloid headline: "Elvis Returns on UFO & Will Build an Alien Theme
Park." However, when prior beliefs are unjustified because they lack the
support of sound inferences from solid evidence, it is not rational to grant
them the status of intellectual gatekeeper. The problem is that people are
often not aware of which of their held beliefs are unjustified. Consequently, the confirmation bias operates even when it should not.
Biased Perception
The confirmation bias is a consequence of the way perception works. Beliefs shape expectations, which in tum shape perceptions, which then
shape conclusions. Thus we see what we expect to see and conclude what
we expect to conclude. As Henry David Thoreau put it, "We hear and apprehend only what we already half knOw." The truism, I'll believe it when
I see it might be better stated I'll see it when I believe it.
The potent effect of expectations on perception was demonstrated in
the following experiment. When subjects were given a drink that they
thought contained alcohol, but in fact did not, they experienced reduced
social anxiety. However, other subjects who were told they were being
given nonalcoholic beverages when they were, in fact, alcoholic did not
experience reduced anxiety in social situations. 75

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

63

Not only do we fail to perceive new information that is in conflict with
prior beliefs, we are also reluctant to draw conclusions that are at odds
with what we already believe to be so. As a result we tend to accept at
face value information that is consistent with pre-existing thinking while
we critically scrutinize and discount information that is inconsistent with
prior beliefs. The confirmation bias explains why our beliefs fail to change
in response to new information as much as they should. 76
It gets worse. The confirmation bias, operating in conjunction with
the laws of chance, predicts that erroneous beliefs will strengthen with
time and familiarity.77 A TA method with no predictive power (e.g., a signal
based on a coin flip) will enjoy occasional success due to chance. Over
time, these confirming instances will accumulate and, because of the confirmation bias, will be given greater weight than instances where the
method fails. The result is a vicious cycle of growing self-deception. This
suggests that the belief in a flawed method's efficacy will increase over
time irrespective of its actual merit. It also implies that TA practitioners
most experienced with a useless method will be the least able to recognize its flaws because of more lengthy exposure to the method's chancebased successes.
Motivational Factors

The confirmation bias is also driven by motivational factors. TA practitioners have a large emotional and financial investment in their favored
method. This is especially true of practitioners whose professional lives
are tied to a particular method.
There is also a strong motive to maintain consistency within our system beliefs and attitudes. The theory of cognitive dissonance formulated
by Festinger78 contends that people are motivated to reduce or avoid psychological inconsistencies. 79 The discomfort provoked by evidence that
contradicts what we believe makes it hard to digest such evidence.
Biased Questions and Search

The confirmation bias also slants the way questions are framed, thereby
biasing the search for new evidence. This search bias increases the
chance of encountering new evidence that supports the prior belief
while reducing the possibility of encountering nonconfirming or contradictory facts. This occurs in the context of subjective TA research. By
definition, it is confined to the search for supportive anecdotal examples. Contradictory examples are difficult, if not impossible, to find because subjectively defined patterns do not specify the conditions of a
prediction error.

64

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

People trained in the scientific method do two things to combat this
tendency. First, at the inception of a test, they establish objective criteria
for evaluating outcomes. Second, they actively pursue evidence that might
contradict prior beliefs and assumptions. Scientists are guided by the notion that ideas that can survive a vigorous search for contradictory evidence have greater validity than ideas that are merely backed by
confirmatory evidence discovered by a search directed at exactly that.
The confirmation bias can occur in the context of objective TA as
well. Consider an analyst searching for profitable rules with back testing.
If the first rule that is tested gives unsatisfactory performance, the search
for a rule with good performance continues. This involves testing a sequence of rules with altered parameters, logic, indicators, and so forth until a good one is found. This is data mining. Because the decision about
when to end this process is entirely up to the analyst, the scope of the
search is unbounded. This guarantees that ultimately a rule with good
past performance will be discovered. The researcher's initial belief that a
good rule will be found is thus confirmed.
In fact, the past performance of a rule discovered by data mining overstates its likely performance in the future. This overstatement is called the
data-mining bias and is discussed in Chapter 6. This problem is not data
mining per se. In fact, when done properly, data mining is a productive research method. The error is the failure to take into account the upward
bias caused by data mining. As will be explained in Chapter 6, by taking
into account the extent of the search that led to the discovery of the good
rule, it is possible to draw sound inferences about the rule's future profit
potential.

How Vague Evaluation Criteria Contribute
to the Confirmation Bias
Because subjective TA is vague about how its forecasts should be evaluated, evidence of its success and failure is ambiguous. This facilitates the
analyst's ability to point to prior predictions that worked (confirmation
bias) while at the same time preventing the identification of prediction errors. This effectively immunizes subjective practitioners from the negative feedback that might cause them to change their beliefs. so
Prediction errors of a subjective method can be obscured in a number
of ways. One is what I refer to as pattern renaming. An upside breakout
pattern that fails is relabeled a successful bull trap. According to TA doctrine, upside breakouts are alleged to predict upward trends. This is illustrated in Figure 2.12.
When an uptrend does not materialize it should be counted as a prediction error. If instead, the pattern is renamed a bull trap,S1 we wind up

65

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

Price
Predicted
Outcome

••

Breakout Signal

'\.

•

•

• ••••
••
••
•
••
•
• ••
••
•

Actual
Outcome

Time
FIGURE 2. J 2

Breakout failure.

with a successful signal from a different pattern as shown in Figure 2.13.
Objective pattern definitions and clearly predefined evaluation criteria
would prevent such after-the-fact evidence fiddling.
Another way prediction errors are obscured is when forecasts lack a
clear endpoint. The endpoint of prediction is a future time or event that
calls for the prediction to be evaluated.. A forecast or signal that does
Price
Successful
Bull-Trap
Signal

Time
FIGURE 2.13 Prediction error obscured with pattern renaming.

66

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

specify or imply a clear endpoint is effectively meaningless. The talking
heads of TA typically issue predictions without clear endpoints: "I'm bullish for the intermediate-term." This vague pronouncement provides the
forecaster with enough postprediction wiggle room to avoid getting nailed
with a bad call. Either a defined time period or a specific subsequent
event, such as a certain percentage of adverse price movement, prevents
the forecaster from engaging in an after-the-fact, free-for-all hunt for any
evidence that portrays the forecast in a good light. However, the statement "I expect the market to advance at least 5 percent from current levels before it declines 5 percent" leaves no room for fudging. Objective
signaling methods imply a clear endpoint-the subsequent signal to exit
the position.
The freedom to alter the forecast evaluation criterion after the fact
makes it likely that supportive evidence will be found. This is precisely
why science has a dual personality. It is flexible and receptive to all
testable ideas, yet rigidly orthodox about how testing and evaluation are
to be carried out. In fact, much of what scientists do can be understood as
the use of strict procedures for determining when an idea is wortWess. If
people were to use similar procedures in their everyday lives, they would
be much less likely to adopt erroneous beliefs. 82 People are highly adept at
concocting ideas, theories, and explanations for their experience that
have a semblance of plausibility.83 However, they are not nearly as good at
testing those beliefs once they have taken root. One of the biggest reasons
is the failure to precisely define which outcomes qualify as supportive evidence and which do not. Without objective evaluation criteria, the opportunity and motivation to find supportive evidence for what we already
believe is left unchecked and runs rampant.

The Confirmation Bias and Vague Evidence
The precise way in which the confirmation bias functions to substantiate
prior beliefs depends upon the clarity of the new evidence. When the new
evidence is vague, the confirmation bias operates unfettered. Because
vague evidence can be interpreted as either contradictory or supportive, it
is simply taken as supportive.
Subjective TA methods are vague on two counts: with respect to how
patterns and signals are defined, and with respect to how predictions
based on said patterns and signals are to be evaluated. This invites the discovery of evidence that is weakly supportive. Weak evidence is not strong
enough to compel the belief that the method works, but because weak evidence is open to interpretation, it can be interpreted as being consistent
with a belief that the method works. The hallmark of weak evidence is
that it can be interpreted as being consistent with several different points

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

67

of view. For example, the appearance of a certain portion of a price chart
could be consistent with a five-wave Elliott impulse pattern, or an entirely
different subjective pattern, or purely random price movement. 84 Objectively defined patterns and evaluation criteria permit no such leeway. Either the data is an example of a particular pattern or it is not. Either the
outcome is consistent with the pattern's prediction or it is not.
The Confirmation Bias and Clearly
Contradictory Evidence

Let's now consider how the confirmation bias operates when there is evidence that clearly contradicts a prior belief. In many situations, the evidence is a mixture. Some evidence clearly confirms the belief and some
clearly contradicts it. In these situations the confirmation bias still operates, but in a more complex manner.
It might be thought that the dissonant evidence would simply be ignored or twisted into being supportive. But, this tends not to happen because people value seeing themselves as rational and cognitively
consistent. "They are reluctant to simply disregard pertinent evidence that
is contradictory in order to see what they expect to see and believe what
they expect to believe."85 However, what they do is to alter the dissonant
information in order to reduce its conflict with prior cherished beliefs. In
other words, the confirmation bias encourages subtle cognitive manipulations to the clearly dissonant evidence to reduce its importance and reduce its clash with confirming evidence and cherished belief.
One way people discount discordant evidence is by applying a
harsher standard of acceptance. 86 The standard applied to evidence that
supports a favored position is the gentle requirement that it have a ring of
plausibility or the possibility of being valid. In contrast, the standard applied to evidence that conflicts with cherished beliefs is that it must be
convincing beyond any possible doubt. For believers in faith healing, a
colorful corroborating account is accepted without question. However, a
controlled scientific study denying the efficacy of faith healing would be
faulted on any and every possible ground, reasonable or otherwise. By demanding that dissonant evidence be so strong that it be compelling beyond any doubt, while only requiring that harmonious evidence be weakly
consistent, holders of erroneous beliefs are able to keep their faith alive.
One of the most surprising findings about the confirmation bias is that
evidence that contradicts a prior belief can actually have the effect of
strengthening that belief. One would think that a mixture of pro and con
evidence should at least reduce the strength of the prior belief. Studies
have shown otherwise. For example, in one experiment, subjects were
presented with clear and convincing evidence that was both pro and con

68

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

capital punishment. 87 The subjects were of two types: those with a prior
belief that capital punishment was good and those with a prior belief that
capital punishment was bad. Both groups were given summaries and critiques to two different studies on capital punishment. One study presented evidence showing that capital punishment was an effective
deterrent against crime while the other provided evidence showing it was
not effective. 88 The experiment showed that participants perceived the
study that was consistent with their prior belief to be valid and important
evidence, whereas the study that conflicted with their view was seen as
flawed research and weak evidence. After being exposed to evidence on
both sides of the issue, participants came away from the experiment with
their prior beliefs strengthened. In other words a mixture of pro and con
evidence caused the two groups to become more polarized.
It is also informative to consider what subjects in the study did not do.
Hostile evidence was neither misconstrued to be favorable nor ignored.
Rather, it was scrutinized for flaws, thus reducing its import. In other
words, significant cognitive effort was expended to explain away or minimize contradictory evidence. 89
An experiment that is closer to TA examined how the confirmation
bias encouraged unsuccessful bettors to maintain their delusions of
gambling greatness despite swelling losses. Losing money would seem
to be unambiguous evidence of failure, yet bad gamblers remained optimistic. Thomas Gilovich showed they accomplished this by evaluating
their wins and losses in a biased manner. 90 As was true for subjects in
the study on capital punishment, the gamblers did not forget or ignore
discordant evidence (losses). Rather, they applied significant cognitive
effort to transform their losses into less derogatory evidence. This was
displayed in journals kept by the gamblers. It was found that they devoted more commentary to losses than gains, and gains and loses were
interpreted differently. Gains were easily attributed to the gambler's betting acumen (self-attribution bias) whereas losses were attributed to
bad luck and, with a bit of fine tuning to the betting system, would have
been wins.
These findings predict how subjective TA practitioners might react if
presented with objective evidence contradicting the validity of a favored
method. 91 For example, suppose a subjective method was to be transformed into an objective method, and tests indicated the method was not
effective. It is likely that devotes of the method would find any number of
grounds to criticize the study. There is no study in any field of science that
cannot be criticized on some grounds. It is also likely that the subjective
practitioner would trot out cherry-picked examples showing instances
where their method was successful. In the end, it is probable that the
practitioners would come away from the exercise more convinced than

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

69

ever in the value of their method while muttering about ivory-tower academics having their heads stuck in the clouds or somewhere worse.
Beyond the Confirmation Bias: The True Believer
We have seen that erroneous beliefs thrive on vagueness and can even
grow stronger in the face of evidence that would, at the very least, call for
reduced belief. However, belief longevity goes beyond even this. Studies
have shown that once a belief takes root, it can even survive a complete
discrediting of the evidence that gave rise to the belief in the first place.
It has been demonstrated that, when subjects are tricked into forming
an erroneous belief, their belief survives even after they are told that they
had been tricked. One study is particularly relevant to TA because it involves pattern discrimination. Subjects were asked to distinguish authentic suicide notes from fictitious ones. 92 Initially, experimenters gave the
subjects fake feedback, thus deceiving them into believing that they had
learned to discriminate authentic suicide notes from fakes. In reality, the
subjects had not leamed how to perform this task. Later, the experimenters told the subjects of the deceit. Even with such clear discrediting
evidence, the subjects continued to believe, to a considerable degree, that
they were able to discriminate real from fake suicide notes. Other experiments conducted along similar lines have found the same effect: a belief
can survive a total discrediting of its original basis. 93
These findings predict how believers might react if Ralph Elliott, W.D.
Gann, or Charles Dow were to return from the grave and announce that
their methods had been intentional scams. It is likely that many currentday practitioners would continue to believe. Given that Elliott wave analysis, or at least one version of it, has now been reduced to an objective
algorithm, it will be interesting to see the reactions of EWP believers if objective tests fail. 94
Subjective Methods Most Likely to Suffer
the Confirmation Bias
Some subjective TA methods are more likely to encourage the confirmation bias than others. These methods will possess three characteristics:
(1) an elaborate causal explanation or compelling story about why the
method works, (2) high retrofit power-the ability to fit or explain past
market behavior accurately, and (3) no ability to generate falsifiable
(testable) predictions.
TA methods fitting this profile include Elliott waves, Hurst cycle theory, astrology-based forecasting, and W.D. Gann analysis, among others.
For example, the Elliott Wave Principle is based on an elaborate causal
