6!:')

Wiley Trading

Praise for EVIDENCE-BASED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
"In clear language, Aronson demonstrates the theoretical flaws in interpretative technical analysis methodologies, the flawed premises and conclusions of the Efficient Market
Hypothesis, and the appropriate techniques for developing and testing technical analysis
methods that do have validity. Readers will learn a lot from this book."
-Jack Schwager, author of Marlcet Wizards and the Schwager on Futures book series

"Aronson's explanation of data mining is a must-read for every analyst, and his overall
discussion of statistical inference is critical to success. The book is filled with commonsense examples and provides a testing and validation process that saves time, frustration, and money."
- Perry Kaufman, author of New Trading Systems and Methods, Fourth Edition

"This book debunks many of the myths of technical analysis. One should read this book
before buying a technical system. The book is a good reference to the literature on the
subject with extensive footnotes and bibliography."
-Sandor Straus, Managing Member, Merfin, LLC

"You may not agree with everything David Aronson says in this controversial, but compelling new study. Still, every trader who wants to invest technical analysis with the
dignity of a great science should read this discerning account."
- Nelson Freeburg, Editor, Fonnula Research

"There is an emerging trend in the technical analysis community toward a new, more
rigorous type of analysis that utilizes the scientific process and depends on statistical
testing to gauge the quality of one's results. Just as quantitative analysts have long
used the tools of technical analysis, market technicians are taking up the quant's tools.
Evidence-Based Technical Analysis is a welcome milestone on a road that leads toward
a better, more dependable type of analysis."
-John Bollinger, CFA, CMT, BollingerBands.com

"There are illusions of the mind that are every bit as real as optical illusions. Aronson's
criticisms of popular forms of technical analysis are right on target."
- Fred Gehm, author of Quantitative Trading and Money Management

.'C."'T."""AL

ISBN 0-470-00874-1
59500

~1807~
= 6!JWILEY:

~.'~'~T~.~.J

9 780470 008744

$95.00 USA/$113.99 CAN/£65.00 UK

s an approach to research, technical analysis has suffered because it is a "discipline"
practiced without discipline. In order for
technical analysis to deliver useful knowledge
that can be applied to trading, it must evolve
into a rigorous observational science.
Over the past two decades, numerous articles
in respected academic journals have approached
technical analysis in a scientifically rigorous
and intellectually honest manner, and now,
Evidence-Based Technical Analysis looks to
continue down this path. Organized into two
parts, this valuable resource first establishes the
methodological, philosophical, and statistical
foundations of eVidenced-based technical
analysis (EBTAl, and then demonstrates this
approach-by using twenty-five years of historical
data to test 6,400 binary buy/sell rules on the
S&P 500.
Evidence-Based Technical Analysis examines
how you can apply the scientific method, and
recently developed statistical tests, to determine the true effectiveness of technical trading
signals. Throughout these pages, expert David
Aronson details this new type of technical analysis that-unlike traditional technical analysisis restricted to objective rules, whose historical
profitability can be quantified and scrutinized
Filled with in-depth insights and practical advice,
Evidence-Based Technical Analysis provides
you with comprehensive coverage of this new
methodology, which is specifically designed for
evaluating the performance of rules/signals that
are discovered by data mining. Experimental
results presented in the book will show
you that data mining-a process in which
many rules are back-tested and the best
performing rules are selected-is an effective
( continued on back flap)

( continued from front flap)

procedure for discovering useful rules/signals.
However, since the historical performance
of the rules/signals discovered by data mining are upwardly biased, new statistical tests
are required to make reasonable inferences
about future profitability. Two such tests, one
of which has never been discussed anywhere
heretofore, are described and illustrated.
If you want to use technical analysis to navigate
today's markets, you must first abandon the
subjective, interpretive methods traditionally
associated with this discipline, and embrace
an approach that is scientifically and statistically valid. Grounded in objective observation
and statistical inference, EBTA is the approach
to technical analysis you need to succeed in
your trading endeavors.

DAVID ARONSON is an adjunct professor at
Baruch College, where he teaches a graduatelevel course in technical analysis He is also
a Chartered Market Technician and has published articles on technical analysis. Previously,
Aronson was a proprietary trader and technical
analyst for Spear Leeds & Kellogg. He founded
Raden Research Group, a firm that was an early
adopter of data mining within financial markets.
Prior to that, Aronson founded AdvoCom, a firm
that specialized in the evaluation of commodity
money managers and hedge funds, their
performance, and trading methods. For free
access to the algorithm for testing data mined
rules, go to www.evidencebasedta.com.

Jacket Design: Pro-Art Graphic Design

Subscribe to our free Finance and Investing eNewsletter at
www.wiley.comJenewsletters

IVisit www.wileyfinance.com I

G)WILEY
wiley.com

Evidence-Based
Technical
Analysis

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Australia and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing
print and electronic products and services for our customers' professional
and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market's ever changing temperament and have prospered-some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
trader, professional or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, please visit our Web site at www.Wiley
Finance.com.

Evidence-Based
Technical
Analysis
Applying the Scientific
Method and
Statistical Inference
to Trading Signals

DAVID R. ARONSON

.ICItNTCHNIAL
J

•

;1807:

~~WILEY :z

z

.

~2007;

,

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2007 by David R. Aronson. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108
of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., III River
Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of LiabilitylDisclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness
for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable
for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical
support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States
at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content
that appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more
information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Aronson, David R., 1945Evidence-based technical analysis: applying the scientific method and
statistical inference to trading signals / David R. Aronson.
p. cm.-(Wiley trading series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-470-00874-4 (cloth)
ISBN-I0: 0-470-00874-1 (cloth)
1. Investment analysis. 1. Title. II. Series.
HG4529.A77 2007
332.63'2042-dc22
2006014664
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8

7 6 5 4 3 2

To Jack and Belma

Contents

Acknowledgments

Ix

About the Author

xi

Introduction

1

PART I

Methodological, Psychological,
Philosophical, and Statistical
Foundations

CHAPTER'

Oblective Rules and Their Evaluation

15

CHAPTER 2

The Illusory Validity of Sublective
Technical Analysis

33

The ScientiOc Method and Technical
Analysis

103

CllAP'rER 4

Statistical Analysis

165

CHAPTER 5

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

217

CHAP1'ER 6

Data-Minin8 Bias: The Fool's Gold
of Oblective 11\

255

CHAPTER 7

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

331

PART II

Case Study: Signal Rules
fol' the S&P 500 Index

CIIAPTER 8

Case Study of Rule Data Minin8
for the S&P 500

389

Case Study Results and the Future of 11\

441

CHAPTER 3

CIIJ\P1'ER 9

vii

CONTENTS

viii
APPENDIX

Proof That Detrending Is Equivalent to
Benchmarking Based on Position Bias

475

Notes

477

Index

517

Acknowledgments

hough a book is attributed to its author(s), it truly reflects the efforts
of many more people. I wish to acknowledge those individuals
without whom this book would have been impossible or a much
lesser work.
I am most indebted to Dr. Timothy Masters, whom I have had the pleasure of knowing for over 10 years. His patient and intelligent guidance
kept me on a solid statistical footing. Tim not only gave me important feedback on technical issues but was responsible for coding and running the
ATR rule experiments and the statistical routines used to test the over
6,400 rules examined. Tim also innovated the Monte Carlo permutation
method as an alterative to the patented method of White, called RealityCheck, for testing the statistical significance of rules discovered by data
mining. Tim has graciously decided to put the method in the public domain
and has allowed it to be published for the first time here.
Also crucial were the programming talents of Stuart Okorofsky and
the database creation by Dr. John Wolberg. I am indebted Dr. Halbert
White, inventor of Reality-Check and for the help of Professor David
Jensen, director of the Knowledge Discovery Lab at the University of
Massachusetts-Amherst.
I also wish to express my appreciation to the following people for reviewing and commenting on various chapters. Their feedback was essential: Charles Neumann, Lance Rembar, Dr. Samuel Aronson, Dennis Katz,
Hayes Martin, George Butler, Dr. John Wolberg, Jay Bono, Dr. Andre Shlefier, Dr. John Nofsinger, Doyle Delaney, Ken Byerly, James Kunstler, and
Kenny Rome.
Special thanks to the helpful folks at John Wiley & Sons: Kevin Commins, for seeing the value of a critical appraisal of technical analysis, and
Emilie Herman, for her steady hand in editing the book. Thanks as well to
Michael Lisk and Laura Walsh.

T

ix

About the Author

David Aronson is an adjunct professor of finance at Baruch College's Zicklin School of Business in New York, where he teaches a graduate-level
course in technical analysis to MBA and financial-engineering students,
and vice-president of Hood River Research Inc., a firm that develops signal
filters and predictive models. He was formerly a proprietary trader and
technical analyst at Spear, Leeds and Kellogg and president of Raden Research Group Inc., a consulting firm that developed the data-mining software PRISM and filters and systems for various trading firms. Prior to that,
he founded AdvoCom Corporation, which managed client funds in portfolios of futures trading advisors using portfolio optimization. He received a
BA in philosophy from Lafayette College in 1967 and served in the Peace
Corps in El Salvador.

xi

Introduction

echnical analysis (TA) is the study of recurring patterns in financial
market data with the intent of forecasting future price movements. I
It is comprised of numerous analysis methods, patterns, signals, indicators, and trading strategies, each with its own cheerleaders claiming
that their approach works.
Much of popular or traditional TA stands where medicine stood before
it evolved from a faith-based folk art into a practice based on science. Its
claims are supported by colorful narratives and carefully chosen (cherry
picked) anecdotes rather than objective statistical evidence.
This book's central contention is that TA must evolve into a rigorous
observational science if it is to deliver on its claims and remain relevant.
The scientific method is the only rational way to extract useful knowledge
from market data and the only rational approach for determining which
TA methods have predictive power. I call this evidence-based technical
analysis (EBTA). Grounded in objective observation and statistical inference (Le., the scientific method), EBTA charts a course between the magical thinking and gullibility of a true believer and the relentless doubt of a
random walker.
Approaching TA, or any discipline for that matter, in a scientific manner is not easy. Scientific conclusions frequently conflict with what seems
intuitively obvious. To early humans it seemed obvious that the sun circled the earth. It took science to demonstrate that this intuition was
wrong. An informal, intuitive approach to knowledge acquisition is especially likely to result in erroneous beliefs when phenomena are complex
or highly random, two prominent features of financial market behavior.
Although the scientific method is not guaranteed to extract gold from the
mountains of market data, an unscientific approach is almost certain to
produce fool's gold.
This book's second contention is that much of the wisdom comprising
the popular version of TA does not qualify as legitimate knowledge.

T

1

2

INTRODUCTION

KEV DEFIMTIONS: PROPOSITIONS AND ClAIMS,
BELIEF AND KNOWLEDGE
I have already used the terms knowledge and belief but have not rigorously defined them. These and several other key terms will be used repeatedly in this book, so some formal definitions are needed.
The fundamental building block of knowledge is a declarative statement, also known as a claim or a proposition. A declarative statement is
one of four types of utterances that also include exclamations, questions,
and commands. Declarative statements are distinguished from the others
in that they have truth value. That is to say, they can be characterized as
either true or false or probably true or probably false.
The statement "Oranges are on sale at the supermarket for five cents a
dozen" is declarative. It makes a claim about a state of affairs existing at
the local market. It may be true or false. In contrast, the exclamatory
statement "Holy cow, what a deal," the command "Go buy me a dozen," or
the question "What is an orange?" cannot be called true or false.
Our inquiry into TA will be concerned with declarative statements,
such as, "Rule X has predictive power." Our goal is to determine which of
these declarative statements warrant our belief.
What does it mean to say, "I believe X."? "With regard to states of affairs in general (i.e., 'matters of fact' or 'what will happen') believing X
amounts to expecting to experience X if and when we are in a position to
do SO."2 Therefore, if I believe the claim that oranges are on sale for five
cents a dozen, it means that I expect to be able to buy oranges for five
cents a dozen if I go to the store. However, the command to buy some oranges or the exclamation that I am happy about the opportunity, set up no
such expectation.
What does all this all means for us? For any statement to even be considered as a candidate for belief, it must "assert some state of affairs that
can be expected. 3 Such statements are said to have cognitive contentthey convey something that can be known. "If the statement contains
nothing to know then there is nothing there to be believe."4
Although all declarative statements presumably have cognitive content, not all actually do. This is not a problem if the lack of cognitive
content is obvious, for example, the declaration "The square root of
Tuesday is a prime number."5 This utterance is, on its face, nonsense.
There are other declarative statements, however, whose lack of cognitive content is not so obvious. This can be a problem, because such
statements can fool us into thinking that a claim has been made that
sets up an expectation, when, in fact, no claim has really been put forward. These pseudo-declarative-statements are essentially meaningless
claims or empty propositions.

Introduction

3

Although meaningless claims are not valid candidates for belief, this
does not stop many people from believing in them. The vague predictions
made in the daily astrology column or the nebulous promises made by
promoters of bogus health cures are examples of meaningless claims.
Those who believe these empty propositions simply do not realize that
what they have been told has no cognitive content.
A way to tell if a statement has cognitive content and is, thus, a valid
candidate for belief is the discernible-difference test6 described by Hall.
"Utterances with cognitive content make claims that are either true or
false; and whether they are true or false makes a difference that can be
discerned. That is why these utterances offer something to believe and
why there is no point in trying to believe an utterance that makes no such
offer"7 In other words, a proposition that passes the discernible-difference
test sets up an expectation such that the state of affairs, if the statement
were true, is recognizably different from the state of affairs, if the statement were false.
The discernible-difference criterion can be applied to statements purporting to be predictions. A prediction is a claim to know something about
the future. If a prediction has cognitive content, it will be clearly discernible in the outcome if the prediction was accurate or not. Many, if not
most, of the forecasts issued by practitioners of popular TA are devoid of
cognitive content on these grounds. In other words, the predictions are
typically too vague to ever determine if they were wrong.
The truth or falsity of the claim oranges are on sale for five cents a
dozen will make a discernible difference when I get to the market. It is
this discernible difference that allows the claim to be tested. As will be described in Chapter 3, testing a claim on the basis of a discernible difference is central to the scientific method.
Hall, in his book Practically Profound, explains why he finds
Freudian psychoanalysis to be meaningless when examined in light of the
discernible-difference test.
"Certain Freudian claims about human sexual development are compatible with all possible states of affairs. There is no way to confirm or disconfirm either 'penis envy' or 'castration complex' because there is no
distinguishable difference between evidence affirming and evidence denying these interpretations of behavior. Exactly opposite behaviors are
equally predictable, depending on whether the alleged psychosexual
stress is overt or repressed." The requirement of "cognitive content rules
out all utterances that are so loose, poorly formed or obsessively held
(e.g., conspiracy theories) that there is no recognizable difference between what would be the case if they were so, and what would be the case
if they were not."8 In a like vein, the Intelligent Design Theory carries no
cognitive freight in the sense that no matter what life form is observed it is

INTRODUCTION

consistent with the notion that it manifests an underlying form specified
by some intelligent designer. 9
What then is knowledge? Knowledge can be defined asjustijied true
belief Hence, in order for a declarative statement to qualify as knowledge, not only must it be a candidate for belief, because it has cognitive
content, but it must meet two other conditions as well. First, it must be
true (or probably true). Second, the statement must be believed with justification. A belief is justified when it is based on sound inferences from
solid evidence.
Prehistoric humans held the false belief that the sun moved across
the sky because the sun orbited the earth. Clearly they were not in possession of knowledge, but suppose that there was a prehistoric person
who believed correctly that the sun moved across the sky because of
the earth's rotation. Although this belief was true, this individual could
not be described as possessing knowledge. Even though they believed
what astronomers ultimately proved to be true, there was no evidence
yet to justify that belief. Without justification, a true belief does
not attain the status of knowledge. These concepts are illustrated in
Figure 1.1.

~\\ Statements
Empty Claims

FIGURE I. t

Knowledge: justified true belief.

Introduction

5

From this it follows that erroneous beliefs or false knowledge fail to
meet one or more of the necessary conditions of knowledge. Thus, an erroneous belief can arise either because it concerns a meaningless claim or
because it concerns a claim that, though meaningful, is not justified by
valid inferences from solid evidence.
Still, even when we have done everything right, by drawing the best
possible inference from sound evidence, we can still wind up adopting
erroneous beliefs. In other words, we can be justified in believing a
falsehood, and honestly claim to know something, if it appears to be
true according to logically sound inferences from the preponderance of
available evidence. "We are entitled to say 'I know' when the target
of that claim is supported beyond reasonable doubt in the network
of well-tested evidence. But that is not enough to guarantee that we
do know."lo
Falsehoods are an unavoidable fact of life when we attempt to know
things about the world based on observed evidence. Thus, knowledge
based on the scientific method is inherently uncertain, and provisional,
though less uncertain than knowledge acquired by less formal methods.
However, over time, scientific knowledge improves, as it comes to describe reality in a progressively more accurate manner. It is a continual
work in progress. The goal of EBTA is a body of knowledge about market
behavior that is as good as can be had, given the limits of evidence gathering and the powers of inference.
