
although they were not bold enough to deny its existence altogether. Between them and
the believers in the old doctrine fierce arguments ensued, and the sceptics were
designated Sadducees. To convince them, the learned and Reverend Joseph Glanvil wrote
his well-known work, "Sadducismus Triumphatus," and "The Collection of Relations;"
the first part intended as a philosophical inquiry into witchcraft, and the power of the
devil "to assume a mortal shape;" the latter containing what he considered a multitude of
well-authenticated modern instances.
But though progress was made, it was slow. In 1664, the venerable Sir Matthew Hale
condemned two women, named Amy Duny and Rose Cullender, to the stake at St.
Edmondsbury, upon evidence the most ridiculous. These two old women, whose ugliness
gave their neighbours the first idea that they were witches, went to a shop to purchase
herrings, and were refused. Indignant at the prejudice against them, they were not sparing
of their abuse. Shortly afterward, the daughter of the herring-dealer fell sick, and a cry
was raised that she was bewitched by the old women who had been refused the herrings.
This girl was subject to epileptic fits. To discover the guilt of Amy Duny and Rose
Cullender, the girl's eyes were blinded closely with a shawl, and the witches were
commanded to touch her. They did so, and she was immediately seized with a fit. Upon
this evidence they were sent to prison. The girl was afterwards touched by an indifferent
person, and the force of her imagination was so great, that, thinking it was again the
witches, she fell down in a violent fit as before. This, however, was not received in
favour of the accused.
The following extract, from the published reports of the trial, will show the sort of
evidence which was received:-"Samuel Pacey, of Leystoff, (a good, sober man,) being sworn, said that, on Thursday the
10th of October last, his younger daughter, Deborah, about nine years old, was suddenly
taken so lame that she could not stand on her legs, and so continued till the 17th of the
same month, when the child desired to be carried to a bank on the east side of the house,
looking towards the sea; and, while she was sitting there, Amy Duny came to this
examinant's house to buy some herrings, but was denied. Then she came twice more, but,
being as often denied, she went away discontented and grumbling. At this instant of time,
the child was taken with terrible fits, complaining of a pain in her stomach, as if she was
pricked with pins, shrieking out with a voice like a whelp, and thus continued till the 30th
of the same month. This examinant further saith, that Amy Duny, having long had the
reputation of a witch, and his child having, in the intervals of her fits, constantly cried out
on her, as the cause of her disorder, saying, that the said Amy did appear to her and fright
her, he himself did suspect the said Amy to be a witch, and charged her with being the
cause of his child's illness, and set her in the stocks. Two days after, his daughter
Elizabeth was taken with such strange fits, that they could not force open her mouth
without a tap; and the younger child being in the same condition, they used to her the
same remedy. Both children grievously complained that Amy Duny and another woman,
whose habit and looks they described, did appear to them, and torment them, and would
cry out, 'There stands Amy Duny! There stands Rose Cullender!' the other person who
afflicted them. Their fits were not alike. Sometimes they were lame on the right side;

sometimes on the left; and sometimes so sore, that they could not bear to be touched.
Sometimes they were perfectly well in other respects, but they could not hear; at other
times, they could not see. Sometimes they lost their speech for one, two, and once for
eight, days together. At times they had swooning fits, and, when they could speak, were
taken with a fit of coughing, and vomited phlegm and crooked pins; and once a great
twopenny nail, with above forty pins; which nail he, the examinant, saw vomited up, with
many of the pins. The nail and pins were produced in the court. Thus the children
continued for two months, during which time the examinant often made them read in the
New Testament, and observed, when they came to the words Lord Jesus, or Christ, they
could not pronounce them, but fell into a fit. When they came to the word Satan, or devil,
they would point, and say, 'This bites, but makes me speak right well.' Finding his
children thus tormented without hopes of recovery, he sent them to his sister, Margaret
Arnold, at Yarmouth, being willing to try whether change of air would help them.
"Margaret Arnold was the next witness. Being sworn, she said, that about the 30th of
November, Elizabeth and Deborah Pacey came to her house, with her brother, who told
her what had happened, and that he thought his children bewitched. She, this examinant,
did not much regard it, supposing the children had played tricks, and put the pins into
their mouths themselves. She, therefore, took all the pins from their clothes, sewing them
with thread instead of pinning them. But, notwithstanding, they raised, at times, at least
thirty pins, in her presence, and had terrible fits; in which fits they would cry out upon
Amy Duny and Rose Cullender, saying, that they saw them and heard them threatening,
as before; that they saw things, like mice, running about the house; and one of them
catched one, and threw it into the fire, which made a noise, like a rat. Another time the
younger child, being out of doors, a thing like a bee would have forced itself into her
mouth, at which the child ran screaming into the house, and before this examinant could
come at her, fell into a fit, and vomited a twopenny nail, with a broad head. After that,
this examinant asked the child how she came by this nail, when she answered, 'The bee
brought the nail, and forced it into my mouth.' At other times, the eldest child told this
examinant that she saw flies bring her crooked pins. She would then fall into a fit, and
vomit such pins. One time the said child said she saw a mouse, and crept under the table
to look for it; and afterwards, the child seemed to put something into her apron, saying,
'She had caught it.' She then ran to the fire, and threw it in, on which there did appear to
this examinant something like a flash of gunpowder, although she does own she saw
nothing in the child's hand. Once the child, being speechless, but otherwise very sensible,
ran up and down the house, crying, 'Hush! hush!' as if she had seen poultry; but this
examinant saw nothing. At last the child catched at something, and threw it into the fire.
Afterwards, when the child could speak, this examinant asked her what she saw at the
time? She answered, that she saw a duck. Another time the youngest child said, after a fit,
that Amy Duny had been with her, and tempted her to drown herself, or cut her throat, or
otherwise destroy herself. Another time they both cried out upon Amy Duny and Rose
Cullender, saying, 'Why don't you come yourselves? Why do you send your imps to
torment us?'"
The celebrated Sir Thomas Brown, the author of "Vulgar Errors," was also examined as a
witness upon the trial. Being desired to give his opinion of the three persons in court, he

said, he was clearly of opinion that they were bewitched. He said, there had lately been a
discovery of witches in Denmark, who used the same way of tormenting persons, by
conveying crooked pins, needles, and nails into their bodies. That he thought, in such
cases, the devil acted upon human bodies by natural means, namely, by exciting and
stirring up the superabundant humours, he did afflict them in a more surprising manner
by the same diseases their bodies were usually subject to; that these fits might be natural,
only raised to a great degree by the subtlety of the devil, co-operating with the malice of
these witches.
The evidence being concluded, Sir Matthew Hale addressed the jury. He said, he would
waive repeating the evidence, to prevent any mistake, and told the jury, there were two
things they had to inquire into. First, Whether or not these children were bewitched;
secondly, Whether these women did bewitch them. He said, he did not in the least doubt
there were witches; first, Because the Scriptures affirmed it; secondly, Because the
wisdom of all nations, particularly our own, had provided laws against witchcraft, which
implied their belief of such a crime. He desired them strictly to observe the evidence, and
begged of God to direct their hearts in the weighty concern they had in hand, since, to
condemn the innocent and let the guilty go free, are both an abomination to the Lord.
The jury then retired, and, in about half an hour, returned a verdict of guilty upon all the
indictments, being thirteen in number. The next morning the children came with their
father to the lodgings of Sir Matthew Hale, very well, and quite restored to their usual
health. Mr. Pacey, being asked at what time their health began to improve, replied, that
they were quite well in half an hour after the conviction of the prisoners.
Many attempts were made to induce the unfortunate women to confess their guilt; but in
vain, and they were both hanged.
Eleven trials were instituted before Chief-Justice Holt for witchcraft between the years
1694 and 1701. The evidence was of the usual character; but Holt appealed so
successfully in each case to the common sense of the jury, that they were every one
acquitted. A general feeling seemed to pervade the country that blood enough had been
shed upon these absurd charges. Now and then, the flame of persecution burnt up in a
remote district; but these instances were no longer looked upon as mere matters of
course. They appear, on the contrary, to have excited much attention; a sure proof, if no
other were to be obtained, that they were becoming unfrequent.
A case of witchcraft was tried in 1711, before Lord Chief Justice Powell; in which,
however, the jury persisted in a verdict of guilty, though the evidence was of the usual
absurd and contradictory character, and the enlightened judge did all in his power to
bring them to a right conclusion. The accused person was one Jane Wenham, better
known as the Witch of Walkerne; and the persons who were alleged to have suffered
from her witchcraft were two young women, named Thorne and Street. A witness, named
Mr. Arthur Chauncy, deposed, that he had seen Ann Thorne in several of her fits, and that
she always recovered upon prayers being said, or if Jane Wenham came to her. He
related, that he had pricked the prisoner several times in the arms, but could never fetch

any blood from her; that he had seen her vomit pins, when there were none in her clothes
or within her reach; and that he had preserved several of them, which he was ready to
produce. The judge, however, told him that was needless, as he supposed they were
crooked pins.
Mr. Francis Bragge, another witness, deposed, that strange "cakes" of bewitched feathers
having been taken from Ann Thorne's pillow, he was anxious to see them. He went into a
room where some of these feathers were, and took two of the cakes, and compared them
together. They were both of a circular figure, something larger than a crown piece; and he
observed that the small feathers were placed in a nice and curious order, at equal
distances from each other, making so many radii of the circle, in the centre of which the
quill ends of the feathers met. He counted the number of these feathers, and found them
to be exactly thirty-two in each cake. He afterwards endeavoured to pull off two or three
of them, and observed that they were all fastened together by a sort of viscous matter,
which would stretch seven or eight times in a thread before it broke. Having taken off
several of these feathers, he removed the viscous matter with his fingers, and found under
it, in the centre, some short hairs, black and grey, matted together, which he verily
believed to be cat's hair. He also said, that Jane Wenham confessed to him that she had
bewitched the pillow, and had practised witchcraft for sixteen years.
The judge interrupted the witness at this stage, and said, he should very much like to see
an enchanted feather, and seemed to wonder when he was told that none of these strange
cakes had been preserved. His Lordship asked the witness why he did not keep one or
two of them, and was informed that they had all been burnt, in order to relieve the
bewitched person of the pains she suffered, which could not be so well effected by any
other means.
A man, named Thomas Ireland, deposed, that hearing several times a great noise of cats
crying and screaming about his house, he went out and frightened them away, and they
all ran towards the cottage of Jane Wenham. One of them he swore positively had a face
very like Jane Wenham's. Another man, named Burville, gave similar evidence, and
swore that he had often seen a cat with Jane Wenham's face. Upon one occasion he was
in Ann Thorne's chamber, when several cats came in, and among them the cat above
stated. This witness would have favoured the court with a much longer statement, but was
stopped by the judge, who said he had heard quite enough.
The prisoner, in her defence, said nothing, but that "she was a clear woman." The learned
judge then summed up, leaving it to the jury to determine whether such evidence as they
had heard was sufficient to take away the prisoner's life upon the indictment. After a long
deliberation they brought in their verdict, that she was guilty upon the evidence. The
Judge then asked them whether they found her guilty upon the indictment of conversing
with the devil in the shape of a cat? The sapient foreman very gravely answered, "We
find her guilty of that." The learned judge then very reluctantly proceeded to pass
sentence of death; but, by his persevering exertions, a pardon was at last obtained, and the
wretched old woman was set at liberty. In the year 1716, a woman and her daughter, - the
latter only nine years of age, -- were hanged at Huntingdon for selling their souls to the

devil, and raising a storm by pulling off their stockings and making a lather of soap. This
appears to have been the last judicial execution in England. From that time to the year
1736, the populace raised at intervals the old cry, and more than once endangered the
lives of poor women by dragging them through ponds on suspicion; but the philosophy of
those who, from their position, sooner or later give the tone to the opinions and morals of
the poor, was silently working a cure for the evil. The fear of witches ceased to be
epidemic, and became individual, lingering only in minds lettered by inveterate prejudice
or brutalizing superstition. In the year 1736, the penal statute of James I. was finally
blotted from the statutebook, and suffered no longer to disgrace the advancing
intelligence of the country. Pretenders to witchcraft, fortune-tellers, conjurors, and all
their train, were liable only to the common punishment of rogues and impostors -imprisonment and the pillory.
In Scotland, the delusion also assumed the same phases, and was gradually extinguished
in the light of civilization. As in England the progress of improvement was slow. Up to
the year 1665, little or no diminution of the mania was perceptible. In 1643, the General
Assembly recommended that the Privy Council should institute a standing commission,
composed of any "understanding gentlemen or magistrates," to try the witches, who were
stated to have increased enormously of late years. In 1649, an act was passed,
confirmatory of the original statute of Queen Mary, explaining some points of the latter
which were doubtful, and enacting severe penalties, not only against witches themselves,
but against all who covenanted with them, or sought by their means to pry into the secrets
of futurity, or cause any evil to the life, lands, or limbs of their neighbours. For the next
ten years, the popular madness upon this subject was perhaps more furious than ever;
upwards of four thousand persons suffered for the crime during that interval. This was the
consequence of the act of parliament and the unparalleled severity of the magistrates; the
latter frequently complained that for two witches they burned one day, there were ten to
burn the next: they never thought that they themselves were the cause of the increase. In a
single circuit, held at Glasgow, Ayr, and Stirling, in 1659, seventeen unhappy creatures
were burned by judicial sentence for trafficking with Satan. In one day, (November 7,
1661,) the Privy Council issued no less than fourteen commissions for trials in the
provinces. Next year, the violence of the persecution seems to have abated. From 1662 to
1668, although "the understanding gentlemen and magistrates" already mentioned,
continued to try and condemn, the High Court of Justiciary had but one offender of this
class to deal with, and she was acquitted. James Welsh, a common pricker, was ordered
to be publicly whipped through the streets of Edinburgh for falsely accusing a woman of
witchcraft; a fact which alone proves that the superior court sifted the evidence in these
cases with much more care and severity than it had done a few years previously. The
enlightened Sir George Mackenzie, styled by Dryden "the noble wit of Scotland,"
laboured hard to introduce this rule into court -- that the confessions of the witches
should be held of little worth, and that the evidence of the prickers and other interested
persons should be received with distrust and jealousy. This was reversing the old
practice, and saved many innocent lives. Though a firm believer both in ancient and
modern witchcraft, he could not shut his eyes to the atrocities daily committed under the
name of justice. In his work on the Criminal Law of Scotland, published in 1678, he says,
"From the horridness of this crime, I do conclude that, of all others, it requires the

clearest relevancy and most convincing probature; and I condemn, next to the wretches
themselves, those cruel and too forward judges who burn persons by thousands as guilty
of this crime." In the same year, Sir John Clerk plumply refused to serve as a
commissioner on trials for witchcraft, alleging, by way of excuse, "that he was not
himself good conjuror enough to be duly qualified." The views entertained by Sir George
Mackenzie were so favourably received by the Lords of Session that he was deputed, in
1680, to report to them on the cases of a number of poor women who were then in prison
awaiting their trial. Sir George stated that there was no evidence against them whatever
but their own confessions, which were absurd and contradictory, and drawn from them by
severe torture. They were immediately discharged.
For the next sixteen years, the Lords of Session were unoccupied with trials for
witchcraft; not one is entered upon the record: but in 1697, a case occurred, which
equalled in absurdity any of those that signalized the dark reign of King James. A girl,
named Christiana Shaw, eleven years of age, the daughter of John Shaw of Bargarran,
was subject to fits, and being of a spiteful temper, she accused her maid-servant, with
whom she had frequent quarrels, of bewitching her. Her story, unfortunately, was
believed. Encouraged to tell all the persecutions of the devil which the maid had sent to
torment her, she in the end concocted a romance that involved twenty-one persons. There
was no other evidence against them but the fancies of this lying child, and the confessions
which pain had extorted from them; but upon this no less than five women were
condemned, before Lord Blantyre and the rest of the Commissioners, appointed specially
by the Privy Council to try this case. They were burned on the Green at Paisley. The
warlock of the party, one John Reed, who was also condemned, hanged himself in prison.
It was the general belief in Paisley that the devil had strangled him, lest he should have
revealed in his last moments too many of the unholy secrets of witchcraft. This trial
excited considerable disgust in Scotland. The Rev. Mr. Bell, a contemporary writer,
observed that, in this business, "persons of more goodness and esteem than most of their
calumniators were defamed for witches." He adds, that the persons chiefly to blame were
"certain ministers of too much forwardness and absurd credulity, and some topping
professors in and about Glasgow." [Preface to "Law's Memorials," edited by Sharpe.]
After this trial, there again occurs a lapse of seven years, when the subject was painfully
forced upon public attention by the brutal cruelty of the mob at Pittenween. Two women
were accused of having bewitched a strolling beggar, who was subject to fits, or who
pretended to be so, for the purpose of exciting commiseration. They were cast into prison,
and tortured until they confessed. One of them, named Janet Cornfoot, contrived to
escape, but was brought back to Pittenween next day by a party of soldiers. On her
approach to the town, she was, unfortunately, met by a furious mob, composed
principally of fishermen and their wives, who seized upon her with the intention of
swimming her. They forced her away to the sea shore, and tying a rope around her body,
secured the end of it to the mast of a fishing-boat lying alongside. In this manner they
ducked her several times. When she was half dead, a sailor in the boat cut away the rope,
and the mob dragged her through the sea to the beach. Here, as she lay quite insensible, a
brawny ruffian took down the door of his hut, close by, and placed it on her back. The
mob gathered large stones from the beach, and piled them upon her till the wretched

woman was pressed to death. No magistrate made the slightest attempt to interfere, and
the soldiers looked on, delighted spectators. A great outcry was raised against this
culpable remissness, but no judicial inquiry was set on foot. This happened in 1704.
The next case we hear of is that of Elspeth Rule, found guilty of witchcraft before Lord
Anstruther at the Dumfries circuit, in 1708. She was sentenced to be marked in the cheek
with a redhot iron, and banished the realm of Scotland for life.
Again there is a long interval. In 1718, the remote county of Caithness, where the
delusion remained in all its pristine vigour for years after it had ceased elsewhere, was
startled from its propriety by the cry of witchcraft. A silly fellow, named William
Montgomery, a carpenter, had a mortal antipathy to cats, and, somehow or other, these
animals generally chose his back-yard as the scene of their catterwaulings. He puzzled his
brains for a long time to know why he, above all his neighbours, should be so pestered; at
last he came to the sage conclusion that his tormentors were no cats, but witches. In this
opinion he was supported by his maid-servant, who swore a round oath that she had often
heard the aforesaid cats talking together in human voices. The next time the unlucky
tabbies assembled in his back-yard, the valiant carpenter was on the alert. Arming
himself with an axe, a dirk, and a broadsword, he rushed out among them: one of them he
wounded in the back, a second in the hip, and the leg of a third he maimed with his axe;
but he could not capture any of them. A few days afterwards, two old women of the
parish died, and it was said that, when their bodies were laid out, there appeared upon the
back of one the mark as of a recent wound, and a similar scar upon the hip of the other.
The carpenter and his maid were convinced that they were the very cats, and the whole
county repeated the same story. Every one was upon the look-out for proofs
corroborative: a very remarkable one was soon discovered. Nanny Gilbert, a wretched old
creature of upwards of seventy years of age, was found in bed with her leg broken; as she
was ugly enough for a witch, it was asserted that she, also, was one of the cats that had
fared so ill at the hands of the carpenter. The latter, when informed of the popular
suspicion, asserted that he distinctly remembered to have struck one of the cats a blow
with the back of his broadsword, which ought to have broken her leg. Nanny was
immediately dragged from her bed, and thrown into prison. Before she was put to the
torture, she explained, in a very natural and intelligible manner, how she had broken her
limb; but this account did not give satisfaction: the professional persuasions of the
torturer made her tell a different tale, and she confessed that she was indeed a witch, and
had been wounded by Montgomery on the night stated - that the two old women recently
deceased were witches also, besides about a score of others whom she named. The poor
creature suffered so much by the removal from her own home, and the tortures inflicted
upon her, that she died the next day in prison. Happily for the persons she had named in
her confession, Dundas of Arniston, at that time the King's Advocate-general, wrote to
the Sheriff-depute, one Captain Ross of Littledean, cautioning him not to proceed to trial,
the "thing being of too great difficulty, and beyond the jurisdiction of an inferior court."
Dundas himself examined the precognition with great care, and was so convinced of the
utter folly of the whole case that he quashed all further proceedings.
