
Units as a Measure of Risk
Since the Turtles used the unit as the base measure for position size
and since those units were adjusted for volatility risk, the unit was
a measure of the risk both of a position and of the entire portfolio
of positions.

256 • Way of the Turtle

The Turtles were given risk management rules that limited the
number of units that we could maintain at any speciﬁc time on four
different levels. In essence, those rules controlled the total risk that a
trader could carry, and those limits minimized losses during prolonged
losing periods as well as during extraordinary price movements.
An example of an extraordinary price movement was the day
after the October 1987 stock market crash. The U.S. Federal
Reserve lowered interest rates by several percentage points
overnight to boost the conﬁdence of the stock market and the country. The Turtles were loaded short in interest-rate futures: eurodollars, T-bills, and bonds. The losses the next day were enormous. In
most cases, 40 to 60 percent of account equity was lost in a single
day. However, those losses would have been correspondingly higher
without the maximum position limits.
The limits were as follows:
Level

Type

Maximum Units

1

Single market

4

2

Closely correlated markets

6

3

Loosely correlated markets

10

4

Single direction, long or short

12

Single markets: A maximum of 4 units per market.
Closely correlated markets: For markets that were closely correlated, there could be a maximum of 6 units in one particular
direction (i.e., 6 long units or 6 short units). Closely correlated market groups include heating oil and crude oil; gold and silver; the
currencies as a group; interest rate futures such as T-bills and
eurodollars; and so on.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 257

Loosely correlated markets: For loosely correlated markets,
there could be a maximum of 10 units in one particular direction.
Loosely correlated markets included gold and copper; silver and
copper; and many grain combinations that the Turtles did not trade
because of position limits.
Single direction: The maximum number of total units in one
direction long or short was 12 units. Thus, one theoretically could
have had 12 units long and 12 units short at the same time.
The Turtles used the term loaded to represent having the maximum permitted number of units for a particular risk level. Thus,
loaded in yen meant having the maximum 4 units of Japanese
yen contracts, completely loaded meant having 12 units, and so
forth.

Adjusting Trading Size
There are times when the market does not trend for many months.
During those times, it is possible to lose a signiﬁcant percentage of
the equity of the account.
After large winning trades close out, one may want to increase
the size of the equity used to compute position size.
The Turtles did not trade normal accounts with a running balance based on the initial equity. We were given notional accounts
with a starting equity of zero and a speciﬁc account size. For example, many Turtles received a notional account size of $1 million
when we started trading in February 1983. That account size was
adjusted each year at the beginning of the year. It was adjusted up
or down depending on the success of the trader as measured subjectively by Rich. The increase or decrease typically represented

258 • Way of the Turtle

something close to the addition of the gains or losses that were
made in the account during the preceding year.
The Turtles were instructed to decrease the size of the notional
account by 20 percent each time we went down 10 percent of the
original account. Thus, if a Turtle trading a $1,000,000 account
ever was down 10 percent, or $100,000, we would begin trading as
if we had an $800,000 account until we reached the yearly starting
equity. If we lost another 10 percent (10 percent of $800,000 or
$80,000, for a total loss of $180,000), we would reduce the account
size by another 20 percent for a notional account size of $640,000.
There are other, perhaps better strategies for reducing or increasing equity as the account goes up or down. These are the rules that
the Turtles used.

Entries
The typical trader thinks mostly in terms of the entry signals when
she is thinking about a particular trading system. Traders believe
that the entry is the most important aspect of any trading system.
They might be surprised to ﬁnd that the Turtles used a very simple entry system based on the channel breakout systems taught by
Richard Donchian.
The Turtles were given rules for two different but related breakout systems we called System 1 and System 2. We were given full
discretion to allocate as much of our equity to either system as we
wanted. Some of us chose to trade all our equity using System 2,
some chose to use a 50 percent System 1 and 50 percent System
2 split, and others chose different mixes. The two systems were as
follows:

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 259

System 1: a shorter-term system based on a 20-day breakout
System 2: a simpler long-term system based on a 55-day breakout.

Breakouts
A breakout is deﬁned as the price exceeding the high or low of a
particular number of days. Thus, a 20-day breakout would be
deﬁned as exceeding the high or low of the preceding 20 days.
Turtles always traded at the breakout when it was exceeded during the day and did not wait until the daily close or the open of the
following day. In the case of opening gaps, the Turtles would enter
positions on the open if a market opened through the price of the
breakout.

System 1 Entry
Turtles entered positions when the price exceeded by a single tick
the high or low of the preceding 20 days. If the price exceeded the
20-day high, the Turtles would buy 1 unit to initiate a long position
in the corresponding commodity. If the price dropped one tick
below the low of the last 20 days, the Turtles would sell 1 unit to
initiate a short position.
System 1 breakout entry signals would be ignored if the last
breakout would have resulted in a winning trade. Note: For the purposes of this test, the last breakout was considered the last breakout
in the particular commodity regardless of whether that particular
breakout was actually taken or was skipped because of this rule.
This breakout would be considered a losing breakout if the price
subsequent to the date of the breakout moved 2N against the position before a proﬁtable 10-day exit occurred.

260 • Way of the Turtle

The direction of the last breakout was irrelevant to this rule.
Thus, a losing long breakout or a losing short breakout would
enable the subsequent new breakout to be taken as a valid entry
regardless of its direction (long or short).
However, if a System 1 entry breakout was skipped because the
previous trade had been a winner, an entry would be made at the
55-day breakout to avoid missing major moves. This 55-day breakout was considered the failsafe breakout point.
At any given point, if a trader was out of the market, there would
always be some price that would trigger a short entry and another
different and higher price that would trigger a long entry. If the last
breakout was a loser, the entry signal would be closer to the current price (i.e., the 20-day breakout) than it would be if it had been
a winner, in which case the entry signal probably would be farther
away, at the 55 day breakout.

System 2 Entry
We entered when the price exceeded by a single tick the high or
low of the preceding 55 days. If the price exceeded the 55-day high,
the Turtles would buy 1 unit to initiate a long position in the corresponding commodity. If the price dropped one tick below the low
of the last 55 days, the Turtles would sell 1 unit to initiate a short
position.
All breakouts for System 2 would be taken whether or not the
previous breakout had been a winner.

Adding Units
Turtles entered single-unit long positions at the breakouts and
added to those positions at 1⁄2N intervals after their initial entry. This

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 261

⁄2N interval was based on the actual ﬁll price of the previous order.
Thus, if an initial breakout order slipped by 1⁄2N, the new order
would be 1 full N past the breakout to account for the 1⁄2N slippage,
plus the normal 1⁄2N unit add interval.
This would continue right up to the maximum permitted number of units. If the market moved quickly enough, it was possible
to add the maximum 4 units in a single day.
Here is an example.
1

Gold
N  2.50
55-day breakout  310
First unit added
Second unit
Third unit
Fourth unit

310.00
310.00  1⁄2 2.50, or 311.25
311.25  1⁄2 2.50, or 312.50
312.50  1⁄2 2.50, or 313.75

Crude Oil
N  1.20
55-day breakout  28.30
First unit added
Second unit
Third unit
Fourth unit

28.30
28.30  1⁄2 1.20, or 28.90
28.90  1⁄2 1.20, or 29.50
29.50  1⁄2 1.20, or 30.10

Consistency
The Turtles were told to be very consistent in taking entry signals because most of the proﬁts in a particular year might come

262 • Way of the Turtle

from only two or three large winning trades. If a signal was
skipped or missed, this could have a great effect on the returns
for the year.
The Turtles with the best trading records consistently applied
the entry rules. The Turtles with the worst records and all those
who were dropped from the program failed to enter positions consistently when the rules indicated.

Stops
There is an expression: “There are old traders and there are bold
traders, but there are no old bold traders.” Most traders who do not
use stops go broke. The Turtles always used stops.
For most people, it is far easier to cling to the hope that a losing
trade will turn around than it is to get out of a losing position and
admit that the trade did not work out.
Let me make one thing very clear: Getting out of a losing position
when the rules of a system dictate doing that is critical. Traders who
do not cut their losses will not be successful in the long term. Almost
all the examples of trading that got out of control and jeopardized
the health of the ﬁnancial institution, such as Barings and LongTerm Capital Management, involved trades that were allowed to
develop into large losses because they were not cut short when they
were small losses.
The most important thing about cutting your losses is to have
predeﬁned the point where you will get out before you enter a position. If the market moves to your price, you must get out, no exceptions, every single time. Wavering from this method eventually will
result in disaster.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 263

Note: The reader may have noticed an inconsistency between
my comments here and those in Chapter 10, where I noted that
adding stops sometimes harms system performance and is not
always necessary. The systems outlined previously which work well
without stops do have an implicit stop because as the price moves
against the position there will come a point where the moving averages will cross and the losses will be limited. So in a sense, there is
a stop, it is just not one that is visible or known to the trader. For
most people, however, the psychological comfort of having a price
point where they will exit a losing trade is important. This is especially true of beginners. It can be psychologically destabilizing to
watch a position go against you without having a clear view of the
point where the pain will end.

Turtle Stops
Having stops did not mean that the Turtles always had actual stop
orders placed with the broker.
Since the Turtles carried such large positions, we did not want
to reveal our positions or our trading strategies by placing stop
orders with brokers. Instead, we were encouraged to have a particular price that when hit would cause us to exit our positions by
using either limit orders or market orders.
These stops were nonnegotiable exits. If a particular commodity traded at the stop price, the position was exited each time, every
time, without fail.

Stop Placement
The Turtles placed their stops on the basis of position risk. No trade
could incur more than 2 percent risk.

264 • Way of the Turtle

Since 1N of price movement represented 1 percent of account
equity, the maximum stop that would allow 2 percent risk would
be 2N of price movement. Turtles’ stops were set at 2N below the
entry for long positions and 2N above the entry for short positions.
To keep total position risk at a minimum, if additional units were
added, the stops for earlier units were raised by 1⁄2N. This generally
meant that all the stops for the entire position would be placed at
2N from the most recently added unit. However, in cases in which
later units were placed at larger spacing because of either fast markets causing skid or opening gaps, there would be differences in the
stops.
Here is an example.

Crude Oil
N = 1.20
55-day breakout = 28.30
Entry Price

Stop

28.30

25.90

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

26.50

Second unit

28.90

26.50

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.10

Second unit

28.90

27.10

Third unit

29.50

27.10

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

27.70

First unit

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 265

Third unit

29.50

27.70

Fourth unit

30.10

27.70

Here is a case in which a fourth unit was added at a higher price
because the market opened gapping up to 30.80:
Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

27.70

Third unit

29.50

27.70

Fourth unit

30.80

28.40

Alternative Stop Strategy: The Whipsaw
The Turtles were told about an alternative stop strategy that resulted
in better proﬁtability but was harder to execute because it incurred
many more losses, which resulted in a lower win/loss ratio. This
strategy was called the Whipsaw.
Instead of taking a 2 percent risk on each trade, the stops were
placed at 1⁄2N for 1⁄2 percent account risk. If a particular unit was
stopped out, the unit would be reentered if the market reached
the original entry price. A few Turtles used this method with good
success.
The Whipsaw also had the added beneﬁt of not requiring the
movement of stops for earlier units as new units were added, since
the total risk would never exceed 2 percent at the maximum 4
units.
For example, using Whipsaw stops, the crude oil entry stops
would be as follows:

266 • Way of the Turtle

Crude Oil
N  1.20
55-day breakout  28.30
Entry Price

Stop

28.30

27.70

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

28.30

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

28.30

Third unit

29.50

28.90

Entry Price

Stop

First unit

28.30

27.70

Second unit

28.90

28.30

Third unit

29.50

28.90

Fourth unit

30.10

29.50

First unit

Beneﬁts of the Turtle System Stops
Since the Turtles’ stops were based on N, they adjusted for the
volatility of the markets. More volatile markets would have wider
stops, but they also would have fewer contracts per unit. This equalized the risk across all entries and resulted in better diversiﬁcation
and more robust risk management.

Exits
There is another old saying: “You can never go broke taking a
proﬁt.” The Turtles would not agree with this statement. Getting

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 267

out of winning positions too early, that is, “taking a proﬁt” too early,
is one of the most common mistakes in trading with trend-following systems.
Prices never go straight up; therefore, it is necessary to let the
prices go against you if you are going to ride a trend. Early in a
trend, this often can mean watching decent proﬁts of 10 to 30 percent fade to a small loss. In the middle of a trend, it may mean
watching a proﬁt of 80 to 100 percent drop by 30 to 40 percent.
The temptation to lighten the position to “lock in proﬁts” can be
very great.
The Turtles knew that where you took a proﬁt could make the
difference between winning and losing.
The Turtle System enters on breakouts. Most breakouts do not
result in trends. This means that most of the trades that the Turtles made resulted in losses. If the winning trades did not earn
enough on average to offset those losses, the Turtles would have
lost money. Every proﬁtable trading system has a different optimal
exit point.
Consider the Turtle System: If you exit winning positions at a
1N proﬁt and exit losing positions at a 2N loss, you will need twice
as many winners to offset the losses from the losing trades.
There is a complex relationship among the components of a
trading system. This means that you cannot consider the proper
exit for a proﬁtable position without considering the entry, money
management, and other factors.
The proper exit for winning positions is one of the most important aspects of trading and the least appreciated. However, it can
make the difference between winning and losing.

268 • Way of the Turtle

Turtle Exits
The System 1 exit was a 10-day low for long positions and a 10-day
high for short positions. All the units in the position would be exited
if the price went against the position for a 10-day breakout.
The System 2 exit was a 20-day low for long positions and a 20day high for short positions. All the units in the position would be
exited if the price went against the position for a 20-day breakout.
As with entries, the Turtles typically did not place exit stop orders
but instead watched the price during the day and started to phone in
exit orders as soon as the price traded through the exit breakout price.

These Are Difﬁcult Exits
For most traders, the Turtle System exits were probably the single
most difﬁcult part of the Turtle System rules. Waiting for a 10- or
20-day new low often can mean watching 20 percent, 40 percent,
or even 100 percent of signiﬁcant proﬁts evaporate.
There is a very strong tendency to want to exit earlier. It requires
great discipline to watch your proﬁts evaporate so that you can hold
on to your positions for the really big move. The ability to maintain discipline and stick to the rules during large winning trades is
the hallmark of an experienced successful trader.

Tactics
The architect Mies van der Rohe, when speaking about restraint
in design, once said: “God is in the details.” This is also true of trading systems. There are some important details that can make a signiﬁcant difference in the proﬁtability of your trading when you are
using the Turtle trading rules.

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 269

Entering Orders
As was mentioned before, Richard Dennis and William Eckhardt
advised the Turtles not to use stops when placing orders. We were
advised to watch the market and enter orders when the price hit our
stop price. We also were told that in general it was better to place
limit orders than market orders. This is the case because limit orders
offer a chance for better ﬁlls and less slippage than do market orders.
Any market at all times has a bid and an ask. The bid is the price
at which buyers are willing to buy, and the ask is the price at which
sellers are willing to sell. If at any time the bid price becomes
higher than the ask price, trading takes place. A market order will
always ﬁll at the bid or ask when there is sufﬁcient volume, and
sometimes it will ﬁll at a worse price for larger orders.
Typically, there is a certain amount of relatively random price
movement that occurs, which is sometimes known as the bounce.
The idea behind using limit orders is to place your order at the
lower end of the bounce instead of simply placing a market order.
A limit order will not move the market if it is a small order, and it
almost always will move it less if it is a larger order.
It takes some skill to be able to determine the best price for a
limit order. However, with practice, you should be able to get better ﬁlls using limit orders placed near the market than you do with
market orders.

Fast Markets
At times the market moves very quickly through the order prices,
and if you place a limit order, it simply will not get ﬁlled. During
fast market conditions, a market can move thousands of dollars per
contract in just a few minutes.

270 • Way of the Turtle

During those times, the Turtles were advised not to panic and
to wait for the market to trade and stabilize before placing their
orders. Most beginning traders ﬁnd this hard to do. They panic and
place market orders. Invariably, they do this at the worst possible
time and frequently end up trading on the high or low of the day
at the worst possible price.
In a fast market, liquidity temporarily dries up. In the case of a
rising fast market, sellers stop selling and hold out for a higher
price, and they will not recommence selling until the price stops
moving up. In this scenario, the asks rise considerably and the
spread between the bid and the ask widens.
Buyers now are forced to pay much higher prices as sellers continue raising their asks, and the price eventually moves so far and
so fast that new sellers come into the market, causing the price to
stabilize and often to reverse quickly and collapse partway back.
Market orders placed into a fast market usually end up getting
ﬁlled at the highest price of the run-up, right at the point where
the market begins to stabilize as new sellers come in.
The Turtles waited until there was some indication of at least a
temporary price reversal before placing our orders, and this often
resulted in much better ﬁlls than would have been achieved with
a market order. If the market stabilized at a point that was past our
stop price, we would get out of the market, but we would do so
without panicking.

Simultaneous Entry Signals
Many days there was little market movement and little for us to do
besides monitor existing positions. We might go for days without
placing a single order. Other days would be moderately busy, with

Original Turtle Trading Rules • 271

signals occurring intermittently over the stretch of a few hours. In
that case, we would take the trades as they came until they reached
the position limits for those markets.
Then there were days when it seemed like everything was happening at once, and we would go from no positions to loaded in a
day or two. Often this frantic pace was intensiﬁed by multiple signals in correlated markets.
This was especially true when the markets gapped open through
the entry signals. You might have a gap opening entry signal in
crude oil, heating oil, and unleaded gas on the same day. With
futures contracts, it was also extremely common for many different
months of the same market to signal at the same time. In those
moments it was important to act efﬁciently and quickly while trying to keep from panicking and issuing market orders since that
invariably would have resulted in much worse trade ﬁlls.
