
as Tom Cruise commands $25 million for each film plus a cut of the box


HOW MEDIA COMPANIES MAKE MONEY

office receipts, and studios are willing to pay this staggering amount because
Cruise isan actor who attracts both interest and dollars. The situation is sim-
ilar in the music and book publishing businesses, where successful bands and

authors often gain a big slice of the profit pie.

Subscriptions

Subscription-based businesses (such as cable and magazine publishing) are
generally more attractive than one-time user fee businesses because subscrip-
tion revenue tends to be predictable, which makes forecasting and planning
easier and reduces the risk of the business. There is another advantage to sub-
scriptions: Subscribers pay upfront for services that are delivered at a later date.
Although firms can’t recognize this cash as revenue right away, they can use it
to fund operations, thus decreasing their reliance on outside sources of capital.

Because of the ongoing customer relationship and the cash received up-
front, subscription-based business models usually are less sensitive to economic
downturns. Moreover, there aren't many other businesses in which you can get
paid upfront before you have to spend the money to create a product.

Many subscription-based companies have heavy fixed costs, giving them
significant operating leverage. Thus, swings in revenue have a large impact on
earnings and cash flow. Magazines and newspapers are good examples. The
most important variable cost for these businesses is paper; other than this ex-
pense, almost all other costs are fixed, regardless of the number of magazines or
newspapers that are sold. Thus, as these companies gain market share, profit
margins should increase dramatically.

The exception is in companies that need to make large, ongoing capital
expenditures to stay in business, such as those found in the cable and satellite-
television industries. For these companies, system upgrades often eat up the
vast majority of operating cash flow, with little cash left over. In theory, once
these upgrades are complete, these businesses should throw off loads of cash.

The problem is that the upgrade cycles seem to be hever ending.

Advertising Revenue
Companies with advertising-based models can enjoy decent profit margins,
which are often enhanced by high operating leverage. The reason for the high

operating leverage is that most of the cost in an advertising-based model is

287


288

MEDIA

fixed. The cost of generating programming for a television or radio station or
hiring a news staff for a newspaper or magazine publisher doesn’t go up with
more subscribers. However, advertising revenue streams can be somewhat
volatile—advertising is one of the first costs that company executives cut
when the economy turns south, which is why advertising revenue growth
tends to move with the business cycle. Media firms that rely on advertising

are fairly sensitive to the state of the overall economy.

Economic Moats in Media

Media firms enjoy a number of competitive advantages that help them gen-
erate consistent free cash flows, with economies of scale, monopolies, and
unique intangible assets being the most prevalent. Economies of scale are es-
pecially important in publishing and broadcasting, whereas monopolies
come into play in the cable and newspaper industries. Unique intangible as-
sets such as licenses, trademarks, copyrights, and brand names are important

across the sector.

Monopolies, Licenses, and Deregulation

Look for companies that hold monopolies in their respective markets. These
companies tend to have very strong pricing power and excellent economic
profits. One of the bigger risks with monopoly power is running afoul of reg-
ulators, but as long as this relationship is well maintained, media firms with
monopolies should be able to increase profits for a long time. And as profits
grow, so should the value of the firm. Newspapers are the best example of this
competitive advantage—few cities can support more than one large daily
newspaper, which means the incumbent paper in any market generally has a
relatively easy time holding off competitors.

Licenses can also lead to strong profits, especially in the television and
radio broadcasting industries. Even though the participants in these industries
don't necessarily enjoy monopolies, its tough for new entrants to break into
the field. That’s because a business must have a license from the Federal Com-
munications Commission (FCC) to transmit a signal in a certain geographic
area. Licenses protect media firms from competition because only a limited
number are available in a given market. In addition, the FCC usually renews

licenses for the maximum eight years for the broadcasters who own them.


PUBLISHING PROFITS

Deregulation is also a key factor. Thanks to deregulation, companies such
as Fox, Viacom, and Clear Channel have been able to buy multiple stations in
the same market. This serves to further reduce competition and typically leads
to higher profits because these companies can spread out their programming
and back-office costs. Some parts of the media sector remain at least partially
regulated; any future deregulation could spur even greater consolidation and,
consequently, higher profitability. Newspaper, television, and radio com-
panies with strong balance sheets would be the most likely to benefit from any

future deregulation.

Publishing Profits

The publishing area is a great place to find investment opportunities. Many
of these companies, especially those in the newspaper business, enjoy mo-
nopolies in their respective markets. This monopoly status gives these com-
panies the power to raise prices without the fear of large customer defections.
The companies can then use these monopoly profits to move into other geo-
graphical areas, expanding their profits and increasing the value of their
shareholders’ investments. At the beginning of 2003, for example, Gannett
published almost 100 newspapers, and as the company’s 2002 annual report
stated, “most of the company’s newspapers do not have daily newspaper com-
petitors that are published in the same city.” Gannett’s free cash flow margins
(free cash flow as a percentage of revenue) are consistently above 10 percent,
which makes it an extremely profitable business.

Companies in the publishing business also benefit from economies of
scale, which result from the largely fixed nature of the industry's cost struc-
ture. As more volume gets pushed through an existing production system,
profitability will naturally improve. The publishing business relies on very ex-
pensive production equipment (presses) and distribution systems. It doesn’t
cost much more to print 1,000,001 books than it does to print 1,000,000, so
most of the revenue from that 1,000,001st book turns into profit, increasing
the company’s profit margins.

Because of this characteristic, most of the companies in the publishing
arena are continually looking for acquisitions that will increase market share
and boost profitability. The larger the scale, the greater the advantage over ri-

vals. Companies that build scale in a conservative and deliberate manner

289


290 MEDIA

tend to do very well over time, both in terms of profits and shareholder re-
turns. McGraw-Hill, for example, has become one of the most important
players in the publishing industry by slowly acquiring competitors, boosting
profitability along the way. Between 1993 and 2002, McGraw-Hill acquired
about 60 companies, most of them in publishing. During this same period,
the company’s operating profit margins increased from 16 percent to 21 per-
cent, largely due to a huge jump in the profitability of the publishing busi-

ness from Ve percent to 14 percent.

Broadcasting and Cable

Companies in the radio, broadcast television, and cable television industries
also tend to have some solid competitive advantages, which often lead to
above-average and sustainable profitability.

Previously, we discussed one of the most important: FCC licenses. Recent
deregulation in the broadcasting industry has led to less competition, as com-
panies own more broadcasting licenses in a specific market. Although some
media activists argue that this is a negative development for consumers, there’s
no denying that increased concentration has been a positive development for
the broadcasting companies that have chosen to take advantage of it.

Broadcasters make most of their money from advertising, which they at-
tract by offering programming to as many people as possible. The program-
ming that broadcasters show is one of the their largest expenses, and the cost is
basically fixed—a broadcaster pays essentially the same amount for the right to
show a program regardless of how large its audience is. However, the bigger the
audience, the more ad dollars the broadcaster attracts, which means that incre-
mental increases in advertising revenue fall directly to the bottom line as profit.
And as broadcasters increase the number of stations they own—which deregu-
lation has spurred—much of the fixed programming costs can be shared
among the stations.

Overall, broadcasters have a solid business model, so investing in this seg-
ment is mostly a matter of valuation. If you can buy these companies at a dis-
count to fair value, your long-term returns should be pretty good. Make sure,
though, that the company isn’t involved in another business that could po-

tentially be a drain on cash.


INVESTING IN THE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY

Finally, there’s the cable industry, which has typically enjoyed the luxury of
having a monopoly in many of its individual markets. Rarely have two cable
companies operated in the same market, which has historically allowed for ag-
gressive increases in monthly fees. Over the past decade, though, satellite tele-
vision providers have become a force in this market, forcing cable companies
to step up their efforts to differentiate themselves through high-speed Internet
access. The cable companies have also tried to compete on price in some areas.

These two moves have led to diminished profitability and free cash flow.
Indeed, the cable industry is highly capital intensive, which has traditionally
led to paltry free cash flow. That’s a big negative. Although many cable com-
panies claim that capital spending will finally start declining as they upgrade
their networks to offer advanced services such as digital cable, video-on-
demand, and high-speed Internet service, they've been making similar claims
for years. With the relatively recent advent of satellite as a competitive force,

the cable industry may have less attractive economics in the future.

Investing in the Entertainment Industry

As we mentioned previously, companies that depend on one-time user fees
often have some shortcomings, including cash flow volatility and low profit
margins. In the film, television, and music industries, which largely revolve
around creating and distributing feature films, television series, and musical
recordings, there aren't many positives to offset these negative characteristics.
We're generally not fans of companies that operate in this area of the media
industry.

On the positive side, most of these businesses have large libraries of films,
television series, and music recordings, which are legally protected from du-
plication. Revenue from these libraries tends to be lucrative because the costs
of production were recorded in the past. Also, the barriers to entry are high in
most cases. It takes a significant amount of capital to develop television series
on an ongoing basis and create multiple feature films.

Barriers to entry in distribution also have historically been high. Over
the past few years, though, the Internet has weakened this barrier, especially
in the music industry. Peer-to-peer distribution of recorded music has meant

hundreds of millions of dollars in lost profits for the large record labels. As

291


292

MEDIA

Common Investing Pitfall: Buying Big Hits

Some investors lock to invest ina media company that is responsible for the current
blockbuster movie, the latest triple-platinum album, or the hot new television drama.
Don't! In all likelihood, the current hit is making up for the flops that no one even heard
about. The media conglomerates that bring these hits to market are big, complex enti-
ties that need much more than one hit to spur long-term profit growth. Unless they are
trading at deep discounts to their intrinsic value (which is nat always easy to deter-
mine because of volatile cash flows), we'd look elsewhere.

technology improves, this phenomenon will become an increasingly signifi-
cant problem for the movie industry as well.

Few entertainment-oriented media firms have been able to create sig-
nificant shareholder value over the long haul. For example, movie and
entertainment firms within the S&P 500 returned only about 3 percent annu-
ally during the 1990s, whereas publishing and printing posted average annual
gains that were many times higher. The reasons for the long-term underperfor-
mance of entertainment firms is clear: The bulk of the industry's profits go to
high-profile actors, directors, and executives, which leaves little for sharehold-
ers. Moreover, this is at heart a hit-driven business, and consistently predicting

consumer tastes is difficult to do over a long time period.

Hallmarks of Success in the Media Sector
In general, the media sector is a great hunting ground for solid investment
ideas. Here’s how to find the best of the best.

Free Cash Flow
In general, we like to see free cash flow margins of at least 8 percent to 10 per-
cent in this sector. This level of free cash flow indicates one of three things:
the company has a product or service for which customers are willing to pay
a premium, the company is very efficient, or the business doesn’t require
much ongoing capital investment. All three are attractive characteristics.

As always, use this as. a general rule rather than an absolute one—ifa media

firm is investing heavily in a new business with excellent prospects, a low


RISKS IN THE MEDIA SECTOR

current free cash flow margin may be a worthwhile tradeoff for the prospect of
faster growth in the future. For example, the Washington Post Company
showed weak free cash flow in the late 1990s as the company plowed money
into its Kaplan educational services business and into some of its cable proper-
ties. In 2002, this investment started to pay off, as free cash flow soared to 13
percent of sales. If you're looking at a media company with temporarily weak
free cash flow, just make sure that the core business is still performing well and

that you trust management's choice of where the excess cash is being invested.

Sensible Acquisitions

One of the characteristics that we look for in a media investment is a willing-
ness and ability to make sensible acquisitions that lead to greater scale. We
emphasize the word sensible because we're talking about smaller acquisitions
that can be easily integrated into the acquiring firm’s operations. We're not
interested in companies that are always chasing after large firms in the quest
to build an empire. And we also don’t want to invest in media firms that are
looking to make a transforming merger. More often than not, these fail. The
AOL/Time Warner merger is the classic example of a case where promised
merger synergy didn’t pay off for investors.

In general, beware of companies that are attempting large mergers predi-
cated on synergies between unrelated businesses. These “growth” acquisitions
rarely succeed, especially in the media business. Look for firms that stick to
their knitting and make digestible purchases. Publishers Reed Elsevier and
McGraw-Hill are examples of firms that have historically made many small,
profitable acquisitions over time.

In addition, look for companies that can fund these acquisitions without
causing too much damage to their balance sheets. This is another reason that
strong free cash flow is so important, because the cash can be used to make

acquisitions, reducing the need for outside capital.

Risks in the Media Sector

> Many media companies are still controlled by the families of the founders,
which can sometimes lead to corporate decisions that are more beneficial
to the family than outside shareholders. No matter how well-managed
these firms may be, shareholders as a group simply do not have the voting

293


294 MEDIA

power that they would with a company whose majority ownership resided
with the public.

> Media firms are also known for extensive cross-ownership holdings, which
means that another media firm could potentially have much more say in
your company’s decision making than individual shareholders. For exam-
ple, Liberty Media owns chunks of many different companies, as does
News Corp.

> The entertainment industry revolves around glitz, glamour, and cash,
and sometimes industry executives get caught up in the scene. Be wary of
firms that reward executives with ridiculous compensation packages and
excessive perks. Michael Eisner at Disney comes to mind immediately,

and the old guard at Warner Brothers was known for this, as well.

Investor's Checklist: Media

» Look for media companies that consistently generate strong free cash
flow. We like to see free cash flow margins around 10 percent.

> Seek out companies that have high market share in their primary mar-
kets—monopolies are often great for profits. Licenses, especially in broad-
casting, also serve to reduce competition and keep profit margins high.

> Seek out companies with a history of well-executed acquisitions that have
been followed by higher margins.

» A strong balance sheet enables media companies to make selective acqui-
sitions without increasing the risk for shareholders or diluting the share-
holders’ ownership stake.

> Look for candid management teams, a history of sensible acquisitions,
and either conservative reinvestment of shareholders’ capital or the return
of capital to shareholders through dividends and stock repurchases.

> Don’t chase hits. Buying a stock because there’s a lot of buzz about a hit

movie or TV show rarely pays off.


Dds

Telecom

THE TELECOM SECTOR is filled with the kinds of companies we love to
hate: They earn mediocre (and declining) returns on capital, economic moats
are nonexistent or deteriorating, their future depends on the whims of regula-
tors, and they constantly spend boatloads of money just to stay in place. Even
companies that once boasted wide moats, such as those that control the local
phone network, face increasing competition from newer players, such as cable
and wireless networks. Because telecom is fraught with risk, we typically look
for a large margin of safety before considering any telecom stock.

Before 1984, AT&T was one of the world’s most reliable companies. Ma
Bell essentially ruled the U.S. telecom world, owning the vast majority of net-
works needed to provide local and long-distance phone service. The majority
of households and businesses had little choice but to send cash monthly, mak-
ing AT&T shares the proverbial safe haven stock for a generation of investors.

But following years of legal challenges, the industry was split in two and
divided between those that connect cities to one another and those that

Michael Hodel and Todd Bernier with Pat Dorsey.


296 TELECOM

provide network access to customers. AT&T retained the intercity, or long-
distance, business, which has been increasingly competitive ever since.

The access, or local, side of the business maintained its virtual monopoly
for several years because regulators decided this business was too capital-
intensive for competitors to have much influence and, thus, still in need of
strict oversight. AT&T's local phone networks were divided among, seven
companies, now known as the regional Bells. These firms have consolidated
over the years, leaving the majority of the nation’s local phone network in the
hands of four companies: Verizon, SBC, BellSouth, and Qwest.

Local phone companies, by virtue of their control of a major access
point to the phone network, retain some remnant of the old Ma Bell moat
because most customers have access to only one or two fixed-line networks.
But even this area of the industry has come under increasing attack as
changing regulations and improving technology have fostered tremendous
growth in the number of ways people connect with one another. The local
phone companies are being threatened by wireless carriers and cable com-
panies on the technological front and by their fixed-line peers on the regu-
latory front.

Unfortunately, the firms trying to dethrone traditional phone companies
are no more attractive as investments. The wireless industry, for example, is ex-
cruciatingly competitive, with little opportunity to develop a moat. Wireless
phone service is a commodity—a minute of airtime on one carrier’s network is
virtually identical to that on another's. There are six nationwide carriers slug-
ging it out, while several smaller regional players carve up areas not reached by
more than one or two of the majors. The presence of several large carriers has
resulted in near-ubiquitous network coverage. Roughly 95 percent of the total
U.S. population has access to three or more different wireless carriers, and 80
percent has access to at least five carriers. With little opportunity to differenti-
ate their services, the wireless carriers have resorted to cutthroat pricing: The
price per minute of wireless airtime has fallen more than 80 percent over the
past decade.

Wireless isn’t the only threat to the Baby Bells’ fixed-line business. Twelve
years after the breakup of AT&T, the federal government decided the time was
ripe to deregulate the local business and open it up to competition. Congress

passed the Telecom Act of 1996, forcing the regional Bells to lease access to


TELECOM

their networks to competitors at discounted rates. Would-be local phone com-
petitors, known as competitive local exchange carriers (CLECs), can build a
“virtual” network to service their customers. AT&T and WorldCom/MCI
have been the biggest users of this regulation, adding local service options to
their traditional long-distance phone services. The result has been a loss of
revenue for the Bells and greater control of customers for their competitors.
