THE FIVE RULES
FOR

SUCCESSFUL
STOCK

INVESTING

Morningstar's Guide to Building Wealth and
Winning in the Market

leet

TO, CEO

FOREWORD BY JOE MANSUETO,
MCRNINGSTAR


The Five Rules for

Successful Stock Investing

Morningstar’s Guide to
Building Wealth and
Winning in the Market

Pat Dorsey
Director of Stock Analysis

@)

WILEY
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.




The Five Rules for

Successful Stock Investing

Morningstar’s Guide to
Building Wealth and
Winning in the Market

Pat Dorsey
Director of Stock Analysis

@)

WILEY
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


Copyright © 2004 by Morningstar, Inc. All rights reserved.

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400,

fax 978-646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com, Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, 201-748-6orT, fax 201-748-6008,

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose, No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at 800-762-2974, outside the United States at
317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002,

Certain financial information included in the The Five Rules for Successful Stock Investing is proprietary
to Mergent, Inc. Copyright © 2003. Reproduction of such information in any form is prohibited.
Because of the possibility of human or mechanical error by Mergent sources, Mergent or others, Mergent
does not guarantee the accuracy, adequacy, completeness, timeliness or availability of any information
and is not responsible for any errors or omissions or for the results obtained from the use of such
information. There are no express or limited warranties, including, but not limited to, warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose or use. In no event shall Mergent be liable for any
indirect, special or consequential damages in connection with subscriber's or other's use of such
information.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www. wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Dorsey, Pat.

‘The five rules for successful stock investing : Morningstar's guide to
building wealth and winning in the market / Pat Dorsey.

Pp cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-471-26965-4 (CLOTH)
1. Investments. 2. Stocks. I. Morningstar, Inc. II. Title.
HG4521.D646 2004
332.63'22—de22

2003018287

Printed in the United States of America.
to 9 8 7 6 § 43 21


Contents

POREWORD

Introduction: Picking Great Stocks Is Tough
It’s the Business that Matters
The Long-Term Approach
Having the Courage of Your Convictions
Let's Get Started

Chapter 1: THE Five Rules for Successful Stock Investing
Do Your Homework
Find Economic Moats
Have a Margin of Safety
Hold for the Long Haul
Know When to Sell
Investor's Checklist: The Five Rules for Successful Stock Investing

Chapter 2: Seven Mistakes to Avoid
Swinging for the Fences
Believing that It's Different This Time
Falling in Love with Products
Panicking When the Market Is Down
Trying to Time the Market
Ignoring Valuation


Iv

CONTENTS

Relying on Earnings for the Whole Story
Investor's Checklist: Seven Mistakes to Avoid

Chapter 3: Economic Moats
Evaluating Profitability
Building an Economic Moat
How Long Will It Last?
Industry Analysis

Investor's Checklist: Economic Moats

Chapter 4: The Language of Investing
The Basics
Where the Money G'oes
Practical Financials—T he Statements in Use
Investor's Checklist: The Language of Investing

Chapter 5: Financial Statements Explained
The Balance Sheet
The Income Statement
The Statement of Cash Flows
Conclusion
Investor's Checklist: Financial Statements Explained

Chapter 6: Analyzing a Company—The Basics
Growth
Profitability
Financial Health
The Bear Case
Conclusion
Investor's Checklist: Analyzing a Company—tT he Basics

Chapter 7: Analyzing a Company—Management
Compensation
Character
Running the Business

Investor's Checklist: Analyzing a Company—Management

Chapter 8: Avoiding Financial Fakery
Six Red Flags
Seven Other Pitfalls to Watch Out For
Investor's Checklist: Avoiding Financial Fakery

18
19

21
22
24
33
36
a7

39
39
AL
42
48

49
50
9
66

76

79
80

85

99

100
100

103
104
108
IIo
112

113
114

117
123


CONTENTS V

Chapter 9: Valuation—The Basics 125
Paying Up Rarely Pays Off 126
Using Price Multiples Wisely 128
Say Yes to Yield By
Investor's Checklist: Valuation—The Basics 137

Chapter ro: Valuation—Intrinsic Value 139
Cash Flow, Present Value, and Discount Rates 140
Calculating Present Value 143
Fun With Discount Rates 144
Calculating Perpetuity Values 147
Margin of Safety 152
Conelusion 153
Investor's Checklist: Valuation—Intvinsic Value 154

Chapter m: Putting It All Together 155
Advanced Micro Devices Iss
Biomet 164
Conclusion I75

Chapter 12: The 10-Minute Test 177
Does the Firm Pass a Minimum Quality Hurdle? 178
Has the Company Ever Made an Operating Profit? 178
Does the Company Generate Consistent Cash Flow from Operations? 178
Are Returns on Equity Consistently above 10 Percent,
with Reasonable Leverage? 179
Is Earnings Growth Consistent or Erratic? 179
How Clean Is the Balance Sheet? 179
Does the Firm Generate Free Cash Flow? 180
How Mach “Other” Is There? 180
Has the Number of Shares Outstanding Increased Markedly
over the Past Several Years? 180
Beyond the 10 Minutes 181

Chapter 13: A Guided Tour of the Market 183
Where to Look 184
Conclusion 185

Chapter 14: Health Care 187
Economic Moats in Health Care 188

Pharmaceuticals 189


VI

CONTENTS

Generic Drug Companies
Biotechnology

Medical Device Companies
Health Insuvancel Managed Care
Investor's Checklist: Health Care

Chapter 15: Consumer Services
Companies We See Every Day
Restaurants
Retail
Conclusion

Investor's Checklist: Consumer Services

Chapter 16: Business Services
Outsourcing Trend
Economic Moats in Business Services
Technology-Based Businesses
People-Based Businesses
Hard-Asset-Based Businesses
Investor's Checklist: Business Services

Chapter 17: Banks
It’s All about Risk
Managing Credit Risk
Selling Liquidity
Managing Interest Rate Risk
Economic Moats in Banks
Hallmarks of Success for Banks
Investor's Checklist: Banks

Chapter 18: Asset Management and Insurance
Asset Management
Life Insurance
Property/Casualty Insurance
Investor's Checklist: Asset Management and Insurance

Chapter 19: Software
Segments of the Software Industry
Economic Moats in the Software Industry
Software Accounting IOE
Red Flags

195
197
200
202
204

207
208
209
211
217
218

219
220
220
221
224
226
229

231
233
233
235
236
239
241
245

247
247
253
257
263

265
266
268
269
270


CONTENTS VII

Hallmarks of Success for Software Companies 295
What's Not to Like about Software? 273
Conclusion 273
Investor's Checklist: Software 274
Chapter 20: Hardware 275
What Drives the Hardware Industry 276
Hardware Industry Dynamics 277
Economic Moats in Hardware 279
Hallmarks of Success for Hardware Companies 282
Investor's Checklist: Hardware 283,
Chapter 21: Media 285
How Media Companies Make Money 286
Economic Moats in Media 2.88
Publishing Profits 289
Broadcasting and Cable 290
Investing in the Entertainment Industry 291
Hallmarks of Success in the Media Sector 292
Risks in the Media Sector 293
Investor's Checklist: Media 294
Chapter 22: Telecom 295
Telecom Economics 298
Economic Moats in Telecom 300
Hallmarks of Success in Telecom 302
Conclusion 303
Investor's Checklist: Telecom 303
Chapter 23: Consumer Goods 305
How Companies Make Money in Consumer Goods 306
Key Strategies for Growth 306
What's Not to Like in Consumer Products 309
Economic Moats in Consumer Goods 310
Hallmarks of Success in Consumer Goods 313
Conclusion 315
Investor's Checklist: Consumer Goods 315
Chapter 24: Industrial Materials 317
The Problem with Cyclicality 318

Economic Moats in Basic Materials 320


VIII

CONTENTS

Economic Moats in Industrial Materials
Hallmarks of Success in Industrial Materials
Red Flags

Finding Opportunities in Industrial Materials
Investor's Checklist: Industrial Materials

Chapter 25: Energy
From the Ground
To the Pipelines
To the Refineries
To the Consumers
Providing the Services
The Impact of Commodity Prices
Economic Moats in Energy
Hallmarks of Success for Energy Companies
Risks in the Energy Sector
Conclusion
Investor's Checklist: Energy

Chapter 26: Utilities
Electricity Primer
Regulation, Regulation, Regulation
Financial Characteristics of Utilities
Hallmarks of Success for Utility Companies
Risks in the Utilities Sector
The Big Picture
Investor's Checklist: Utilities

APPENDIX
RECOMMENDED READINGS
MORNINGSTAR RESOURCES

INDEX

321
32.4
326
329
329

331
331
332
333
333
333
335
337
338
339
340
340

341
341
3.43
344,
345
346
347
347

349
393
399
397


Foreword

BECAUSE I’M THE founder of Morningstar, you might think I invest most
of my personal assets in mutual funds. The truth is | own few mutual funds.
Nearly all of my assets are in stocks. Although I love funds, I have an even
greater passion for stocks. Funds are great for those who don’t want to
spend a lot of time doing research. But if you enjoy analyzing companies—
and I think it’s a tremendous amount of fun—you can do perfectly well in-
vesting in equities yourself.

My interest in equity analysis began in business school at the University
of Chicago. There I learned about efficient markets and how collectively se-
curity analysts add little or no value. That did little to excite me about stock
investing. Why, after all, spend time studying companies if a market basket of
stocks will do just as well? After graduation, though, I stumbled across The
Money Masters by John Train and read about Warren Buffett.

Now that was exciting. Buffett used an approach I could readily grasp
and inspired me by showing how much fun and intellectually challenging in-
vesting could be. Moreover, Buffett’s track record—and the record of others


x

FOREWORD

who shared his philosophy—was stellar. | went back and read all the Berk-
shire Hathaway annual reports. My life changed course as a result.

I went to work as a stock analyst at Harris Associates in Chicago. I chose
Harris because I admired its value-oriented, Buffett-like approach, and I
liked the people. It was a great job, and I worked with some terrific financial
minds—Clyde MacGregor, Chuck McQuaid, Bill Nygren, Ralph Wanger,
Sherwin Zuckerman, to name a few. They all practiced a rigorous, bottoms-
up investment style that involved looking for companies selling at a discount
to their true worth. I spent my days reading annual reports, talking to com-
pany managers, and learning from my peers. And I got paid to do it.

The idea for Morningstar came from trying to teach myself equity analysis.
I called regularly to get the mutual fund reports from managers | admired—
people such as Kurt Lindner (Lindner Funds), George Michaelis (Source
Capital), Michael Price (Mutual Shares), Bill Ruane (Sequoia Fund), John
Templeton (Templeton Funds), and Ralph Wanger (Acorn). I examined their
holdings to see what stocks they were buying and tried to figure out why they
were buying them.

One day, when I had all these shareholder reports scattered across my
dining room table, I thought it would be useful if someone compiled all that
valuable information into a book. The proverbial light bulb clicked. I started
to research the mutual fund industry. I could see that it was growing nicely
and that there were few sources to help investors make intelligent decisions
about funds. Thus, Morningstar was born.

I left my stock analyst job at Harris, cleared out the living room of my
apartment, bought several PCs, and got started. I wrote to all the funds to get
their materials, entered everything into a database, and six months later a
400-page Mutual Fund Sourcebook was sitting on my desk. In 1984, this in-
depth fund information was very hard to get—and certainly not available for
$32.50. The Sourcebook, for example, provided complete portfolio holdings. It
took five pages just to list the 800 stocks in Peter Lynch’s Magellan Fund. I
sold 700 copies of that first publication, and Morningstar was on its way.

By bringing a stock perspective to the mutual fund world, we began to
define the Morningstar approach to fund investing. It’s hard to believe now,

but back then investors purchased mutual funds based on recent returns and


FOREWORD

not much else. Morningstar brought rigorous, fundamental analysis to the
industry. We realized that by looking carefully at the stocks a fund owned, we
could understand the manager’s strategy more clearly. So we developed our
equity expertise as a way of doing better fund analysis.

While Morningstar began by serving fund investors, over time, we broad-
ened our mission to help all investors. And that meant stock investors, too.
This wasn’t soulless corporate expansion, but logical growth based on a pas-
sion for equity analysis. And the more we looked at information available for
stock investors, the more we realized that we had something innovative, use-
ful, and unique to offer. There was little new in equity research, and many ex-
isting products seemed dated and not particularly helpful. We thought we
could do better.

Our approach to equity analysis builds on the Ben Graham and Warren
Buffett school of investing, It would be hard to find two better mentors—and
we're grateful and indebted to them for all that they have done for investors.
You'll find some of their key lessons embedded in our advice—concepts such
as margin of safety and economic moats. We add value by systemizing, broaden-
ing, and explaining their approach so you can do it yourself. The result is a
robust framework that should serve you well in making your own inyest-
ment decisions.

But we haven't cornered the market on advice. We've included a reading
list, and I urge you to use it as a guide. There aren't many great books on in-
vesting, so you should be able to master most of them. If you aren't doing so
now, I suggest you begin reading the major business magazines regularly—
Barvon’s, BusinessWeek, Forbes, Fortune,—as well as The Wall Street Journal
daily. You'd be surprised how many investors neglect to do these basic things.
Among our own publications, you'll find Morningstar.com and Morningstar
StockInvestor, our monthly newsletter, helpful. I also recommend all the Berk-
shire Hathaway annual reports and Outstanding Investor Digest for its lengthy
interviews with leading money managers.

You need to read widely to build a “latticework of mental models,” as
Berkshire Hathaway's Charlie Munger says. By looking closely at many com-
panies, you'll see common themes that drive their success or failure. And

youll begin to form models that you can apply to situations you want to

XI


XII

FOREWORD

analyze. Then you must ask some questions. How is the world changing?
How will those changes affect this company’s prospects? You can begin to see
the challenge and the fun of investing.

The Five Rules for Successful Stock Investing: Morningstar's Guide to Building
Wealth and Winning in the Market is the effort of Pat Dorsey, the head of eq-
uity research at Morningstar. Among his many talents, Pat can communicate
in aclear and engaging way, and he has the rare ability to distill complex ques-
tions to a form so that the answer appears obvious. Pat works closely with Hay-
wood Kelly, Morningstar’s chief of securities analysis and editor-in-chief of
Morningstar.com, and Catherine Gillis Odelbo, president of securities analysis
and head of our retail business, to guide our equity effort. We're indebted to all
three for what they've created at Morningstar and for defining the investment
philosophy that is the framework for this book.

A common quality of successful investors is the steadfast ability to think
independently. Don't be swayed by what the “experts” say—even us. Graham
and Buffett often point out that if your reasoning is right, that’s all you need
to worry about. I hope you read this book with a questioning mind. I hope
you challenge our thinking. Above all, I hope you learn guiding principles
that will shape your personal investment philosophy. Although no one can
guarantee success, if you apply the precepts in this book and think for your-
self, you'll be well on your way.

JOE MANSUETO


Acknowledgments

ALTHOUGH ONLY ONE name appears on the cover, this book was very
much a team effort. Erica Moor kept the project on track and ably orches-
trated text, graphics, deadlines, and schedules to produce a finished manu-
script, while Amy Arnott worked tirelessly to tighten the initial muddled
prose into something worthy of publication. Both deserve a great deal of
credit. Dave Pugh at John Wiley & Sons also contributed valuable edits and
a fresh perspective on the material. Morningstar designer Jason Ackley trans-
formed complicated concepts into lucid graphics, while analyst Sanjay Ayer
collected the data that underpin the tables and charts.

I have the great fortune to work with a group of very talented and dedi-
cated analysts, and a round of applause is due to the entire Equity Analyst
team at Morningstar. They contributed the lion’s share of this book’s second
half. This book could not have been written without their accumulated in-
dustry expertise. I’m also indebted to Mark Sellers for helping develop Morn-
ingstar’s investment philosophy; and to Mike Porter, Jason Stipp, and Rich
McCaffery for valuable editorial feedback. Mike also deserves credit for


XIV

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

shouldering many of my duties while I completed the book. Special thanks
go to Haywood Kelly for being not only the world’s most patient boss, but a
great editor, mentor, and friend. Thanks also to Catherine Odelbo, president
of securities analysis and our retail business, for her ongoing support of this
project and our equity research efforts at Morningstar, and to founder Joe
Mansueto for having the vision to take a risk and build Morningstar. Joe’s un-
wavering commitment to independence and objectivity sets the example for
the whole firm.

On a more personal note, my late grandfather, E. V. Patrick, deserves
credit for introducing me to investing at a relatively young age, while my par-
ents, Herb and Carol, have given me enormous support throughout my ca-
reer. None, however, are more deserving of gratitude than my wife Katherine,
whose good humor and unflagging patience are my most valuable assets. This

book could not have been written without her support.

B.D.


Introduction: Picking Great
Stocks Is Tough

SUCCESSFUL INVESTING I8 simple, but it’s not easy.

One of the big myths of the bull market of the 1990s was that the stock
market was essentially a savings account that returned 15 percent per year.
You picked up a copy of Fortune, you watched a little CNBC, you opened an
online account, and you were on the road to riches. Unfortunately, as many
investors discovered when the bubble popped, things that look too good to
be true usually are.

Picking individual stocks requires hard work, discipline, and an invest-
ment of time (as well as money). Expecting to make a large amount of money
with only a little effort is like expecting to shoot a great round of golf the first
time you pick up a set of clubs. There’s no magic formula, and there’s no
guarantee of success.

That’s the bad news. The good news is that the basic principles of suc-
cessful stock-picking aren't difficult to understand, and the tools for finding
great stocks are available to everyone at a very low cost—you don’t need ex-

pensive software or high-priced advice to do well in the stock market. All


XVI

INTRODUCTION

you need are patience, an understanding of accounting and competitive
strategy, and a healthy dose of skepticism. None of these is out of the average
person’s grasp.

The basic investment process is simple: Analyze the company and value
the stock. If you avoid the mistake of confusing a great company with a great
investment—and the two can be very different—you'll already be ahead of
many of your investing peers. (Think of Cisco at 100 times earnings in 2000.
Tt was a great company, but it was a terrible stock.)

Remember that buying a stock means becoming part owner in a business.
By treating your stocks as businesses, you'll find yourself focusing more on
the things that matter—such as free cash flow—and less on the things that
don’t—such as whether the stock went up or down on a given day.

Your goal as an investor should be to find wonderful businesses and pur-
chase them at reasonable prices. Great companies create wealth, and as the
value of the business grows, so should the stock price in time. In the short
term, the market can be a capricious thing—wonderful businesses can sell at
fire-sale prices, while money-losing ventures can be valued as if they had the
rosiest of futures—but over the long haul, stock prices tend to track the value
of the business.

It's the Business that Matters

In this book, I want to show you how to focus on a company’s fundamental
financial performance. Analyst upgrades and chart patterns may be fine tools
for traders who treat Wall Street like a casino, but they're of little use to in-
vestors who truly want to build wealth in the stock market. You have to get
your hands dirty and understand the businesses of the stocks you own if you
hope to be a successful long-term investor.
