
retrench his wasteful expenditure and live reasonably; he could not dismiss without a
pang his horsemen, his jesters, his morris-dancers, his choristers, and his parasites, or
confine his hospitality to those who really needed it. Notwithstanding his diminished
resources, he resolved to live as he had lived before, and turn alchymist, that he might
make gold out of iron, and be still the wealthiest and most magnificent among the nobles
of Brittany.
In pursuance of this determination he sent to Paris, Italy, Germany, and Spain, inviting all
the adepts in the science to visit him at Champtoce. The messengers he despatched on
this mission were two of his most needy and unprincipled dependants, Gilles de Sille and
Roger de Bricqueville. The latter, the obsequious panderer to his most secret and
abominable pleasures, he had intrusted with the education of his motherless daughter, a
child but five years of age, with permission, that he might marry her at the proper time to
any person he chose, or to himself if he liked it better. This man entered into the new
plans of his master with great zeal, and introduced to him one Prelati, an alchymist of
Padua, and a physician of Poitou, who was addicted to the same pursuits. The Marshal
caused a splendid laboratory to be fitted up for them, and the three commenced the search
for the philosopher's stone. They were soon afterwards joined by another pretended
philosopher, named Anthony of Palermo, who aided in their operations for upwards of a
year. They all fared sumptuously at the Marshal's expense, draining him of the ready
money he possessed, and leading him on from day to day with the hope that they would
succeed in the object of their search. From time to time new aspirants from the remotest
parts of Europe arrived at his castle, and for months he had upwards of twenty alchymists
at work - trying to transmute copper into gold, and wasting the gold, which was still his
own, in drugs and elixirs.
But the Lord of Rays was not a man to abide patiently their lingering processes. Pleased
with their comfortable quarters, they jogged on from day to day, and would have done so
for years, had they been permitted. But he suddenly dismissed them all, with the
exception of the Italian Prelati, and the physician of Poitou. These he retained to aid him
to discover the secret of the philosopher's stone by a bolder method. The Poitousan had
persuaded him that the devil was the great depositary of that and all other secrets, and
that he would raise him before Gilles, who might enter into any contract he pleased with
him. Gilles expressed his readiness, and promised to give the devil anything but his soul,
or do any deed that the arch-enemy might impose upon him. Attended solely by the
physician, he proceeded at midnight to a wild-looking place in a neighbouring forest; the
physician drew a magic circle around them on the sward, and muttered for half an hour
an invocation to the Evil Spirit to arise at his bidding, and disclose the secrets of
alchymy. Gilles looked on with intense interest, and expected every moment to see the
earth open, and deliver to his gaze the great enemy of mankind. At last the eyes of the
physician became fixed, his hair stood on end, and he spoke, as if addressing the fiend.
But Gilles saw nothing except his companion. At last the physician fell down on the
sward as if insensible. Gilles looked calmly on to see the end. After a few minutes the
physician arose, and asked him if he had not seen how angry the devil looked? Gilles
replied, that he had seen nothing; upon which his companion informed him that
Beelzebub had appeared in the form of a wild leopard, growled at him savagely, and said

nothing; and that the reason why the Marshal had neither seen nor heard him, was that he
hesitated in his own mind as to devoting himself entirely to the service. De Rays owned
that he had indeed misgivings, and inquired what was to be done to make the devil speak
out, and unfold his secret? The physician replied, that some person must go to Spain and
Africa to collect certain herbs which only grew in those countries, and offered to go
himself, if De Rays would provide the necessary funds. De Rays at once consented; and
the physician set out on the following day with all the gold that his dupe could spare him.
The Marshal never saw his face again.
But the eager Lord of Champtoce could not rest. Gold was necessary for his pleasures;
and unless, by supernatural aid, he had no means of procuring many further supplies. The
physician was hardly twenty leagues on his journey, before Gilles resolved to make
another effort to force the devil to divulge the art of gold making. He went out alone for
that purpose, but all his conjurations were of no effect. Beelzebub was obstinate, and
would not appear. Determined to conquer him if he could, he unbosomed himself to the
Italian alchymist, Prelati. The latter offered to undertake the business, upon condition that
De Rays did not interfere in the conjurations, and consented besides to furnish him with
all the charms and talismans that might be required. He was further to open a vein in his
arm, and sign with his blood a contract that he would work the devil's will in all things,
and offer up to him a sacrifice of the heart, lungs, hands, eyes, and blood of a young
child. The grasping monomaniac made no hesitation; but agreed at once to the disgusting
terms proposed to him. On the following night, Prelati went out alone; and after having
been absent for three or four hours, returned to Gilles, who sat anxiously awaiting him.
Prelati then informed him that he had seen the devil in the shape of a handsome youth of
twenty. He further said, that the devil desired to be called Barron in all future
invocations; and had shown him a great number of ingots of pure gold, buried under a
large oak in the neighbouring forest, all of which, and as many more as he desired, should
become the property of the Marechal de Rays if he remained firm, and broke no condition
of the contract. Prelati further showed him a small casket of black dust, which would turn
iron into gold; but as the process was very troublesome, he advised that they should be
contented with the ingots they found under the oak tree, and which would more than
supply all the wants that the most extravagant imagination could desire. They were not,
however, to attempt to look for the gold till a period of seven times seven weeks, or they
would find nothing but slates and stones for their pains. Gilles expressed the utmost
chagrin and disappointment, and at once said that he could not wait for so long a period;
if the devil were not more prompt, Prelati might tell him, that the Marechal de Rays was
not to be trifled with, and would decline all further communication with him. Prelati at
last persuaded him to wait seven times seven days. They then went at midnight with picks
and shovels to dig up the ground under the oak, where they found nothing to reward them
but a great quantity of slates, marked with hieroglyphics. It was now Prelati's turn to be
angry; and he loudly swore that the devil was nothing but a liar and a cheat. The Marshal
joined cordially in the opinion, but was easily persuaded by the cunning Italian to make
one more trial. He promised at the same time that he would endeavour, on the following
night, to discover the reason why the devil had broken his word. He went out alone
accordingly, and on his return informed his patron that he had seen Barron, who was
exceedingly angry that they had not waited the proper time ere they looked for the ingots.

Barron had also said, that the Marechal de Rays could hardly expect any favours from
him, at a time when he must know that he had been meditating a pilgrimage to the Holy
Land, to make atonement for his sins. The Italian had doubtless surmised this, from some
incautious expression of his patron, for De Rays frankly confessed that there were times
when, sick of the world and all its pomps and vanities, he thought of devoting himself to
the service of God.
In this manner the Italian lured on from month to month his credulous and guilty patron,
extracting from him all the valuables he possessed, and only waiting a favourable
opportunity to decamp with his plunder. But the day of retribution was at hand for both.
Young girls and boys continued to disappear in the most mysterious manner; and the
rumours against the owner of Champtoce grew so loud and distinct, that the Church was
compelled to interfere. Representations were made by the Bishop of Nantes to the Duke
of Brittany, that it would be a public scandal if the accusations against the Marechal de
Rays were not inquired into. He was arrested accordingly in his own castle, along with
his accomplice Prelati, and thrown into a dungeon at Nantes to await his trial.
The judges appointed to try him were the Bishop of Nantes Chancellor of Brittany, the
Vicar of the Inquisition in France, and the celebrated Pierre l'Hopital, the President of the
Provincial Parliament. The offences laid to his charge were sorcery, sodomy, and murder.
Gilles, on the first day of his trial, conducted himself with the utmost insolence. He
braved the judges on the judgment seat, calling them simoniacs and persons of impure
life, and said he would rather be hanged by the neck like a dog without trial, than plead
either guilty or not guilty to such contemptible miscreants. But his confidence forsook
him as the trial proceeded, and he was found guilty on the clearest evidence of all the
crimes laid to his charge. It was proved that he took insane pleasure in stabbing the
victims of his lust, and in observing the quivering of their flesh, and the fading lustre of
their eyes as they expired. The confession of Prelati first made the judges acquainted with
this horrid madness, and Gilles himself confirmed it before his death. Nearly a hundred
children of the villagers around his two castles of Champtoce and Machecoue, had been
missed within three years the greater part, if not all, of whom were immolated to the lust
or the cupidity of this monster. He imagined that he thus made the devil his friend, and
that his recompence would be the secret of the philosopher's stone.
Gilles and Prelati were both condemned to be burned alive. At the place of execution they
assumed the air of penitence and religion. Gilles tenderly embraced Prelati, saying,
"Farewell, friend Francis! In this world we shall never meet again; but let us place our
hopes in God; we shall see each other in Paradise." Out of consideration for his high rank
and connections, the punishment of the Marshal was so far mitigated, that he was not
burned alive like Prelati. He was first strangled, and then thrown into the flames: his
body, when half consumed, was given over to his relatives for interment; while that of the
Italian was burned to ashes, and then scattered in the winds. [For full details of this
extraordinary trial, see "Lobineau's Nouvelle Histoire de Bretagne;" and D'Argentre's
work on the same subject.]

JACQUES COEUR.
This remarkable pretender to the secret of the philosopher's stone, was contemporary with
the last mentioned. He was a great personage at the court of Charles VII, and in the
events of his reign played a prominent part. From a very humble origin he rose to the
highest honours of the state, and amassed enormous wealth, by peculation and the
plunder of the country which he should have served. It was to hide his delinquencies in
this respect, and to divert attention from the real source of his riches, that he boasted of
having discovered the art of transmuting the inferior metals into gold and silver.
His father was a goldsmith in the city of Bourges; but so reduced in circumstances
towards the latter years of his life, that he was unable to pay the necessary fees to procure
his son's admission into the guild. Young Jacques became, however, a workman in the
Royal Mint of Bourges, in 1428, and behaved himself so well, and showed so much
knowledge of metallurgy, that he attained rapid promotion in that establishment. He had
also the good fortune to make the acquaintance of the fair Agnes Sorel, by whom he was
patronized and much esteemed. Jacques had now three things in his favour - ability,
perseverance, and the countenance of the King's mistress. Many a man succeeds with but
one of these to help him forward: and it would have been strange indeed, if Jacques
Coeur, who had them all, should have languished in obscurity. While still a young man
he was made Master of the Mint, in which he had been a journeyman, and installed at the
same time into the vacant office of Grand Treasurer of the royal household.
He possessed an extensive knowledge of finance, and turned it wonderfully to his own
advantage as soon as he became intrusted with extensive funds. He speculated in articles
of the first necessity, and made himself very unpopular by buying up grain, honey, wines,
and other produce, till there was a scarcity, when he sold it again at enormous profit.
Strong in the royal favour, he did not hesitate to oppress the poor by continual acts of
forestalling and monopoly. As there is no enemy so bitter as the estranged friend, so of all
the tyrants and tramplers upon the poor, there is none so fierce and reckless as the upstart
that sprang from their ranks. The offensive pride of Jacques Coeur to his inferiors was the
theme of indignant reproach in his own city, and his cringing humility to those above him
was as much an object of contempt to the aristocrats into whose society he thrust himself.
But Jacques did not care for the former, and to the latter he was blind. He continued his
career till he became the richest man in France, and so useful to the King that no
important enterprise was set on foot until he had been consulted. He was sent in 1446 on
an embassy to Genoa, and in the following year to Pope Nicholas V. In both these
missions he acquitted himself to the satisfaction of his sovereign, and was rewarded with
a lucrative appointment, in addition to those which he already held.
In the year 1449, the English in Normandy, deprived of their great general, the Duke of
Bedford, broke the truce with the French King, and took possession of a small town
belonging to the Duke of Brittany. This was the signal for the recommencemerit of a war,
in which the French regained possession of nearly the whole province. The money for
this war was advanced, for the most part, by Jacques Coeur. When Rouen yielded to the
French, and Charles made his triumphal entry into that city, accompanied by Dunois and

his most famous generals, Jacques was among the most brilliant of his cortege. His
chariot and horses vied with those of the King in the magnificence of their trappings; and
his enemies said of him that he publicly boasted that he alone had driven out the English,
and that the valour of the troops would would have been nothing without his gold.
Dunois appears, also, to have been partly of the same opinion. Without disparaging the
courage of the army, he acknowledged the utility of the able financier, by whose means
they had been fed and paid, and constantly afforded him his powerful protection.
When peace returned, Jacques again devoted himself to commerce, and fitted up several
galleys to trade with the Genoese. He also bought large estates in various parts of France;
the chief of which were the baronies of St. Fargeau, Meneton, Salone, Maubranche,
Meaune, St. Gerant de Vaux, and St. Aon de Boissy; the earldoms or counties of La
Palisse, Champignelle, Beaumont, and Villeneuve la Genet, and the marquisate of Toucy.
He also procured for his son, Jean Coeur, who had chosen the Church for his profession,
a post no less distinguished than that of Archbishop of Bourges.
Everybody said that so much wealth could not have been honestly acquired; and both rich
and poor longed for the day that should humble the pride of the man, whom the one class
regarded as an upstart and the other as an oppressor. Jacques was somewhat alarmed at
the rumours that were afloat respecting him, and of dark hints that he had debased the
coin of the realm and forged the King's seal to an important document, by which he had
defrauded the state of very considerable sums. To silence these rumours, he invited many
alchymists from foreign countries to reside with him, and circulated a counter-rumour,
that he had discovered the secret of the philosopher's stone. He also built a magnificent
house in his native city, over the entrance of which he caused to be sculptured the
emblems of that science. Some time afterwards, he built another, no less splendid, at
Montpellier, which he inscribed in a similar manner. He also wrote a treatise upon the
hermetic philosophy, in which he pretended that he knew the secret of transmuting
metals.
But all these attempts to disguise his numerous acts of peculation proved unavailing; and
he was arrested in 1452, and brought to trial on several charges. Upon one only, which
the malice of his enemies invented to ruin him, was he acquitted; which was, that he had
been accessory to the death, by poison, of his kind patroness, Agnes Sorel. Upon the
others, he was found guilty; and sentenced to be banished the kingdom, and to pay the
enormous fine of four hundred thousand crowns. It was proved that he had forged the
King's seal; that, in his capacity of Master of the Mint of Bourges, he had debased, to a
very great extent, the gold and silver coin of the realm; and that he had not hesitated to
supply the Turks with arms and money to enable them to carry on war against their
Christian neighbours, for which service he had received the most munificent
recompences. Charles VII. was deeply grieved at his condemnation, and believed to the
last that he was innocent. By his means the fine was reduced within a sum which Jacques
Coeur could pay. After remaining for some time in prison, he was liberated, and left
France with a large sum of money, part of which, it was alleged, was secretly paid him by

Charles out of the produce of his confiscated estates. He retired to Cyprus, where he died
about 1460, the richest and most conspicuous personage of the island.
The writers upon alchymy all claim Jacques Coeur as a member of their fraternity, and
treat as false and libellous the more rational explanation of his wealth which the records
of his trial afford. Pierre Borel, in his "Antiquites Gauloises," maintains the opinion that
Jacques was an honest man, and that he made his gold out of lead and copper by means
of the philosopher's stone. The alchymic adepts in general were of the same opinion; but
they found it difficult to persuade even his contemporaries of the fact. Posterity is still
less likely to believe it.
INFERIOR ADEPTS OF THE FOURTEENTH AND FIFTEENTH CENTURIES.
Many other pretenders to the secrets of the philosopher's stone appeared in every country
in Europe, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The possibility of transmutation
was so generally admitted, that every chemist was more or less an alchymist. Germany,
Holland, Italy, Spain, Poland, France, and England produced thousands of obscure
adepts, who supported themselves, in the pursuit of their chimera, by the more profitable
resources of astrology and divination. The monarchs of Europe were no less persuaded
than their subjects of the possibility of discovering the philosopher's stone. Henry VI. and
Edward IV. of England encouraged alchymy. In Germany, the Emperors Maximilian,
Rodolph, and Frederic II. devoted much of their attention to it; and every inferior
potentate within their dominions imitated their example. It was a common practice in
Germany, among the nobles and petty sovereigns, to invite an alchymist to take up his
residence among them, that they might confine him in a dungeon till he made gold
enough to pay millions for his ransom. Many poor wretches suffered perpetual
imprisonment in consequence. A similar fate appears to have been intended by Edward
II. for Raymond Lulli, who, upon the pretence that he was thereby honoured, was
accommodated with apartments in the Tower of London. He found out in time the trick
that was about to be played him, and managed to make his escape, some of his
biographers say, by jumping into the Thames, and swimming to a vessel that lay waiting
to ceive him. In the sixteenth century, the same system was pursued, as will be shown
more fully in the life of Seton the Cosmopolite, in the succeeding chapter.
The following is a catalogue of the chief authors upon alchymy, who flourished during
this epoch, and whose lives and adventures are either unknown or are unworthy of more
detailed notice. John Dowston, an Englishman, lived in 1315, and wrote two treatises on
the philosopher's stone. Richard, or, as some call him, Robert, also an Englishman, lived
in 1330, and wrote a work entitled "Correctorium Alchymiae," which was much
esteemed till the time of Paracelsus. In the same year lived Peter of Lombardy, who
wrote what he called a "Complete Treatise upon the Hermetic Science," an abridgement
of which was afterwards published by Lacini, a monk of Calabria. In 1330 the most
famous alchymist of Paris was one Odomare, whose work "De Practica Magistri" was,
for a long time, a hand-book among the brethren of the science. John de Rupecissa, a
French monk of the order of St. Francis, flourished in 1357, and pretended to be a
prophet as well as an alchymist. Some of his prophecies were so disagreeable to Pope

Innocent VI, that the Pontiff determined to put a stop to them, by locking up the prophet
in the dungeons of the Vatican. It is generally believed that he died there, though there is
no evidence of the fact. His chief works are the "Book of Light," the "Five Essences," the
"Heaven of Philosophers," and his grand work "De Confectione Lapidis." He was not
thought a shining light among the adepts. Ortholani was another pretender, of whom
nothing is known, but that he exercised the arts of alchymy and astrology at Paris, shortly
before the time of Nicholas Flamel. His work on the practice of alchymy was written in
that city in 1358. Isaac of Holland wrote, it is supposed, about this time; and his son also
devoted himself to the science. Nothing worth repeating is known of their lives.
Boerhaave speaks with commendation of many passages in their works, and Paracelsus
esteemed them highly: the chief are "De Triplici Ordine Elixiris et Lapidis Theoria,"
printed at Berne in 1608; and "Mineralia Opera, seu de Lapide Philosophico," printed at
Middleburg in 1600. They also wrote eight other works upon the same subject. Koffstky,
a Pole, wrote an alchymical treatise, entitled "The Tincture of Minerals," about the year
1488. In this list of authors a royal name must not be forgotten. Charles VI. of France,
