for several weeks. It is not unusual for a stock to consolidate the gains
after a strong move.
3. Price rose up again away from the moving average. On June 5 a dragonfly doji formed, followed by a near gravestone doji (3) the following
session.
4. Price pulled back to the moving average, offering buyers another entry
opportunity. The next swing up began with a bullish engulfing pattern
(4) on June 13.
5. Price lifted up from the average and gapped up on June 15. Two spinning tops followed signaling a loss of momentum of the move. On

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 139 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

139

June 20 a bearish engulfing pattern formed (5), starting another pullback toward the moving average.
6. Price stopped declining at the 20-period SMA and consolidated there
for a few days.
7. Price caught air again, ending with another dark cloud cover pattern
(7) on July 9.
8. Price pulled back below the moving average. On July 18 a bullish engulfing pattern formed (8).
If a candlestick reversal signal calls the end of a price swing, and then price
resumes the longer trend after pulling back or consolidating, it does not mean
that the candlestick pattern failed. The presence of a reversal pattern does not
imply that an entire intermediate- or long-term trend will reverse. When price pulls
back or consolidates after an upward move, it does change direction for a period
of time; either from up to down or from up to sideways, respectively. Candlestick
reversal signals serve as warnings that a change in price direction may occur.
They do not tell us how significant the change will be, or how long it will last.
Reversion to the mean does not only occur in an uptrend; watch for the
same phenomenon in a downtrend. There will always be sellers covering short
positions, and “bottom fishers” looking for buying opportunities, whose trading actions will drive price back toward the mean.
Figure 7.21 shows DVR again, but this time a few months later. The stock
topped out in July 2007, forming a bearish Western head-and-shoulders top.
Price closed below the neckline (dotted line) of the head-and-shoulders pattern
on July 26, confirming the bearish pattern. Price curled back up a few days later
and tested the neckline as resistance. It is very common for prior support to be
tested as resistance after a breakdown, and vice versa after an upside breakout.
The price action that occurred during the subsequent decline corresponds to
numbers 1 through 4 on the chart:
1. Price declined for a couple of weeks, moving far away from the 20-period
SMA. The decline ended with a gap down and intraday sell-off on
August 6. By the close of that session, the stock had recovered much of the
intraday decline, as evidenced by the long tail, and formed a bullish hammer (1) on the daily chart. During the following session a bullish engulfing pattern formed around the hammer’s real body and the prior session’s
gap was filled. Price closed well off its high on the engulfing day leaving a
long upper shadow and evidence that there were still sellers around.
2. The next day price traded up to near the 20-period SMA (2) intraday;
here you see the reversion to the mean. The stock then closed well off
its high leaving another long upper shadow.

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

140

Page 140 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 7.21 When price declines too far from the average, it
tends to move back toward it
Source: TeleChart 2007®

3. Price declined again and tested the August low (at 1), setting up the
potential for a Western bullish double bottom pattern. A bullish hammer (3) formed on August 16, creating a smaller candlestick pattern
within the larger double bottom. I call this a pattern inside a pattern
and interpret it as strengthening the larger setup.
4. Price moved back up to the 20-period SMA.
The phenomenon of reversion to the mean offers traders opportunities to
enter positions at lower-risk areas than when price has moved away from the average where it is vulnerable to a setback. Reward and risk will be addressed later
in this book.
The Importance of Probability

Trading successfully is not a matter of chance; it is a result of trading in a manner that puts the odds of winning on your side. For example, when price moves
too far away from the average, it is more likely to revert to the average than to
continue moving farther away from it. That is not to say that when price moves
away from the average and moves back toward it, a long trend is likely to reverse. Remember that price tends to swing back and forth while still moving in
the general direction of the trend (see Figure 7.20).

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 141 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

141

Since the probability is good that price will revert
to the mean, that factor should influence the way traders
probability
select and manage their trades, especially swing traders.
The likelihood,
If a swing trader holds a long position in a stock and
but not a
does not wish to hold it through a pullback, once price
certainty, of
catches air it may be time to exit, or start scaling out of
something’s
the position, or at least be very watchful for a warning,
happening or
such as a candlestick reversal signal. If a stock that he
being true.
does not yet hold a position in, but would be interested
in purchasing, has moved far away from the average, he
can watch for a dip back toward the average for a lowerrisk entry opportunity. If an entry is taken while the stock is far away from the
average, chances are good that the trader is setting himself up to hold through a
pullback or sideways move.
Even traders who hold long-term positions should evaluate each stock individually. An investor may plan on holding through pullbacks as the trend develops. However, looks can be deceiving. Don’t forget to consider the stock’s
current volatility. What may appear to be a small move on the chart may actually be a significant percentage move.

Example

Figure 7.22 shows a daily chart of Echelon Corp. (ELON). Price pulled
back to the 20-period SMA in late July 2007. Price consolidated for a
few days followed by a strong swing up. At that point price had moved
away from the average, leaving a pocket of air below and the stochastic
oscillator provided an overbought reading, indicating the move was
overextended. (The stochastic oscillator is discussed later in this
chapter.) Price then turned down for several days, finally stopping at the
50-period SMA. Recall that you can quickly look at the logarithmic
scale to get a gauge of the stock’s current volatility. To find out exactly
how far this stock fell, calculate the distance from the high of the
upswing ($32.49) to the low of the downswing ($19.92). The difference
was $12.57, or a decline of approximately 39 percent from the swing
high to the swing low. Notice that a long lower shadow formed the
swing low indicating that bulls were willing to step into long positions
at the 50-period moving average.
(continues)

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

142

Page 142 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

(continued )

FIGURE 7.22 Holding through a pullback may be more difﬁcult than a
trader realizes
Source: TeleChart 2007®

The example in Figure 7.22 was chosen in order to point out the following:
• Short-term traders who held long positions during the swing up would
have no desire to watch all of their gains disappear.
• Even long-term traders would have to question whether they would
wish to watch a stock decline so far.
• If a protective stop were utilized (recommended) that did not exceed
the trader’s maximum risk tolerance, for example, 10 percent for a
swing trader and 15 percent for an investor, the stop would not have
held up through the decline.
• Once price caught air, the probability of a pullback was high. A trader
who chased this stock and entered a long position near the swing high
watched the trade immediately turn negative and had a very painful
experience due to a poorly timed entry.

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 143 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

143

Be careful not to fall into the “wishful thinking” trap. When looking back
from the right edge of the chart at a stock that trended for a long period of
time, you may think you could have just held on through all the pullbacks and
periods of consolidation. Looking at a past chart of a stock in which you held
no position is a quite different situation than monitoring a live trade in which
real profits are at stake. In some cases a trader can hold on for much of the trend
using a trailing stop. However, in many cases a trader may get stopped out one
or more times as the trend evolves. And if a stock is volatile, what might look
like it was a minor pullback on the chart may have equated to a significant percentage decline.
Although holding through a decline may not sound like a big deal, that’s
where experience, with real money invested, is needed in order to determine
psychologically what you can handle. Short-term traders typically do not plan
to hold through pullbacks. If a short-term trader finds himself holding
through a lot of pullbacks, it may be an indication of poor trade selection and
management. Lack of discipline will lead to failure in this business. Plan your
trades in advance and know what justifies an entry, where to exit with a profit
if the trade goes as expected, and where to exit with a protective stop in case it
goes against you.
Beware of Chasing Overextended Stocks

A common mistake made by inexperienced traders is to chase after a stock entering a position when price has become overextended. Unfortunately, new
traders often are not aware of the concept of reversion to the mean. Even those
who are aware may choose to take the gamble, hoping that price will continue
to move unabated. They let their emotions get the best of them. Emotional decisions typically lead to sloppy trade execution and losses that could have been
avoided.
Experienced traders do not generally buy the swing high (or sell the swing
low) and then hold on trying to ride out a pullback. More often, it is the experienced traders who are gladly selling their shares near the swing highs to the
novice traders who shouldn’t be buying at such overextended levels. The traders
who buy the swing highs are sometimes called the “greater fools,” because there
is no greater fool willing to pay higher prices, so they are left holding the bag, so
to speak, as the stock turns against them.
The experienced traders are also the ones who are waiting to take the
shares off the hands of the novices who bail out because the pain of entering
too high, and then having to hold through the subsequent pullback, becomes
too much for them. In other words, experienced traders look to enter on
weakness (pullbacks or consolidation) and exit into strength as price gets
overextended.

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

144

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 144 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Smart Investor Tip
In order to thrive as a trader, you must ﬁrst survive. Trading is not
about gambling or wishful thinking. Traders must learn to control their
emotions and trade based on what is likely to happen rather than on
what they “hope” will happen. Seasoned traders do not use hope as a
strategy!

Momentum of the Trend
In addition to determining the direction and duration of a trend, there are also
methods of measuring its momentum. In his book Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (New York Institute of Finance, 1999, p. 228), John Murphy
defines momentum as follows: “Momentum measures the velocity of price
changes as opposed to the actual price levels themselves.”
Oscillators are a group of indicators that measure the momentum of price
(the rate of its ascent or descent). Price often loses momentum before it actually
changes direction; thus, oscillators may act as “leading” indicators of price.
While there are many different oscillators with different methods used to calculate them, their interpretation doesn’t vary much. Be careful using too many oscillators because they basically measure the same thing.
There are usually at least a few oscillators to
choose from in most charting programs. Stochastics and
Wilder’s Relative Strength Index (RSI) are among the
oscillator
best known.
A technical
Unlike moving averages, which tend to whipsaw
indicator that
when
price moves sideways, oscillators are effective in a
signiﬁes when
nontrending
environment. They can help catch the turna stock or
ing points when price swings back and forth across a
market is in an
trading range. The oscillator’s fluctuations tend to correoverbought or
spond to the peaks and troughs in price. Oscillators are
oversold
not limited to nontrending environments. They can also
condition.
be helpful in a trending market. Oscillators have several
uses in this regard:
• Overextended conditions. When price is rising and an oscillator reaches
an extreme high level, it sends a signal that price may be overextended
to the upside or overbought. When an oscillator reaches an extreme low
level, it indicates that price may be overextended to the downside or

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 145 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

145

oversold. Overbought and oversold readings warn that price is vulnerable to at least a short-term change in direction.
• Divergence analysis. When higher peaks are forming in an uptrending
market, but the peaks of the oscillator are declining, a negative (bearish) divergence exists. In a downtrending market, if price is forming declining bottoms, but the oscillator bottoms are rising, it signals a
positive (bullish) divergence. A divergence between price and the oscillator is a sign that the trend may be weakening.
• Relationship to the midpoint. Many oscillators have a midpoint. For
some oscillators that point is zero; others that move along a scale of 0
and 100 have midpoints of 50. When price turns up after a downtrend,
the oscillator will cross the midpoint and remain above it for most of
the uptrend, and vice versa when price reverses from up to down.
Traders may use the crossing of the midpoint as a buy or sell signal.
For now, we’ll focus on using an oscillator, namely stochastics, to help determine when price may be overextended.
Stochastic Oscillator

The stochastic oscillator is a very popular momentum indicator developed by
George Lane. It is based on the premise that when price is trending up, the closing prices will tend to be near the high of the price range. In a downtrend, the
closing prices will be nearer the low of the price range.
The indicator includes two lines: the faster %K line and the slower %D
line. The %K line is the stochastic. The %D line is a moving average of %K,
which smoothes the stochastic and acts as a signal line. The result is two lines
that oscillate between fixed lower and upper boundaries of 0 and 100 percent,
respectively (Figure 7.23).

FIGURE 7.23

Stochastic oscillator

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

146

11:39 AM

Page 146 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

The calculation compares the most recent closing price (on a percentage
basis) to the total range of price over a designated period of time. Time periods
must be chosen for the stochastic and the moving average.
Example

Two commonly used lengths are 14 periods for the stochastic with a
5-period moving average (14-5-5) and 12 periods with a 3-period
moving average (12-3-3). As is usually the case with technical indicators,
if you opt for speed, you give up some accuracy, and vice versa. A
stochastic length of 14 will produce slightly slower signals, but they may
be more accurate. A length of 12 will produce faster signals, although
there may be more false signals.

Within the boundaries of 0 and 100 lie the overbought line (80) and the
oversold line (20). A reading of over 80 is considered to be high; it indicates
that the current closing price is near the top of the designated range. Conversely, a reading of below 20 is considered to be low; the current closing price
is near the low end of the designated range.
Overbought and Oversold Conditions

The stochastic oscillator can be used to alert traders of short-term price extremes. At times, price moves for too long, or too far too quickly, in one direction. The result is an overbought (uptrend) or oversold (downtrend) condition.
These conditions are generally short term in nature and can be alleviated by a
pullback, correction, or a period of consolidation. In a strong trending market,
confident bulls (uptrend) or bears (downtrend) will often step back into trades
once the short-term overextended condition has been alleviated. There will certainly be cases when the trend will reverse after such conditions arise; however,
it takes a consensus by many market participants to reverse a strong trend.
Therefore, overbought and oversold signals should generally be interpreted to
be short term in nature unless there is additional evidence that a trend reversal
is in the making.
If a bearish candlestick reversal pattern forms while stochastic is in overbought territory, or if a bullish reversal pattern forms while stochastic is in
oversold territory, it strengthens the candlestick signal. In these cases, a candlestick pattern forms when the stock is already vulnerable to a change in the direction of price.

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 147 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

147

Example

Figure 7.24 shows a daily chart of Advanced Micro Devices (AMD). In
mid-July 2007, the price advance showed signs of trouble with the
formation of three doji within four trading sessions. A strong bearish
engulfing pattern formed on July 20. Price had moved up away from the
moving average and the stochastic oscillator was in overbought territory,
adding more evidence that a change in the direction of price was likely
to occur.

FIGURE 7.24 Bearish engulﬁng pattern formed while the
stochastic oscillator was in overbought territory
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Enhanced Candlestick Signals
Now you know that when price moves far from the average it tends to revert to
the mean. In addition, when the stochastic oscillator signals overbought or oversold, price is vulnerable to a change in direction. These two scenarios will often
occur in sync, but not always, so I don’t recommend that you require that price
be far from the average and the stochastic oscillator be at an extreme in order to
justify acting on a candlestick signal. However, if either or both conditions are
present, the odds are good that a change in the direction of price will occur.

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

148

Page 148 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

Figure 7.25 shows a daily chart of DTS Inc. (DTSI). Price made a
strong swing up in early August 2007, ending with a bearish shooting
star on August 8. Follow the dotted line down from the shooting star
to below the chart window and you’ll see that the stochastic oscillator
with a setting of 14-5-5 (middle panel) did not provide an
overbought reading. Even with a shorter setting of 12-3-3 (lower
panel), the indicator did not move above the overbought line.
However, notice how far the two long bullish candles that formed
prior to the shooting star pushed price above the 20-period SMA. In
this case, in spite of the absence of confirmation from the oscillator, a
change in the direction of the short-term trend should be anticipated.
Price consolidated for a period of time after the appearance of the
shooting star.

FIGURE 7.25 In spite of the lack of conﬁrmation from the
stochastic oscillator, price had moved away from the average
when a bearish shooting star formed
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 149 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Trend Analysis

149

Example

Figure 7.26 shows a daily chart of Cohu Inc. (COHU). Price declined
far below the 20-period SMA by early August 2007. On August 7, the
stock gapped down open but closed deeply into the prior bearish
candle’s real body, forming a bullish piercing pattern. In this example,
not only was price far below the moving average, but the stochastic was
in oversold territory. Price then rallied back up to the average.

FIGURE 7.26 Bullish piercing pattern formed while price was
far below the average and was conﬁrmed by stochastics
Source: TeleChart 2007®

There will certainly be candlestick reversal signals that follow through
when neither of the preceding conditions is present. The likelihood of a successful signal increases, though, if there is more evidence that price is overextended
and vulnerable to a change in direction.

JWBK100-Ch07.qxd

2/21/08

11:39 AM

Page 150 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

JWBK100-ch08.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 151 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

8
Chapter

Gaps
o instruction on charting would be complete without a discussion of
gaps. It is important for traders to be able to identify gaps and understand their implications. For decades, gaps have been recognized in
Western technical analysis. However, the identification and analysis of gaps did
not originate in the West. The Japanese utilized gaps in their analysis long before they became known in the Western hemisphere. In Japanese candlestick
charting, price gaps are referred to as windows.
In this chapter, you will be introduced to price gaps and a very common
event called the morning gap. Since the term gap is so well known, for consistency, gap will be used throughout most of this discussion rather than the
Japanese term windows.

N

Price Gaps
A price gap is also called a true gap because it leaves a void on the chart. The
gap is still open by the end of the daily trading session, leaving empty space
where no trading took place. Neither the real bodies nor shadows of the two
consecutive bars that form the gap can overlap.
In order for an upside gap to form, the low of the
current bar must be above the high of the previous bar
(Figure 8.1). The Japanese refer to an upside gap as a risgap
ing window. For a downside gap to occur, the high of the
Empty space
current bar must be below the low of the prior bar (Figure
on a chart
8.2). The Japanese call a downside gap a falling window.
