price bar reversals and continuations in the market. Finally, various popular price
bar formations are discussed via numerous chart examples.
xvi

Preface

Chapter 8 (Window Oscillators and Overlay Indicators) classifies indicators
into window oscillators and price overlay indicators. Overlay indicators are further subdivided into numerical, geometrical, horizontal, and algorithmic indicators. The differences between static and dynamic indicators are also explained.
The practitioner is then introduced to the seven main approaches to analyzing
oscillators. Cycle tuned oscillators, multiple timeframe oscillator analysis, and
various popular oscillators and indicators are described in detail.
Chapter 9 (Divergence Analysis) describes the application of divergence in
technical analysis. Detailed coverage of the definitional issues helps clarify the
confusion surrounding the topic. The practitioner is introduced to bullish, bearish,
standard, and reverse divergence. Various explanations are also presented with respect to the functioning of reverse divergence. The concepts of double divergence,
detrending, and signal alternation are also covered in detail. The chapter concludes with numerous chart examples illustrating the various forms of divergence
in equities and commodities.
Chapter 10 (Fibonacci Number and Ratio Analysis) introduces the practitioner
to Fibonacci ratio and number analysis. It covers Fibonacci retracements, extensions, expansions, and projections with numerous chart examples. All Fibonacci
calculations are clearly explained and illustrated. The differences between numerically and geometrically based Fibonacci operations are also discussed. Guidelines
for drawing Fibonacci retracements in single, double, and multiple leg retracements are covered in detail. Fibonacci price and time ratio analysis of Elliot waves
are also explored. Various popular Fibonacci applications such as fan lines, channel expansions, and arc projections are illustrated via real‐world charts.
Chapter 11 (Moving Averages) analyzes various moving averages, such as
exponential, simple, and weighted moving averages. The practitioner is shown
how to calculate various averages. The chapter extensively covers the seven main
components and nine main applications of moving averages. Moving averages
functioning as signals and triggers are also discussed.
Chapter 12 (Envelopes and Methods of Price Containment) covers price bands
or envelopes and their various modes of price containment. The practitioner is
introduced to the six main functions of a price envelope. The different forms of
central value that may be adopted by an envelope and the construction of the
upper and lower bands are also analyzed in detail. The practitioner is then shown
how to tune the bands with respect to the dominant cycles in the markets. The
five main forms of price containment are illustrated with suggestions for effective
entry and exit of the bands.
Chapter 13 (Chart Pattern Analysis) discusses the application of chart pattern
analysis. A detailed breakdown of the classification of chart patterns is presented
with specific examples. There is extensive coverage of the minimum measuring
objective, conditions for pattern completion, and alternative price targets. The
chapter concludes with the extensive treatment of many popular reversal and continuation chart patterns.
Chapter 14 (Japanese Candlestick Analysis) introduces the practitioner to
­Japanese candlestick analysis. Many of the most popular Japanese candlestick
formations are presented and covered in detail. Japanese candlestick formations
xvii

Preface

should be read within the context of the market, and this is achieved with reference to the 16 price action characteristics discussed extensively in this chapter. The
practitioner is then shown how to integrate Japanese candlestick analysis with
other forms of technical analysis, such as cycles, chart patterns, oscillators, Ichimoku Kinko Hyu charting, Fibonacci levels, volume action, and moving averages.
Chapter 15 (Point-and-Figure Charting) covers Point-and-Figure charting, focusing on the minimum continuation and reversal box size, vertical and horizontal counts, box filtering, and the effects of chart scaling, as well as coverage of the
most popular point and figure formations.
Chapter 16 (Ichimoku Charting and Analysis) presents a powerful set of
price overlay indicators, collectively referred to as Ichimoku Kinko Hyu charting.
The chapter focuses on the construction, analysis, and application of the various
overlays with special attention to the time displacement and lookback periods.
Methods of trend identification, potential reversals, and continuations are also
discussed with respect to the various Ichimoku overlays.
Chapter 17 (Market Profile) covers market profile charting. There is detailed
treatment of the value area calculation, determination of the Point of Control via
Time Price Opportunity (TPO) count and volume, as well as coverage of the various popular TPO distributions.
Chapter 18 (Basic Elliott Wave Analysis) introduces Elliott wave analysis with
special focus on wave construction, alternation, truncations, impulsive and corrective
wave formations, as well as the application of Fibonacci ratio and number analysis to
the Elliott wave structure. The significance of pattern, time, and ratio is also discussed.
Chapter 19 (Basics of Gann Analysis) covers some of the most popular Gann
techniques for forecasting potential price reversals, which includes the squaring of
price and range, squaring of the high and low, the square of nine time and price
projections, Gann lines, Gann retracements, and Gann grids.
Chapter 20 (Cycle Analysis) covers the basic elements of cycle analysis. The
principle of summation, harmonicity, proportional commonality, nominality, variation, and synchronicity are covered in detail. Cycle inversions, translations, and the
tuning of oscillators to the dominant cycle are illustrated clearly on various charts.
The practitioner is also presented with five basic approaches to identifying cycles.
Chapter 21 (Volatility Analysis) discusses the five measures of market and
price volatility. There is also coverage of the concept of normal and standard deviation, mean deviation, skewness, kurtosis, average true range, and stock beta.
Plus there is discussion of the volatility indices and their application.
Chapter 22 (Market Breadth) covers the elements and factors that affect the
reliability and consistency of market breadth analysis. Market fields and components such as its nine breadth data fields and eleven data operations are discussed
in detail. Various popular market breadth indicators and their applications are
then illustrated via numerous equity and commodity charts.
Chapter 23 (Sentiment Indicators and Contrary Opinion) introduces the topic
of sentiment analysis and analyzes the behavior and psychology of the market
participants. The chapter covers contrary opinion, irrationality, and necessary
conditions for the reliability of sentiment indicators. Various popular sentiment
indicators are examined with the appropriate charts.
xviii

Preface

Chapter 24 (Relative Strength Analysis) is about measuring the relative
strength of one market against another. The directional implications and definitions such underperformance and outperformance are explained with various
examples. The application of technical analysis to RS lines is examined and illustrated via numerous charts.
Chapter 25 (Investor Psychology) covers the basic elements of investor
psychology. The chapter discusses how trends, consolidations, and market reversals
develop with respect to various psychological and emotional biases. It also describes the underlying forces that create chart patterns in terms of the biases of
investors and traders. Topics relating to cognitive dissonance and positive feedback
loops are covered in detail.
Chapter 26 (Trader Risk Profiling and Position Analysis) introduces the practitioner to trader profiling. The practitioner is exposed to the concept of risk capacity and is shown that most market participants are usually both risk averse
and risk seeking at the same time, with respect to price, time, and risk size. Trade
orders based on behavioral profile are also discussed in detail. The collection of
bullish and bearish indications across multiple timeframes is discussed in terms of
the long, medium, and shorter term trader and investor.
Chapter 27 (Integrated Technical Analysis) introduces the concept of integrated technical analysis. It shows the practitioner how to effectively combine various technical tools to achieve better forecasts and trade decisions. It stresses the
importance of identifying significant bullish and bearish clustering and oscillator
signal agreements in order to locate high probability trades. Multiple timeframe
analysis and multicollinearity are also discussed in detail.
Chapter 28 (Money Management) covers the elements of money management
for traders. It classifies money management into passive and dynamic exposures.
The four stochastic exit mechanisms are introduced and explained in detail. The
concept of linear and geometric expectancy, asymmetric leverage, minimum winning percentage, and win‐loss distribution are discussed from the perspective
of improving trade performance. Familiarity with the concepts and disciplined
application of passive and dynamic components of money management are
essential skills for the long-term survivability as a trader.
Chapter 29 (Technical Trading Systems) introduces the practitioner to the
basic elements of constructing, testing, and optimizing technical trading systems.
It covers system conceptualization, system components, and performance measurement specifications.
Appendix A (Basic Investment Decision Making Based on Chart Analysis)
illustrates how charts are employed to make trading and investment decisions.
The practitioner is shown how to describe both the stock and the climate or environment in which the stock is trading in bullish and bearish terms and how to
identify various participatory options available in the stock with respect to the
client risk capacity and expectation.
Appendix B (Official IFTA CFTe, STA Diploma (UK), and MTA CMT Exam
Reading Lists) provides a list the official IFTA CFTe, STA Diploma (UK), and
MTA CMT exam reading requirements.
This book also includes an overview of the companion website and test bank.
xix

Preface

Online Materials
This book also includes access to a companion website (www.wiley.com/go/limta)
that includes:
An online test bank based on the topics outlined in the official syllabuses for
both the MTA and IFTA professional examinations
■■ Answers to the end‐of‐chapter questions in the book
■■ Excel spreadsheets that help illustrate the mathematics underlying various
technical and money management concepts within the handbook
■■ Updated charts
■■ Additional content on new topics added to the exams
■■

For instructions on accessing the test bank, please refer to the About the Test
Bank and Website at the end of this book.

xx

Acknowledgments

I Emilie Herman, Chris Gage, and everyone at Wiley for their amazing work and

would like to express my deepest appreciation and gratitude to Nick Wallwork,

inspiration, without which the creation of this book would not be at all possible.
I am especially indebted to Emilie Herman for her phenomenal contribution
and expertise in helping me put this book together. I thank Emilie for her constant encouragement and guidance and for putting up with all the delays during
the difficult and very challenging writing process. I would also like to convey my
heartfelt appreciation to Chris Gage for his amazing work on the manuscripts.
Finally, I truly thank all my past and current graduates for their amazing participation, patience, and dedication. It is through their constant feedback, criticisms,
and fervent participation that much of the technical analysis in this book have
been refined and crystallized into its current form. A special word of thanks also
goes out to Mr. Eric Lee at MetaQuotes (Singapore) for his very kind assistance.
The charts in this book are sourced, with kind permission, from Stockcharts
.com and MetaQuotes Software Corp. Note that MetaTrader is a trademark of
MetaQuotes Software Corp.

xxi

About the Author

M awarded the Bronwen Wood Memorial Prize in financial technical analysis
ark Lim graduated from King’s College London in Special Physics. He was

by the Society of Technical Analysis (UK) in 2007. He holds both the MSTA (UK)
and the International Federation of Technical Analysts CFTe designations and is a
full member of the Society of Technical Analysis (UK). Mark’s expertise includes
stock, CFDs, commodity futures, and options trading. He is currently involved
with mathematics and physics at the postgraduate level.
Mark is the author of The Profitable Art and Science of Vibratrading (Wiley,
2011). He is also a contributing author of The Wiley Trading Guide Volume II.
He conducts a range of technical analysis and trading Masterclasses via online
webinars and on‐site seminars, covering intermediate to advanced profit extraction methodologies for directional and nondirectional trading.
Mark can be reached at www.tradermasterclass.com.

xxiii

Chapter

1

Introduction to the Art
and Science of Technical
Analysis

Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
■■ Understand the key concepts underlying technical analysis
■■ Identify the different forms of chart analysis
■■ Describe the objectives of technical analysis
■■ Understand what subjectivity means in technical analysis
■■ Recognize the strengths and weaknesses of technical analysis
■■ Categorize market participants according to style and time in markets
■■ Identify the various styles and approaches in technical analysis

T Its main strength is that a lot of it is visual, giving practitioners a better feel

echnical analysis is a fascinating field of study. It is as much science as it is art.

of the underlying dynamics of the markets. We shall also be looking at the various challenges to technical analysis, their resolution, and how technical analysis
affects trading in general. The classification of technical approaches, market participants, and various markets will also be discussed in detail.

1.1 Main Objective of Technical Analysis
It is generally accepted that human beings are born with certain instincts, tempered and molded by evolution via the passing of time. Every human being strives
and seeks to fulfill these powerful instinctive forces.

1

the Handbook of Technical Analysis

The three main motivational instincts are:
1. The instinct to survive
2. The instinct for comfort
3. The instinct to propagate
The instinct to survive is probably the strongest and most overpowering. Survival almost always precedes the need for comfort or to propagate the species. The
instinct to survive includes:
The instinct to stay alive
■■ The instinct to satisfy hunger
■■ The instinct to seek safety, that is, being in a group/herd
■■ The instinct to avoid danger (by having natural fears like the fear of fire, loud
sounds, heights, etc.)
■■

This powerful instinct to survive is the main driving force in life for striving
to make a profit. But in order to make a profit to ensure continued survival, there
must be a positive change in the actual or perceived value of something that we
own. This change in value of some variable may be anything that will allow us to
profit from change. One very popular and convenient variable of change is price.
We can participate in this price change by satisfying a very simple mechanical rule
that will ensure profitability every single time, which is to always buy when prices
are low and sell when they are higher, popularly referred to as the buy low, sell
high principle. See Figure 1.1.
Unfortunately, in order to satisfy this simple rule of guaranteed profitability,
we need to be able to do more of one thing, which is to be able to determine the
direction of price ahead of time in order to know exactly when to buy low and subsequently sell higher. Hence, it is not only the mechanical action of buying low and
selling high that counts, but also the timing of the action itself that is critical. This

Figure 1.1

2

The Mechanics of Profiting from a Change.

Introduction to the Art and Science of Technical Analysis

introduces an element of chance or probability into an otherwise fairly straightforward mechanical venture. Profitability therefore requires effective and efficient
action in two dimensions, that is, price and time. Traders and analysts keep track
of this action using a two‐dimensional visualization tool, that is, a price‐time chart,
which tracks price on the vertical axis and time on horizontal axis.
In short, the ability to forecast or predict price or market action in a reasonably accurate fashion represents one of the skills that may be critical for longer‐
term success as a professional trader or analyst.

1.2 Dual Function of Technical Analysis
Technical analysis essentially serves two main functions:
1. For Identification: It identifies and describes past and present price action. It
serves as a historical record of what has transpired in the markets. It provides
a descriptive representation of market action. This allows the market practitioner to observe how the market has performed in the past, which includes its
average volatility over a specified period; its highest and lowest historical price
extremes; the common areas of consolidation, average duration, and price
excursion of trends; the amount of liquidity and participation in the markets; the average degree and frequency of price gapping; the impact of various
monetary economic announcements on price, and so on. This information is
especially critical prior to any investment or trading decision.
2. For Forecasting: Once a particular price or market action is identified, the practitioner may now use this information to interpret what the data actually means
before inferring future price action. This inference about potential price action is
wholly based on the assumption that price patterns are repetitive to some reasonable degree and therefore may be used as a basis for price predictions.

1.3 Forecasting Price and Market Action
There are three main approaches to predicting potential future price action or
behavior, namely via:
1. Fundamental Analysis
2. Technical Analysis
3. Information Analysis
See Figure 1.2.

Forecasting Stock Prices Using Fundamental Analysis
One way to gauge the potential price of a stock is by analyzing the company’s performance via its financial statements and accounts in order to determine its intrinsic value
or the worth of the security in light of all its holdings, debt, earnings, dividends, income
and balance sheet activity, cash flow, and so on. This accounting information is nor3

the Handbook of Technical Analysis

Figure 1.2

Three Approaches to Price Forecasting.

mally represented in ratio form, as in price to earnings (P/E), price to earnings growth
(PEG), price to book, price to sales, and debt to equity ratios, to name but a few.
The logic is that a strongly performing company should continue to perform
well into the future and garner more demand from investors excited to participate
in the expected capital gains derived from the stock’s price and appreciating dividend yields. The price of a stock is expected to rise if there are sufficient buyers,
signifying a demand for it. Conversely, the price of a stock is expected to decline
if there are sufficient sellers, signifying an oversupply in the stock. Demand is
potentially generated if the current stock price is below its estimated intrinsic
value, that is, it is currently undervalued or underpriced, whereas supply is created
if the current stock price is above its estimated intrinsic value, that is, it is currently overvalued or overpriced. See Figures 1.3 and 1.4 for illustrations of using
intrinsic value to forecast potential stock price movements.

Figure 1.3

4

Price Forecasting Based on Intrinsic Value of a Stock.

