
Cup with Handle

279

FIGURE 11.9 ACMR increased approximately ﬁvefold after the breakout from the
cup and handle pattern.

As you can see in Figure 11.13, after the stock pushed its way past
the horizontal line at the 26-cent level, it ascended to above $100, which
is about a 400-fold increase. Here again we could use that time machine: a
$10,000 investment in 1992 would have grown to $4 million in a mere eight
years. (The small arrows on the chart, remember, point out the times that
the six stock splits took place).

FIGURE 11.10 CNP shows an almost perfect pattern here as it creates a base
beneath the $6.30 level.

280

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 11.11 CNP proceeded to a nearly ﬁvefold increase with a series of higher
highs and higher lows.

FIGURE 11.12 Here is the stock EMC on a split-adjusted basis forming a cup with
handle pattern in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Cup with Handle

281

FIGURE 11.13 EMC enjoyed a spectacular 400-fold increase in value after its cup
with handle pattern was complete.

Before we get too carried away with such astronomical returns, let us
look at two more cup with handle examples with more typical changes
in value. Figure 11.14 shows the symbol MTW sporting a cup with handle
pattern that has a couple of interesting properties. First, the time length of
the cup and the length of the handle are about the same. Second, if you
examine the handle closely, it seems to be itself a smaller cup with handle
pattern. There is nothing wrong with either of these nuances of the chart.
Patterns aren’t the same for every chart in every time frame. As you gain
experience looking at hundreds of different charts, you will learn to be
flexible (within reason) as to what constitutes a winning pattern.
Once again, the arrow highlights for us the point in time when the price
pushed above resistance, eventually moving from $4 to about $57. Owners
of this stock would not have suffered some of the severe ups and downs of
other equities, as the ascent of MTW was relatively uninterrupted (Figure
11.15).
One final example of this pattern (before we look at some pattern failures) is stock ticker PTR, which sports a rather dainty handle on its right
side (Figure 11.16). It should be pointed out once again that often the best
stocks are those that already seem too expensive. When this stock made
its way above resistance, you would have been fair to observe that it had

282

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 11.14 Here the stock MTW consolidates below the $4 resistance level
before breaking above it.

FIGURE 11.15 MTW went up virtually uninterrupted after completing the pattern, rising more than fourteenfold.

Cup with Handle

283

FIGURE 11.16 Here the stock PTR forms a nice pattern beneath the resistance
level at $18.50.

already doubled in price in just a year. It might feel too risky to buy into the
stock. The more potent fact, however, is that it was moving out of a very
large, reliable pattern.
Taking the risk by buying into this expensive stock paid off remarkably
for those who bought. The price increased from the breakout point (see
arrow) to about $125 in only a couple of years (Figure 11.17).
These examples might seem to make it easy to get huge returns on
stocks, as long as you can locate the right pattern. This is not always the
case. Any pattern is prone to failure, and when a pattern fails, you should
get out of the position immediately. The final portion of this chapter looks
at these failures and their signs.

PATTERN FAILURES
Take a look at the chart in Figure 11.18. It seems very similar to many of
the other charts shown in this chapter, and a person would be perfectly
reasonable to buy into this stock and anticipate handsome gains. This is,
after all, virtually a textbook example of what a cup with handle pattern
should look like.

284

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 11.17 The stock PTR went on to a more than sixfold increase in price
after the pattern was complete.

FIGURE 11.18 Here is a virtually perfect cup with handle pattern of the stock
symbol SM.

Cup with Handle

285

FIGURE 11.19 The break above the cup with handle by SM propelled the stock
to an approximate 150 percent increase.

And in fact, buyers of this stock would have been delighted with the
short-term results of their purchase. The stock, ticker symbol SM, increased in value by 150 percent in less than a year (Figure 11.19).
But there’s more to the story than this. Figure 11.20 shows the initial breakout (with an arrow), the rapid increase in price, and then—
surprisingly—the just as rapid decrease in price. By 1998, every bit of profit
in this position would have been wiped out, and you actually would be holding onto a losing position. This would be terribly disheartening to those
who had ridden the stock to a 150 percent profit only to see it disintegrate
into a loss. (It should be noted, in the long term, the stock went on to fabulous gains later, but in 1998 we would not have had the benefit of a graph
extending years into the future!)
How could such a loss have been avoided? How could we have at least
preserved a portion of the profits after that initial 150 percent increase?
Every chart is different, of course, but in this case, it probably would have
been best to monitor the stock for its series of higher highs and higher
lows. As long as the stock was ascending with a pattern of higher highs
and higher lows, it would be a solid hold. When the price cut beneath one
of the prior lows, however, it would have been a good time to get out. In
this instance, it would have meant a profit of about 50 percent (instead of

286

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 11.20 The price violated the support zone established by the cup with
handle pattern. In spite of this, the stock ultimately went on to a more than 10-fold
increase in value.

150 percent), but that’s certainly a lot better than the loss that would have
ensued if the position had simply been held in spite of its price action.
One of the most popular securities on the market is the QQQ,
often referred to as the “cubes” and with the ticker symbol QQQQ. This
ETF tracks the performance of the NASDAQ 100 stocks, and the chart in
Figure 11.21 shows the QQQ with a well-formed cup with handle and a resistance level of about $40.20. At the time of this chart, the price pushed
cleanly past this resistance level, portending good times for this security.
Look at the longer-term price perspective in Figure 11.22, however.
The price breakout is indicated by the arrow, and as you can see, the price
moved up to $42, sank back down to the former resistance level, pushed
higher once again to $43.50, and sank once again to the resistance level,
ascending yet again (but not as high as the last time), and then finally gave
up and fell hard.
This certainly wasn’t the result expected. The QQQ seemed to cling to
the $40.20 line and fell to that level repeatedly. On its fourth fall down to
that level, it no longer had the support from buyers that it needed, and it
sank far beneath the initial breakout point. A person steadfastly holding
onto this position would have had a substantial loss.
The “higher highs, higher lows” would also have been helpful here.
It would not take long to see that no such pattern was forming, and the

Cup with Handle

287

FIGURE 11.21 Based on this pattern, it seemed that QQQQ was well-positioned
for a substantial price increase.

FIGURE 11.22 In spite of the cup with handle pattern and the subsequent price
action above resistance, QQQQ ultimately fell well below its former resistance level.

288

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

position could be closed. At a minimum, however, a stop price should always be set just beneath the former resistance level. In this instance, any
price action below $40.20 would be cause to immediately close out the position. Even if it means sacrificing former profits, at least you keep your
losses to an absolute minimum.

DIAMONDS AND DEAD-CAT BOUNCES
That is surely one of the more peculiar headings in this book, but both of
these are real terms in the world of technical analysis.
A diamond pattern is formed when a stock’s price swings gets increasingly wide, and then increasingly narrow, resulting in roughly a diamond
shape when trendlines are applied. This pattern can be bearish or bullish,
depending on whether the price breaks above or below the pattern.
Figure 11.23 shows DirectTV Group in a diamond pattern spanning
from about $18.50 to $28.50. Once it broke out of this pattern to the
upside, it quickly climbed to the mid 30s. The diamond pattern is worthy

FIGURE 11.23 DirectTV’s stock formed a diamond pattern that spanned three
years and presaged a strong push higher in price.

Cup with Handle

289

of special note, not only because it is rare but also because it is one of the
more reliable technical patterns.
Diamond patterns are just as potent on the bearish side. During the
tremendous commodity boom in the summer of 2008, Alpha Natural Resources (ANR) spent almost that entire summer hammering out a wellformed diamond pattern. When the pattern was broken to the downside,
ANR lost about 85 percent of its value in just a few months, as shown in
Figure 11.24.
There is also a circumstance in technical trading known as a deadcat bounce, which is much less well-defined than other patterns we’ve

FIGURE 11.24 Between August and November 2008, ANR lost about 85 percent
of its equity value, which was predicted by the preceding diamond pattern.

290

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

discussed. As the name implies, the dead-cat bounce refers to an equity
that has plunged so sharply in value that, at some point, it will probably
bounce up in price from a sharply oversold condition.
In the financial crisis of 2008–2009, there were hundreds of stocks that
lost more than 90 percent of their peak value. In many cases, these stocks
gained hundreds or even thousands of percent after they bounced off their
March 2009 lows. Lodgnet Interactive, shown in Figure 11.25, climbed
about 1200 percent off its March 2008 lows after having lost 98 percent
of its value before.
The reason dead-cat bounces are enticing has to do with simple arithmetic: it is impossible to make anything more than 100 percent on a short

FIGURE 11.25 Lodgenet went from about $36 to 50 cents during the crisis of
2008, only to recover a portion of that loss shortly thereafter.

Cup with Handle

291

sale, whereas the potential profits from a long position are unlimited. If you
had the impeccable timing to short LNET at its peak and cover the position
at its precise bottom, you would have made a handsome 98 percent return.
However, a long position (over a much shorter time span) would have
yielded 1200 percent with the dead-cat bounce. So even though the vast
majority of people who had ever bought LNET were still in losing positions
after this 1200 percent bounce; if you had entered anywhere near the bottom, the percentage gain would have been fantastic.
An even more remarkable example is found with Pier 1 Imports
(Figure 11.26), which, having lost almost all its equity value, bounced 4300
percent. To put that in concrete terms, a $10,000 investment on March

FIGURE 11.26 Pier-1 Imports fell from the lower $20s to merely a dime in price,
after which it dramatically climbed 4300 percent in half a year.

292

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

13 would have been worth over half a million dollars exactly six months
later. Keep in mind that such events are exceedingly rare, but this amplifies the potential of such dead-cat bounces (even though some stocks never
bounce and simply drift into worthless bankruptcy).
It is all too easy to read a book like this and believe that making a
fortune in the stock market is as simple as hunting down patterns similar
to those found here. This is simply not the case. These patterns represent
idealized examples seen with the benefit of hindsight. As you gain experience in charting, viewing thousands, tens of thousands, and ultimately hundreds of thousands of charts, you will be able to find patterns more reliably
and—far more important—trade them successfully without the benefit of
hindsight that is possible with historical examples.

CHAPTER 12

Multiple Tops
and Bottoms

his chapter discusses two new, related subjects: how to emphasize
particular parts of a chart with highlighting and text, and how to recognize and profit from multiple tops and bottoms. When a chart is in
the process of creating a multiple top or bottom, it is helpful to be able to
highlight these zones as it is happening.

T

HIGHLIGHTING CHARTS
It is almost certain you have used a wide variety of highlighter pens. These
pens allow you to draw a see-through stripe (usually in yellow) on top of
text in order to call it out as important. For instance, when reading a textbook, you may highlight certain portions so that when you reread it, you
can focus on just the most important parts of the text.
That is precisely the idea behind both highlighter tools in
ProphetCharts. Each of them does the same thing: produces a see-through
color in either an oval or rectangular shape (depending on the tool selected). You can control how transparent the color is as well as what color
is used.
You may be wondering what kinds of things you would want to highlight. The answer is anything that merits attention. It could be a huge gap in
a chart, a series of tops or bottoms, an area of consolidation, or an interesting price pattern. Just as with any of the other drawn objects, the principle
is to embellish the chart in such a way that it is more meaningful to you
both now and in the future.
293

294

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.1 The oval highlighting tool.

Applying a highlight to a chart is very simple:
1. Choose the tool you want; in this example, we’ll use the oval tool (Fig-

ure 12.1).
2. Click on the graph in the place you want to start drawing the oval.
3. Drag the mouse until the oval is the shape and location you desire, then

click the mouse once more.
An example oval is shown in Figure 12.2. Any oval has several properties: location, size, color, and opacity. (Opacity is the opposite of transparency; the more opaque something is, the more difficult it is to see
through it.) This particular oval might be representing an important bottom in a stock’s chart.

FIGURE 12.2 An oval highlight drawn on a chart to emphasize a bottom in price
action.

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

295

FIGURE 12.3 The rectangle highlight tool.

Applying a rectangular highlight to a chart is achieved in the exact
same manner as for an oval, with the exception that you choose the rectangle highlight tool (Figure 12.3) first.
The chart in Figure 12.4 provides an example of the effective use of a
rectangular highlight. This is a chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average
spanning from about November 2005 through July 2006. The index bounced
off firm support at the 10,660 level on numerous occasions. The purpose of
this highlight is to show this support zone and to emphasize the consequences to the market should the zone be violated. (By the time you read
this, you will be aware of how things turned out! As of this writing, the
market has no such knowledge.)
Once you have put a highlight onto a chart, you can right-click on it
and choose from a number of options via a pop-up menu. The first is Move,
which, as with the other drawn objects, lets you reshape the object with
the anchors that are displayed. The second, Duplicate, creates a copy of the
object nearby the original with the anchors preselected. This is a quick way
of creating multiple highlights. And the third, Change Style/Color, invokes a
dialog box (Figure 12.5) so you can adjust the appearance of the highlight.

FIGURE 12.4 A rectangle highlight, which emphasizes the support zone for this
index.

296

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.5 This dialog box lets you change the highlight’s color and opacity.

Altering the settings from this dialog box will change the settings only
for the selected object. This means you can have a variety of styles of
highlight on one chart. The various elements you can alter via this dialog
box are:
Color: Select from any of 15 available highlight colors
Fill Opacity: This number ranges from 0 (there is no color at all) to 1.0
(it is as dark as it can be, even though you can still see the price
bars).
Outline Weight: This is a dropdown of five different selections, ranging
from skinny to fat. It controls how thick the line is that constitutes
the outline of the rectangle or oval.
Outline Opacity: Identical to Fill Opacity, except that it controls the
opacity of the outline instead of the filling. To cite an extreme example, an Outline Opacity of 0 and a Fill Opacity of 0 would mean
that you couldn’t see the object at all.
In general, you want to be conservative with how many objects you put
onto any chart. After all, if you clutter up your chart with dozens of lines,
highlights, and other items, it becomes a distraction from the analysis you
have to do. The judicious use of highlights, however, can make seeing the
most germane parts of price action much easier for you day-to-day.

ADDING TEXT NOTES
ProphetCharts gives you the ability to put text onto a chart in two
forms—as raw text (such as “Earnings Surprise”) or as an icon (for long
text notes, or in case you just don’t want text all over your chart). Even

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

297

FIGURE 12.6 The text tool.

though text and a highlight color may seem very different, their purpose
is similar: to call attention to something special happening at a particular
point in time on a chart. In the case of text, you might describe management changes, product introductions, earnings announcements, or certain
actions you took in your own trading with respect to the security being
charted.
Putting a text note on a chart involves these steps:
1. Click on the text tool (Figure 12.6).
2. Click on the place on the chart where you want the text message to go.
3. A dialog box will appear. Type the text you want, and then click OK.

The text you entered now appears on the chart with a left-pointing
arrow at the left side of the text. The assumption is that you’ll want to
point out something on the price chart, and the arrow will assist with that
reference.
In step 3 of entering a text note, you are given a text note dialog box to
type in the note. Besides having an area to enter the note, you are also given
a radio button with two choices: Text On Chart and Icon (Figure 12.7). The
default is Text On Chart. If you click on the Icon radio button, then instead

FIGURE 12.7 This dialog box lets you enter and edit a text note.

298

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

of text appearing on the chart, a small icon will be there. When you point
the mouse cursor at that icon, the text note will appear in a similar fashion
as a tool tip. You can put as many text icons on a chart as you like. If you
intend to mark up a chart with a lot of text notes, using icons is a good way
to keep the chart from being overly cluttered (unless you want all of the
text visible at once).
As with the other drawn objects, text can be altered if you right-click
on it. The pop-up menu (Figure 12.8) provides these choices (note that, at
the bottom, Delete and Delete All Drawings have consistent functionality
across all objects, so there’s no need to go into that pair for every kind of
object type):
Move: Clicking this lets you drag the text item anywhere you want on
the chart. Unlike other objects, it does not have anchors. The entire note (or icon) can simply be dragged by clicking on it and dragging the mouse, so you can place it precisely where you like. Once
you are satisfied with the new location, click anywhere else on the
chart to finish with the placement.
Edit Text: This invokes the same dialog box you saw when you entered
the text note in the first place. You can change the text or change
from a text note to an icon (or vice versa).
Duplicate: This creates a copy of the same text note in the same style,
which you can immediately move to the desired location.
Change Font/Color: This is described in detail next. Note that this feature is not relevant if you choose to show the text note as an icon.
Hide Arrow: Removes the left-pointing arrow. If you are not really
pointing out something on the price chart, you might want to suppress the arrow. Note that this feature is not relevant if you choose
to show the text note as an icon.

FIGURE 12.8 This pop-up menu appears when you right-click on a text object.

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

299

FIGURE 12.9 You can alter many aspects of the text note’s appearance.

The selection Change Font/Color invokes another dialog box (Figure 12.9) that provides a number of choices. The Font dropdown lets you
choose from any of the dozens of fonts available on your operating system. The Size dropdown lets you select a size ranging from tiny (8 point)
to gigantic (72 point). Clicking on Color lets you choose from any of the
15 available colors. Lastly, the Opacity function lets you alter the opacity
to be anywhere from 0 (invisible) to 1 (solid). As you modify Font, Color,
and Opacity, the words “Note Text Sample” at the top will change to represent that font, color, and opacity. This sample will not change based on
the Size, however, since it would be impractical to fit very large text in this
small space.
As a final remark on text notes, making use of icons for large quantities
of text information is illustrated by Figure 12.10. Notice how the rightmost
text icon has the text displayed. This is because the mouse is pointing at
this icon.

HIGHER HIGHS AND HIGHER LOWS
The simplest and most reliable indicator of a stock’s strength can be determined by seeing if the price chart is making a consistent series of higher
highs and higher lows. You may want to read and reread that sentence a
dozen times, because it’s crucially important and ties into so much of what
technical analysis is all about. The reason this sentence is true can be illustrated with Figure 12.11, a real stock shown over a period of almost a
decade.
Over this period, the stock increased nearly 10-fold in value. It didn’t
get there overnight, and it didn’t get there in a straight line. First, it went up

300

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.10 Multiple text notes are displayed in the form of icons.

FIGURE 12.11 Alexandria Real Estate stock went up about 900 percent with a
steady series of higher highs and higher lows.
