
BOX 15.7 TRADING DIAMONDS
The diamond formation, once properly defined, tends to have a fast-moving price
run on the breakout. Indeed, if the postbreakout price behavior is sluggish, the position should likely be closed or a close trailing stop placed near the current price. The
price objective is usually the distance that the entry price traveled to reach the diamond. A steep entry is usually followed by a steep exit.

Wedge and Climax
A wedge pattern is a triangle pattern with both trend lines heading in the same direction. A rising
wedge has both lines headed upward, with the lower bound rising more quickly than the upper
bound, as pictured in Figure 15.11. The declining wedge has both lines headed downward, with
the upward bound falling more quickly than the lower bound. The lines cross in the future, just as
in a standard triangle, and the nomenclature for the crossover and height is the same.
Rather than the rectangle as the basis for this formation as it is with standard triangles, consider a channel (see Chapter 12). A channel is two parallel trend lines either rising or declining.
In the earlier discussion of channels, we noted that when the channel line, drawn parallel to the
trend line through the opposite set of reversal points, begins to slope toward the trend line, it suggests that players are becoming less enthusiastic with the trend line direction. For example, in an
upward-sloping channel, the channel line above the trend line connecting the downward reversal
points begins as a line parallel to the upward trend line. If a later rally within the channel fails to
reach the channel line, the new channel line through the new downward reversal and the last

Download at www.wowebook.com

323

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

downward reversal will have a lesser slope than the underlying trend line, and if projected into
the future, it will eventually meet the trend line. This new configuration of channel and trend line
is a rising wedge. It suggests, in the example, that sellers have become a little more anxious than
before, and by implication, it suggests that the trend line will soon be broken. Indeed, the statistics bear this out. Almost all declining wedges (92%) break out upward, and most rising wedges
(69%) break out to the downside (Bulkowski, 2010).

Pullback

Climax Peak

Breakout

Entry

Price

FIGURE 15.11 Rising wedge with breakout down from a climax peak

Wedges are one of a few patterns that can be consolidation patterns against the prevailing
trend, consolidation patterns with the trend, or topping patterns, especially when accompanying
a climax. They occur more often during consolidations but are more dramatic after a climax.
Let us look at rising wedges first. Rising wedges occur either during a long downward
price trend or after an upward climax. The ones that occur during a downtrend appear as very
weak rallies against the trend. As mentioned previously, they invariably break again to the downside and continue the downtrend. Declining wedges are almost the same pattern and occur under
similar circumstances, only in the opposite direction.
A market climax occurs when prices accelerate, as shown in Chapter 12. At these times,
the underlying trend line is gradually adjusted at a steeper slope in line with the direction of
prices. In an upward accelerated trend, the support reversal points occur at levels higher than the
projected trend line and cause that trend line to be adjusted to a steeper slope. This can occur several times as prices accelerate upward. The climax itself usually comes on extremely high volume and a sharp reversal. It is discussed later in Chapter 17. After a climax has occurred and
prices settle down, invariably a “test” occurs that attempts to rally back through climax extreme
peak. The pattern most often associated with the failure of that test—in other words, when the
test fails to exceed the climax extreme or only exceeds by a small amount—is a rising wedge
(refer to Figure 15.11). In the case of a climax low after a panic, the test wedge is the declining
variety (see Figure 15.12).

Download at www.wowebook.com

324

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Price
Entry

Breakout

Throwback
Climax Trough (Panic)

FIGURE 15.12 Declining wedge with breakout up from climax trough

At a climax peak, when the test is a rising wedge pattern, the odds are extremely high that
the breakout will be downward. Because the emotion and commitment have been exhausted at
the climax peak and are unable to return during the test, the downward break in the wedge pattern is the sign of a longer-term downward reversal. Thus, the wedge is a reversal pattern, even
though it may not occur at the actual climax peak high.
Other rising wedges can occur as a consolidation during a sustained downward trend and
occasionally will end at the top of a weakening upward trend. The latter we will see as a “fifth
wave diagonal” in the discussion of Elliott Waves in Chapter 20, “Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann.”
Because trend lines often converge in the same direction when a wedge is not present,
Bulkowski requires that at least five reversal points be touched to qualify the pattern as a wedge.
This means three points on one trend line and at least two on the other. Otherwise, the pattern is
not accurately identified and may fail to show the results seen in actual wedge patterns.
Another characteristic of wedges, in both the consolidation and reversal varieties, is
declining volume during the formation of the wedge. Declining volume occurs in three-quarters
of the formations, and when it does, the postperformance improves over those wedges with
increasing volume. Breakout volume seems to be irrelevant to postperformance. Pullbacks and
throwbacks have high odds of occurring and when present detract from subsequent performance.
The performance rank for wedges is in the lower quartile of all the other classic patterns,
and its failure rate is considerably lower for upward breakouts (8%–11%) than for downward
breakouts (15%–24%). The rising wedge with a downward breakout is the least reliable.

Download at www.wowebook.com

325

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

BOX 15.8 TRADING WEDGES
It pays to wait for that breakout and to act immediately on it. In addition, because
wedges have such a high percentage of breakouts in the direction opposite from the
wedge direction, the direction of breakout is clear once the wedge is forming. A rising wedge invariably will break downward, and a declining wedge upward. Whenever a climax has occurred, whether up or down, look for a wedge to form on the
test. This is one of the most profitable patterns of all. Just be sure that a wedge as
described previously is valid before you take any action.

PATTERNS WITH ROUNDED EDGES—ROUNDING AND HEAD-ANDSHOULDERS
The patterns we have considered up to this point have been defined by straight lines. When we
begin to define patterns with curved lines, we become more indefinite than with using straight
lines such as trend lines. This does not make the patterns any less useful, but it does make them
more difficult to describe specifically.

Rounding Top, Rounding Bottom (Also “Saucer,” “Bowl,” or “Cup”)
Rounding tops and bottoms occur are formed by price action that reverses slowly and gradually,
rather differently from the spike with very definite and sharp reversal characteristics. Volume in
the bottoms seems to follow the same trend of lessening as prices gradually approach the bottom
and increasing as they gradually turn upward again. In a rounding top, volume tends to follow the
same pattern of lessening as prices decelerate and increasing as prices gradually turn down.
Rounding usually takes time, and within its process, it has many minor up and down, very shortterm trends. Rounding is, thus, more conceptual than specific.
However, many formations depend on rounding for their description. The most famous is
the “cup-and-handle” formation described in detail by O’Neil (1988) but referred to in many earlier publications. This formation, as shown in Figure 15.13, is a variation of the rounding bottom
that shows a “lip” after the rise from the bottom, and a small congestion area that reverses downward for a short while called a “handle.” The high of the lip establishes, in this type of rounding
bottom, the resistance level to watch for an upward breakout. Sometimes the breakout never
occurs, and prices keep declining in the handle, continuing to new lows. Traditionally, the cupand-handle is considered to be a bottoming reversal pattern. However, Bulkowski has found that
when it is a continuation pattern from an earlier low, it is much more reliable and profitable. It
still only ranks 13 out of 23, despite its popularity.

Download at www.wowebook.com

326

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Price
Breakout
Entry

Lip
Throwback
Handle

Cup or Bowl

FIGURE 15.13

Cup or bowl and handle variety of a rounding bottom with breakout up

Rounded bottoms are more common than rounded tops, but neither materializes very
often. They tend to be longer-term patterns, more easily identified in weekly or even monthly
charts. They are reversal patterns but can also appear in very long price consolidations. Shorterterm rounded formations, often called “scallops,” are usually continuation patterns and are
equally difficult to define. Performance of rounded bottoms rank 5 out 23 in performance and
have a low 5% failure rate. Tops have the same performance rank, when breaking downward, but
a slightly higher failure rate of 9%–12%. They are difficult to recognize and often require weekly
or monthly charts to identify. They are also difficult to trade. First, the breakout level is not easily defined, except in cup-and-handle patterns. Second, they are slow to develop and often fail to
breakout.

Head-and-Shoulders
The head-and-shoulders pattern is probably the most famous technical pattern. Its name is often
used when ridiculing technical analysis, yet its profitability is very high, relative to other patterns, and it is one of the few that the Lo, Mamaysky, and Wang (2000) study showed had statistical significance.
Head-and-shoulders is a complex pattern because it combines all three potential characteristics of a pattern: trend lines, support or resistance lines, and rounding. It is most often seen at a
top or bottom, but it can occur in its normal state or as a failed formation in a consolidation.
Mostly, it should be traded only after it has formed completely. Its complexity causes many
impatient analysts to anticipate its formation and to act prematurely. Its performance and success
rate are high, but only after it has formed completely and satisfied all its requirements. We
describe the traits of a head-and-shoulders top. The bottom formation (see Figure 15.15) is the
reverse in every way except where noted.

Download at www.wowebook.com

327

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

An uptrend, but not necessarily long-term trend, precedes a head-and-shoulders top. Thus,
as shown in Figure 15.14, the head-and-shoulders top pattern is entered from below. (The headand-shoulders pattern can also occur within a consolidation rather than at the end of a trend, but
such occurrences are rare and more likely a series of triangles or a rectangle with a false downward breakout at the “head.”)
The head-and-shoulders top pattern is a series of three well-defined peaks, either sharp or
rounded. The second peak is higher than the first and third peak. This middle, higher peak is
called the “head.” The first peak is called the “left shoulder,” and the third peak is called the
“right shoulder.” The left and right shoulders must both be lower than the head, but the two
shoulders do not have to be the same height. In fact, a left shoulder peak slightly higher than the
right shoulder peak adds a little to the postbreakout performance of a top formation. (A headand-shoulders bottom is pictured in Figure 15.15. In the bottom pattern, a right shoulder low that
is slightly lower than the left shoulder low adds to performance.)

Head

Left Shoulder

Right Shoulder

Breakout

Entry

Neckline

Pullback
Price

FIGURE 15.14

Head-and-shoulders top with breakout down

The peaks in the head-and-shoulders top formation are roughly equidistant from each
other. The shoulders should appear roughly symmetrical about the head and should peak at
roughly the same level. Symmetry is important and makes the formation more identifiable.
Occasionally, more than two shoulders appear. These formations are called “complex head-andshoulders” and have roughly the same performance and failure rates as the standard two-shoulder variety. As in the standard, the multiple shoulders appear symmetrically on both sides of the
head. Rarely, a “two-headed” variety appears, and it, too, shows the same performance and failure rates as the standard. There is also the “unbalanced” version, as described by Edwards and
Magee, but it is difficult to describe accurately and seems to fit only those formations that might
be head-and-shoulders but cannot be formally categorized as such. The standard is the most
common, and the one to look for.

Download at www.wowebook.com

328

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Price

Breakout

Neckline

Entry
Throwback
Right Shoulder

Left Shoulder

Head

FIGURE 15.15

Head-and-shoulders bottom with breakout up

The bottoms between the peaks form a recognizable trend line. Technicians call this line
the “neckline.” Although the neckline is often horizontal, as in a support line, it also can be
downward or upward sloping. Indeed, there is some evidence that an upward-sloping neckline in
a top formation produces better performance than the standard horizontal neckline. (In a bottom
formation, the same rules hold except the neckline is now resistance rather than support. In a bottom formation, a downward-sloping neckline increases postbreakout performance over an
upward-sloping neckline but not over the horizontal one.) Tilting the slope of the neckline to an
extreme, however, destroys the head-and-shoulders pattern and its likely consequences.
Volume is usually highest on the rise into and at the peak of the left shoulder and decreases
throughout the formation. This is not a requirement, however, as those formations with decreasing volume, though slightly less frequent, seem to have a slight performance edge at tops.
(Increasing volume has a slight edge in head-and-shoulders bottoms.) Higher volume on either
shoulder does not affect performance at a top, but at a bottom, higher volume on the right shoulder than on the left shoulder adds considerably to postbreakout performance.
Breakout and action signals occur when prices, after completing the right shoulder, break
below the neckline. The breakout is a requirement for the formation. Second-guessing before
completion of the pattern can be dangerous. Sometimes, the right shoulder does not form completely, and prices fall short of breaking the neckline and rise to penetrate above the right shoulder peak. Not only is this a failure, but it also is an opportunity, provided the analyst had not
anticipated a breakdown and acted prematurely. The head-and-shoulders failure of this type is
very profitable, according to Schwager (1996). The standard failure, however, is when prices
break below the neckline and then reverse back upward through the right shoulder. This kind of
failure is relatively rare.
The breakout often occurs on increased volume, but decreased volume is not a sign of an
impending failure. It just occurs less frequently. Increasing volume on a bottom formation

Download at www.wowebook.com

329

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

improves performance, whereas decreasing volume on the breakout from a top pattern increases
performance.
Pullbacks or throwbacks are frequent—roughly 45%–63% for bottoms and 60%–67% for
tops. In summary, the head-and-shoulders pattern—aside from being the best known, even
among nontechnicians—is the most reliable and profitable of the classic formations.
The performance rank for the standard head-and-shoulders top is 1, the highest ranking
possible. Complex tops have a rank of 3, standard bottoms a rank of 7, and complex bottoms a
rank of 9. Both top and bottom patterns, therefore, are high on the list of performance.
We have seen in most other patterns that when a pullback or throwback occurs, the comparative performance suffers. This is also true in head-and-shoulders patterns. The failure rates
for both top and bottom formations are very low. Only 3%–4% failed a 5% gain or more from
tops and bottoms. In short, the head-and-shoulders formation has a high rate of reliability as well
as profitability.

BOX 15.9 TRADING HEAD-AND-SHOULDERS PATTERNS
Once a pattern has been observed using the preceding descriptive features, the neckline becomes the most important factor. The neckline is where the breakout level
resides. Never should one act in anticipation of a break through the neckline. The
risk of failure is too great, and as we have seen with the upward break of a descending triangle, the strongest upward formation, the rise from descending peaks and a
flat neckline, can be substantial. This is equally true with head-and-shoulders bottom
formations. The ascending triangle with a breakout down is also a powerful formation. Thus, breakout stops should be placed outside the right shoulder reversal point.
Once the breakout is triggered, the risk of failure declines substantially. If the breakout is through the neckline, use the standard statistics as a guide, but if the breakout
is a failed head-and-shoulders through the right shoulder extreme, use the appropriate triangle statistics as a guide.
The price target for a head-and-shoulders pattern is relatively accurate. It is calculated like the others by taking the height of the formation and projecting it up or
down from the breakout price. The height is measured by drawing a vertical line
from the peak of the head to where it intersects the neckline and measuring the number of points between the two. This holds for flat as well as sloping necklines.

Shorter Continuation Trading Patterns—Flags and Pennants (Also
“Half-Mast Formation”)
For efficient use of trading capital, consider trading with flags and pennants. They are frequent
formations with extremely rapid and relatively reliable outcomes. After a breakout in either
direction or either pattern, prices usually run immediately, having very few pullbacks or throwbacks and low rates of failure. Some successful traders use only flags and pennants because of

Download at www.wowebook.com

330

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

these advantages. Flags and pennants are really variations of the same formation. The flag is a
short channel that usually slopes in the opposite direction from the trend. The pennant is a short
triangle that does the same. Both of these patterns are pictured in Figure 15.16.

Flag

Pennant

Price

FIGURE 15.16

Flag and pennant in upward trend

Both flags and pennants are preceded by a steep, sharp price trend, best at 45 degrees
rather than straight up. Flag preceded by a rise of 90% or more have almost a zero failure rate
and an average return of 69%. This variety is the best of all chart patterns. Two parallel trend
lines in a small channel that resembles a flag form the pattern, and the slope of the channel can
be in any direction, but most commonly the best performance comes when it slopes away from
the preceding trend. Flag formations occur over a short period, usually a few days to a few
weeks; the best flag is less than 15 days. Volume usually declines throughout the formation of
the flag. In fact, this downward trend in volume is found in almost four out of every five flags
that occur.
The pennant pattern is the same as the flag except that the trend lines converge, forming a
miniature triangle, instead of being parallel. The direction of the formation is usually opposite
from that of the immediately preceding price trend, but in stronger moves, it can be horizontal or
even trending in the same direction as the underlying trend. Pennants differ from wedges in that
they are shorter in time and require a sharp move preceding them. Wedges tend to be longer-term
patterns. Falling volume throughout the formation is even more common with pennants; 90% of
pennants are characterized by a downward trend in volume.
Two types of failures can occur. First, a breakout in the opposite direction from the previous trend can occur. Second, a failure can occur after breakout. Because a flag or a pennant is
usually a continuation formation, the breakout should be expected in the direction of the preceding trend, provided it is steep and sharp. When the breakout goes opposite to that trend, the failure invariably returns to the earlier trend, but only after a few heart palpitations have occurred
first and a few protective stops have been triggered.

Download at www.wowebook.com

331

Chapter 15 Bar Chart Patterns

BOX 15.10 TRADING FLAGS AND PENNANTS—MEASURED RULE
Because these patterns have low failure rates, few pullbacks or throwbacks, short
time periods, and steep trends preceding and following their occurrence, they are
very good trading patterns. One of the most important identification features is the
steep trend preceding the pattern. It is important to be cautious to make sure that a
complete formation has occurred and to wait for the breakout. The breakout occurs
when a trend line is broken, usually in the direction of the preceding trend. The price
target for these patterns is calculated by taking the distance from the beginning of the
sharp trend, not necessarily the beginning of the entire trend, to the first reversal in
the pattern and adding it to the breakout price. This method is called the “measured
rule” (see Figure 15.17) and usually only applies to flags and pennants. It implies
that the formation will occur roughly halfway through the entire steep price trend;
because of this, these patterns are also called “half-mast” patterns. The projection of
a target is only partially accurate (about 60% of the time), but because of the steepness of the subsequent trend, close trailing stops are the best manner of protecting
profits.
