
Going with the Flow/Trading the Range
Successful currency traders are able to assess whether the market is trending or likely to remain
confined to ranges. If they think the market is trending, they aim to go with the flow more often than
against it. When the short-term trend is higher, they’re looking for levels to get long at, and vice
versa when the direction is down. At the same time, they’re aware that trends pause and frequently
correct, so they’re also actively taking profit at key technical points as the larger trend unfolds.
If the environment favors range trading, successful currency traders are able to switch gears and
become contrarians, selling near the top of the range when everyone else is buying, or buying near
the bottom of the range when everyone else is selling. Just as important, when they’re in rangetrading mode, they’ve defined an ultimate point when the range is broken. If that point is hit, they
throw in the towel without any remorse, possibly even reversing direction and jumping on the
breakout.

Focusing on a Few Pairs
Many successful forex traders focus on only one or two currency pairs for most of their trading.
Doing so enables them to get a better feel for those markets in terms of price levels and price
behavior. It also narrows the amount of information and data they need to monitor. Above all, they
recognize that different currency pairs have different trading characteristics, and they’re able to
adjust their tactics from one pair to the next.

Focus on gaining experience and success in just one or two major pairs before trying to
broaden out and take on the whole market. Look at other pairs only when they’re trending or
trading at key levels.

Protecting Profits

There are numerous market aphorisms on the benefits of taking profits, such as “You can’t go
broke taking profit.” One of my favorites is “Bulls and bears each get a seat at the table, but pigs
get slaughtered.”
Successful traders take profit regularly, whether it’s a partial take profit (reducing the size of a
winning position) or squaring up completely and stepping back after a profitable market
movement. Above all, when a trade is in the money, successful traders focus on keeping what
they’ve made and not giving it up for the chance to make a little more.

If you don’t take some money off the table from time to time, the market will do it for you.

Trading with Stop Losses
All successful traders lose money from time to time. What makes them successful in the long run is
that their losses are relatively small compared to their average winning trades. The absolute key is
to have a stop loss in place at all times to prevent an everyday losing trade from becoming an
account killer.

No one likes to lose money, but the best traders are able to accept it as part of the cost of
doing business. And the only way they can regularly accept losses is by keeping them small in
the first place. Master this habit, and you’re halfway there.

Watching Other Markets
Currencies don’t trade in a vacuum, and smart traders keep an eye on other major financial
markets as a matter of routine. The primary markets they focus on are benchmark bond yields of
the major currencies (U.S., German, UK, and Japanese ten-year government notes); oil; gold; and,
major global stock indexes.
On an intraday basis, they look to these other markets for confirmation of short-term U.S. dollar
directional bias. For example, if the dollar is moving higher, U.S. ten-year yields are rising, and
gold is falling, it’s confirmation from other markets in favor of the dollar’s move higher. If yields
are flat or down, and gold is higher, the dollar’s move up may be only short lived. On a longerterm basis, currency traders analyze those other markets for significant technical levels and
overall directional trends, just as they do the currencies.

Spend the extra money for charting services that include live rate feeds for those other
markets.

Chapter 18

Ten Beginner Trading Mistakes
In This Chapter
Spotting the signs of bad trading habits
Avoiding common strategic trading errors
Preventing lapses in trading discipline
Failing to adapt to changing market conditions
I call these “beginner” trading mistakes, but they’re made by everyone — from total newcomers to
grizzled market veterans. No matter how long you’ve been trading, you’re bound to experience
lapses in trading discipline, whether they’re brought on by unusual market developments or
emotional extremes.
The key is to develop an intuitive understanding of the major pitfalls of trading, so that you can
recognize early on if you’re letting your discipline slip. If you start to see any of the following
errors in your own trading, it’s probably a good idea to square up, step back from the market, and
refocus your concentration and energies on the basic trading rules.

Running Losers, Cutting Winners
By far the most common trading mistake is holding on to losing positions for too long and taking
profit on winning trades too soon. By cutting winners too early, you may not make as much — but
then again, you literally can’t go broke taking profit. That said, you will deplete your trading
capital if you let losses run too long.
The key to limiting losses is to follow a risk-aware trading plan that always has a stop-loss order
and to stick to it. No one is right all the time, so the sooner you’re able to accept small losses as
part of everyday trading, the sooner you’ll be able to refocus on spotting and trading winning
strategies.

Trading without a Plan
Opening up a trade without a concrete plan is like asking the market to take your money. If the
market moves against you, when will you cut your losses? If the market moves in your favor, when

will you take profit? If you haven’t determined these levels in advance, why would you suddenly
come up with them when you’re caught up in the emotions of a live position?
Resist the urge to trade spontaneously based on your instincts alone without a clearly defined riskmanagement plan. If you have a strong view, go with it, but do the legwork in advance so you have
a workable trading plan that specifies where to enter and where to exit — both stop-loss and takeprofit.

Be aware of the increased risk of trading around important news and data releases. Study
economic and event calendars to identify future event risks, and factor them in to your trading
plan. That may mean stepping out of the market in advance of such events.

Trading without a Stop Loss
I can’t stress this enough: Trading without a stop loss is a recipe for disaster. It’s how small,
manageable losses become devastating wipeouts. Trading without a stop loss is the same as
saying, “I know I’m going to be right — it’s just a matter of time.” That may be so — but it may
take a lot longer than your margin collateral can support.
Using stop-loss orders is part of a well-conceived trading plan that has specific expectations
based on your research and analysis. The stop loss is where your trade strategy is invalidated.

Moving Stop-Loss Orders
Moving your stop-loss order to avoid being stopped out is almost the same as trading
without a stop loss in the first place. Worse, it reveals a lack of trading discipline and opens
a slippery slope to major losses. If you don’t want to take a relatively small loss based on
your original stop loss, why would you want to take an even larger loss after you’ve moved
your stop? If you’re like most people, you won’t — and you’ll keep moving your stop to
avoid taking an ever-larger loss until your margin runs out.
Move your stop loss only in the direction of a winning trade to lock in profits, and never move
your stop in the direction of a losing position.

Overtrading

Overtrading comes in two main forms:
Trading too often in the market: Trading too often in the market suggests that there is
always something going on and that you always know what it is. If you always have a
position open, you’re constantly exposed to market risk. But the essence of disciplined
trading is minimizing your exposure to unnecessary market risk. Instead, focus on trade
opportunities where you think you’ve got an edge, and apply a disciplined trade strategy to
them.
Trading too many positions at once: Trading too many positions at once also suggests
that you’re able to spot multiple trade opportunities and exploit them simultaneously.
More likely, you’re throwing darts at the board, hoping something sticks. Trading too
many positions also eats up your available margin collateral, reducing your cushion
against adverse market movements.

Be careful about trade duplication and overlapping positions — a long USD/CHF position
can be the same as a short EUR/USD or GBP/USD (all long USD versus Europe), while a
short EUR/USD and a long EUR/JPY position nets out to be the same as being long
USD/JPY.

Overleveraging
Overleveraging is trading too large a position size relative to your available margin. Even a small
market move against you can be enough to cause an overleveraged position to be liquidated for
insufficient margin.

This common no-no is made more tempting by the generous leverage ratios available with
some online forex brokers. Just because they offer you 100:1 or 200:1 leverage does not
mean you have to use it all. Don’t base your position size on your maximum available
position. Instead, base your position size on trade-specific factors such as proximity to
technical levels or your confidence in the trade setup/signal.

Failing to Adapt to Changing Market
Conditions
Market conditions are always changing, which means your trading approach needs to be flexible,
too. Trends give way to consolidation ranges, and breakouts from ranges may lead to new trends.

Stay flexible with your trading approach by first evaluating overall market conditions in terms of
trends or ranges. If a trending move is under way, using a range-trading style won’t work, just as a
trend-following approach will fail in a range-bound market. Use technical analysis to highlight
whether range or trending conditions prevail.

Being Unaware of News and Data Events
Even if you’re a dyed-in-the-wool technical trader, you need to be aware of what’s going on and
what’s coming up in the fundamental world. You may see a great trade setup in AUD/USD, for
instance, but the Australian trade balance report in a few hours could blow it out of the water.
Make data/event calendar reading a part of your daily and weekly trading routine. The market
throws enough curve balls with unscheduled developments, so make sure you at least have a
handle on what’s coming up. A forward-looking mindset also allows you to anticipate potential
data outcomes and market reactions and to factor them into your trading plan.

Trading Defensively
No trader wins all the time, and we’ve all experienced losing streaks. After a series of losses, you
may find yourself trading too defensively, focusing more on avoiding losses than spotting winning
trades. At those times, it’s best to step back from the market, look at what went wrong with your
earlier trades, and refocus your energies until you feel confident enough to start spotting
opportunities again.

Keeping Realistic Expectations
Face it: You’re not going to retire based on any single trade. The key is to hit singles and stay in
the game. Be realistic when setting the parameters of your trading plans by looking at recent
market reactions and average trading ranges. Avoid holding out for perfection — if the market has
achieved 80 percent of your expected scenario, you can’t go wrong locking in some profits, at the
minimum.

Chapter 19

Ten Rules of Risk Management
In This Chapter
Limiting the financial downside
Getting a handle on human nature
Managing your market exposure
When people think about risk management in the context of currency trading, the natural tendency
is to zero in on the risk of losing money. No two ways about it, that’s the ultimate risk. But traders
can head down many different streets before they get to their final realized profit or loss address.
Throughout this book, I stress that risk management is a multifaceted process that ends only with
the final trading tally. In case you skipped it, check out Chapter 13 for more detailed ideas on the
various forms of risk. Sometimes, what you don’t know can hurt you.
How you navigate the avenues of risk has as much to with trading outcomes as it does with
whether you ever reach the final destination. In this chapter, I group ten practical rules of risk
management to guide you in your forex trading.

Trade with Stop-Loss Orders
Stop-loss orders are the ultimate risk-limiting tools. (The exception is data/events where stop-loss
order executions may be subject to substantial slippage. Avoid that risk by not carrying positions
into news releases.) If you trade without stop-loss orders, you’re exposed to virtually unlimited
risk. Always have a stop-loss order in place for every open position, and don’t move the stop-loss
order except to protect profits. Do your analysis and risk calculations before you enter the trade,
and then stick to your trading plan.

Leverage to a Minimum
Position size will ultimately determine how much financial risk you’re exposed to — the larger the
position, the greater the risk. Don’t be seduced by high leverage ratios and take too large a
position. Trading too large a position relative to your available margin reduces your cushion
against routine, adverse price movements. Keep your use of leverage to the minimum needed to

trade your strategy.

You can request a lower leverage ratio from most forex brokerages to systemically limit
your leverage utilization. Just because they offer 50:1 or 100:1 leverage doesn’t mean you
have to use it all.

Trade with a Plan
The best way to limit the inevitable emotional reactions that come with trading is to develop a
complete trading plan from entry to exit (stop loss and take profit) before you ever open a
position. (I devote most of Part III to the merits of trading with a plan.) Committing yourself to
having a trade plan for every strategy will also keep you from speculating on a whim or
overtrading (always having an open position). Of course, no trading plan will work if you don’t
follow it, which brings me back to the human risks in trading. You stand a much better chance of
sticking to a trading plan if you’ve drawn one up in the first place.

Stay on Top of the Market
Make sure you have a firm grasp of what’s happening in the market and the currency pair you’re
trading. Know what data and events are scheduled in the days and weeks ahead. Consider liquidity
conditions during your trade plan’s time horizon. What has the market priced in and priced out?
Anticipating market events and conditions won’t guarantee a winning trade, but it will alert you to
potentially disruptive circumstances that you can factor into your trading plan to limit overall risk.

Trade with an Edge
The currency market trades around the clock, but that doesn’t mean you have to be in it all the time.
Pick your spots, and choose your timing; don’t get pulled in by the noise. Keep your ammunition
dry, and look for trade setups with a clearly defined risk/reward scenario. Be opportunistic, and
spend your time and efforts looking for trading opportunities still to come instead of getting caught
up in the market move of the moment. Other opportunities will surely develop, and you’ll be ready
for them.

Step Back from the Market

When you’re not involved in the market, a funny thing happens: Your perspective is clearer; your
objectivity is at its peak; you’re not emotionally invested in a market position. Make it a point to
square up and step back from the market on a regular basis. Use the downtime to catch up on your
charting and fundamental analysis. Take time off completely, and just forget about the markets for a
while. When you return, you’ll be refreshed and thinking more clearly, ready for new trading
opportunities.

Take Profit Regularly
Taking profit regularly is the surest way to limit risk. By definition, if you take profit, even partial
profit, you’re reducing your exposure to market risk. Your trade plan may have a more aggressive
profit target, but if market events play out in your favor, it pays to protect what you’ve gained by
taking partial profit or adjusting your stop-loss orders to lock in some of the gains. It may be a
fluke that the market jumped 40 pips in your favor on a data release, or it may be a fluke that the
market dropped back by 50 pips 10 minutes later. The only way to be sure is to take some profit.
You can’t go broke taking profit.

Understand Currency Pair Selection
Market risk varies significantly from one currency pair to the next, based on volatility, liquidity,
data sensitivity, and many other factors. Each currency pair brings its own idiosyncrasies to the
table, requiring different analytical tools or strategic approaches. Different currency pairs also
carry higher or lower margin utilizations and pip values. Make sure that you understand what
currency pair you’re trading and that your trading plan reflects that pair’s characteristics.
(Chapters 8 and 9 look at the trading behavior and drivers of the most heavily traded currency
pairs and crosses. Not all currency pairs are the same.)

Double-Check for Accuracy
Currency trading is a fast-paced environment made even faster by electronic trading. The risk of
human error in inputting trades and orders is ever present and requires diligence on your part to
avoid costly errors. A stop-loss order won’t help if it’s entered for the wrong currency pair or the
wrong amount. Make it part of your routine to double-check every trade and order entry you make,
ideally before you submit it but at least immediately after you make it. Mistakes happen to
everyone, but only careless traders let minor errors slip through and become big disasters.

Take Money out of Your Trading Account
Here’s one you won’t see in many trading books: If you’ve made some money in the market, make
periodic withdrawals from your trading account. I call it taking money off the table. If your profit
stays in your margin account, it’s subject to future trading decisions, which represents an unknown
risk. Keep your margin balance at a level that allows you to trade in sizes you’re comfortable
with. Also, remember why you’re trading — it’s not just about the money, but what you can do
with it. Withdraw your profits, and spend or invest them the way you always said you would.

Chapter 20

Ten Great Resources
In This Chapter
Discovering more about technical analysis
Developing strategy and discipline
Understanding emotions and psychology
Getting inside economic data reports
This book gives you a solid foundation for understanding the ins and outs of currency trading, but it
can’t cover all the subdisciplines of trading, such as technical analysis, market psychology, and
strategy development. Those subjects are deep enough and rich enough to warrant further study on
their own as you develop your own trading style and favorite techniques. Indeed, those topics are
important enough that entire books have been written on them. I think you’ll find the following
suggested additional resources very helpful in gaining a deeper understanding of the technical
tools, economic data reports, and practical applications of strategy and psychology.

Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets,
by John Murphy
Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets: A Comprehensive Guide to Trading Methods and
Applications, by John Murphy, is the encyclopedia of technical analysis, written by perhaps the
most prominent technical practitioner in the market. Murphy covers all the tools and all the rules in
depth, from both a theoretical and a practical standpoint. Murphy also lays out one of the most
comprehensive reviews of chart patterns you’ll find anywhere. If you’re going to have only one
book on technical analysis in your library, make it this one.

Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques, by
Steve Nison
I’m a huge proponent of candlestick charting, and for my money, Japanese Candlestick Charting
Techniques: A Contemporary Guide to the Ancient Investment Techniques of the Far East, 2nd
Edition, by Steve Nison, is the best book on candlesticks out there. Nison takes you inside the

linguistic and cultural meanings behind the myriad candle patterns, which leaves you with a more
intuitive understanding of the patterns. With that greater understanding, you’re more likely to spot
viable candlestick patterns and understand what they’re telling you. I keep this book handy and
refer to it frequently in my own candlestick observations. (I look at several key candlestick
patterns in Chapter 11.)

Elliott Wave Principle, by A. J. Frost and
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.
Elliott Wave Principle: Key to Market Behavior, by A. J. Frost and Robert R. Prechter, Jr.
(Wiley), is the go-to guide if you’re interested in learning more about the Elliott wave principle.
Elliott wave patterns are an important part of currency price movements, especially if you’re
intending to trade from a medium- to longer-term perspective. This book explains the philosophy
behind Ralph Nelson Elliott’s theories of price patterns and provides practical examples of how
to apply those theories to all financial markets.

Technical Analysis Explained, by Martin J.
Pring
Technical Analysis Explained: The Successful Investor’s Guide to Spotting Investment Trends
and Turning Points, 4th Edition, by Martin J. Pring, is an excellent alternative to Murphy’s more
encyclopedic volume (see earlier in this chapter). Pring covers all the components of trend
behavior, and focuses heavily on momentum analysis and other keys to successful market timing.
He also has a good chapter on automated trading, if that’s your objective.

Technical Analysis For Dummies, by Barbara
Rockefeller
Technical Analysis For Dummies, by Barbara Rockefeller (Wiley), is an excellent introduction to
the many and varied tools and methods of technical analysis, all delivered in the easy-to-read For
Dummies style. Rockefeller takes you through all the important tools and approaches, and
provides plenty of real-life dos and don’ts that you can apply to your own trading.

The Book of Five Rings, by Miyamoto Musashi
The Book of Five Rings, by Miyamoto Musashi, is known as Go Rin No Sho in Japanese. This
relatively short book (about 150 pages) is a fascinating exposition on the philosophy of strategy
and rules of tactical warfare. Musashi was the greatest samurai to ever live, and this book is his
end-of-life distillation of all the rules of strategy and swordsmanship gained in his lifetime.
Musashi’s exhortations on timing and staying calm in the midst of chaos are as applicable to
successful trading today as they were to martial artists in the mid-17th century, when the book first
appeared. This book is not for a single reading only. Pull it out and reread it often. Not only does
it contain advice on strategy and mental discipline, but it also offers lessons on personal
fulfillment and finding a spiritual, focused, and balanced existence.
