
TRADE EXAMPLE 1: A SWING TRADE
Here's a simple example that pulls together much of the previous discussion. I label it a swing trade,
though as I'll discuss in the conclusion it's really a hybrid combination of a position or trend trade
with an attempt to play a brief reversal that gives the trade its “swing” element. One of the reasons I
chose it is to illustrate how the trade types are just general labels, as the distinctions between them
are often blurred.

Initial Screening

On Sunday, September 18, 2011, while scanning weekly charts, I find the following intriguing
situation for the EURUSD shown in Figure 7.1.
FIGURE 7.1 EURUSD Weekly Chart, May 16 to September 11, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

What Initially Attracts Me
The pair has been in a strong downtrend for the past three weeks but bounced in the prior week,
putting it back near strong support for a short trade if the downtrend resumes. Specifically, we note
that the pair's most recent weekly close is 1.3680 and it has recently broken a major support at
1.3700, a level that included the:
100 week exponential moving average (EMA)
200 week EMA
38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement level of the uptrend from the week of June 6, 2010, to the
week of May 1, 2011
We also note that the shorter duration (and more sensitive to recent price momentum) 10-, 20-, and
50-week EMAs have begun turning lower, a sign of downward momentum that further supports the
case for shorting the pair. We'll discuss more on using moving average crossovers to discern
momentum changes in Chapter 8.

Fundamental Analysis Context—Weekly Chart
During the prior week, the pair had bounced higher, back close to this support level. As I noted in my
weekly review at the time, I believed the move was based on false hopes that the EU situation would
improve soon and that the EURUSD would rise.2 The prior week's bounce seemed like a possible
new chance to enter a short EURUSD position right back near strong support around the 1.3700 area
(remember that support for a short position is the likely high for the period in question).
So I suspect we may have a “short the rally” situation—that is, a rally unlikely to last that may

allow promising entry points for new short EURUSD positions near strong support.

Technical Analysis (TA)—Weekly Chart
First, there are the technical factors that initially attracted me to this trade, on the weekly chart, like
the strong three-week-old downtrend that is still very much intact after the prior week's small bounce
back up to near the 38.2 percent Fib retracement line. So we may have a safe entry point around there.
Then, we also may have a temptingly distant exit point. According to the indicators displayed,
there's no significant resistance to a further downside until the 1.3400 to 1.3275 area, where there
may be resistance from both:
The 1.3400 price level itself (note how often it served as an s/r point in the past).
The 50 percent Fibonacci retracement nearby at 1.3366.
With the current price around 1.3680, that leaves almost 300 pips of room for profit according to
this first look, assuming an exit around 1.3400. The question is: can I find a low-risk, high potential
yield entry point? That is, an entry point with a reasonable stop loss that allows both:
Enough room so that I don't get stopped out by random movements but rather only if the pair is
really moving higher and my thinking was wrong.
A loss that is a third or less the size of my gain according to what I see as likely strong
resistance.

Second Screening
To find out, let's zoom in to look at this possible entry point on a daily time frame, because we appear
to have a good entry point at a near term high for a short EURUSD trade in this time frame.

TA and RAMM Considerations—Daily Chart
We now need to see where resistance might be on the daily chart shown in Figure 7.2. First we look
for s/r points over a longer period.
FIGURE 7.2 EURUSD Daily Chart, October 15, 2010, to September 16, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

No real resistance until about 1.3455, which was an s/r point from November 2010 to February
2011 (highlighted with the ellipsis). The Fibonacci retracements are the same as in the weekly chart
(Figure 7.1). Note the strong downward momentum indicated by the shorter-term moving averages
crossing below the longer-term moving averages.
I zoom in further for a closer look on the daily chart shown in Figure 7.3 to the period of August 10
to September 16, 2011, in order to get a sense of where my stop loss should be.
FIGURE 7.3 EURUSD Daily Chart, August 11 to September 16, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

We see that the nearest meaningful high (support) is in the 1.3915 to 1.3865 area highlighted by the
ellipsis.

RRR Evaluation
In sum, the daily chart for the EURUSD indicates the potential gain and potential loss on the trade.

Potential Gain: Likely Profit-Taking Point
There's no likely resistance until around 1.3455 per the chart, though it's possible the 38.2 percent Fib
level at about 1.3700 could stop us, so I'd consider switching from a fixed to a trailing stop loss order
just before that level.
It's now Friday, September 16, 2011.
Planned entry point: 1.3815
Planned exit point: 1.3455
Potential gain:

0.0360 or 360 pips

Potential Loss: Stop Loss Placement and RRR
I'll keep it simple and just refer to recent highs as a guide for setting a stop loss, and see if that's small
enough compared to the likely gain from the pair falling to the 1.3455 area.

The recent highs are around the 1.3915 to 1.3865 area.
If I use those as a guide for placing my stop loss at 1.3915 (the high of the prior week), then if this
stop loss is hit my loss is:
Planned entry point: 1.3815
Planned stop loss:

1.3915

Potential loss:

0.0100 or 100 pips

Risk-reward ratio

100/360 = 1:3.6, exceeding our 1:3 criterion

Assume that 100 pip loss represents less than 3 percent of my total trading account equity, so I'm
within my money management guidelines.
I'd plan on switching to a 50 pip trailing stop loss order at around 1.3720. I choose 50 pips because
it represents a good chunk of the recent daily volatility, while still allowing me to break even (or do
slightly better) after expenses.

Fundamental Analysis Context
I know there is a meeting of European finance ministers Friday and Saturday discussing the latest
Greek bailout package. Greece has failed miserably to meet its deficit reduction targets, so there's a
good chance of the meeting producing either its usual disappointing lack of results (bearish for the
pair) or even a chance they'll get tough with Greece and demand further budget cutbacks, which
would put the Greek bailout in even greater doubt, which would likely send the EURUSD down.
In sum, it appears that we have a low-risk, high potential reward trade on the daily chart from the
perspectives of:
Money management
Risk management
Technical analysis
Fundamental context
If the price moves in our favor, we might do better than the 360 pips by switching to a trailing stop
once we gain ∼150 to 200 pips (so that we get at least a 1:1.5 to 1:2 rrr as a worst-case scenario) and
the EURUSD moves below our anticipated 360 pip drop. I'd have to consider conditions at the time to
determine how wide the trailing stop should be.

Conclusion: We Take the Trade
We take this trade with the stated entry and stop loss points, and probably move up our stop loss and
change it from a fixed to a trailing stop once price moves in our favor, as noted. However, we're
going to take only a relatively small position, half of what I'd like to do. Why?
Note again that this is not really a classic swing trade, which would wait until we clear the recent
low around 1.3570, and thus truly swing past this most recent resistance. I'm being more aggressive
and getting in earlier for two reasons:
1. The fundamental considerations suggest the odds favor more downside. That was decisive.
2. The entry point is near strong support for entering an existing trend (making this a mix of
position and swing trade).
So I want to take a more aggressive position. There are many who would say I'm being too

aggressive and should wait. However, my stop loss and position sizes are not large, and the rrr is
excellent, so I make a judgment call and enter with half of what I would like to put in, and may add to
the short when the EURUSD closes below 1.3565.
Here's one last word about the importance of trying to understand the fundamental context in which
the trade occurs. Throughout the EU sovereign debt and banking crisis, trading the EURUSD was
hazardous. There was constant risk that the crisis could become another Lehman Brothers event that
could crash global markets and spark another recession or worse. Thus the real drivers of this crisis
were political decisions that are inherently difficult to predict. Just when a default would seem
imminent, a last-minute rescue deal, or a mere rumor of one, could send the pair higher. The opposite
kind of news could send the pair crashing lower.

Trade Postmortem: What Happened
As shown in Figure 7.4, the trade worked as planned.
FIGURE 7.4 EURUSD Weekly Chart, June 6 to October 30, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Specifically:
Anticipated support (or resistance for our short position) held due to hopes that there would be a
decisive solution to the EU debt crisis in the coming weeks.
As the long down candle for the week of October 30 shows, these hopes proved incorrect. Our
bearish view of the EU situation continued to be correct after a brief rally as the EURUSD pair
put in another lower high, setting up another move lower in the continued downtrend of the
EURUSD.
So this trade had a happy ending. However, there's a reason we want those nice high risk-to-reward
ratios when we can get them. We want to make enough on the winners so that we can be wrong more
often than we're right, or to provide extra cash reserves so that we can afford to be patient when we're
having trouble finding low-risk, high potential yield trades.

TRADE EXAMPLE 2: A BREAKOUT TRADE
Here's another simple trade example, this time a breakout type of trade.

First Screening
On Sunday, July 11, 2010, while scanning weekly charts, I find the situation for the EURUSD shown
in Figure 7.5.
FIGURE 7.5 EURUSD Weekly Chart, February 15, 2009, to July 4, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

What Initially Attracts Me
If the EURUSD can make a decisive break above the 1.2700 area labeled Resistance 2, this would
then become a strong support and possible low-risk entry point ∼1.2700, which we'll then examine
more closely on the daily chart in the second screening.
The EURUSD has already broken through two resistance levels at 1.2375 (bottom of ellipsis
labeled Resistance 1) and at 1.2515 (middle of ellipsis labeled Resistance 1). Now it may be ready
to break through the next area at around 1.2660 to 1.2700 (labeled Resistance 2), which would be a
bullish sign of strength for the current uptrend because:
This price level was a significant s/r point in the past, from the weekly candles of February 15 to
March 15 (ellipsis A), and also for the weekly candles of May 2, 16, and 23.
It has the 23.6 percent Fibonacci retracement level for the downtrend that ran from the weekly
candle of November 29 to that of June 6.
The prior week's high was around 1.2720.
If the pair can make a decisive break above the prior week's high of about 1.2720 (the upper
extreme of the July 4 candlewick), that breakout could signal the next move higher, so I might want to
enter a long EURUSD position around that price.

Fundamental Analysis Context—Weekly Chart
Though long-term prospects for the EUR may be very cloudy, we have the ingredients for some kind
of further rally:
The EURUSD is in a five-week uptrend after hitting multiyear lows around 1.2000 on fears that
Greece would default. Given that the newly passed €750 billion rescue package is currently
believed to be able to cover Greece for the coming year and also the next most likely default
threats, Portugal and Ireland, these default threats have passed for now, and no other peripheral
economy poses an immediate default threat. None of the long-term problems at the root of the EU
sovereign debt and banking crisis have been addressed, but they've likely been deferred long
enough for a tradable multiweek rally, as suggested by the current five-week rally. I may not
personally believe the EUR has a bright future, but that's irrelevant. The uptrend is telling me that
the other traders believe it at least has a tradable rally. If the pair breaks above the area labeled
Resistance 2, that will be further confirmation of that belief and an indication that the uptrend has
room to run.
The pair is coming off multiyear lows, and so could well retrace a chunk of the December 2009
to June 2010 downtrend shown in Figure 7.5.
An upcoming stress test of EU banks will likely paint a rosy picture, and while everyone knows
in advance that the results will show that all is in order, this little PR exercise may still provide
an excuse for a further rally. I suspect the market wants that excuse, given that the primary
fundamental driver of the recent downtrend (threat of Greek default) has passed and the EURUSD
pair is coming off multiyear lows and so may be ripe for a further rally.

Technical Analysis (TA)—Weekly Chart
As noted above and shown in Figure 7.5 the pair has broken past recent resistance at 1.2500
(Resistance 1) and now faces resistance around 1.2660 (Resistance 2), which has served as a strong
weekly s/r point from mid-February to mid-March in 2009 and for much of May in 2010, and from the
23.6 percent Fib retracement of the downtrend.
As noted earlier, if it can break past the prior week's high around 1.2720 (which would be an entry
point), there is no significant resistance until about 1.2900 (Resistance 3), which is the next likely
strong resistance because:
1.2900 was the s/r price level in April 2009 (ellipsis B).
1.2900 was a recent s/r price level in early to mid-May 2010 (Resistance 3).
The 20-week exponential moving average (the descending line that touches the right side of the
Resistance 3 area ellipsis) also converges on this area.
From 1.2720 to 1.2900 we have about 280 pips, depending on our exact entry and exit points.
Again, we assume only one entry and exit to simplify our presentation. That implies that for this trade
to work we'll need to see if a stop loss can be placed no farther than a third to a half of that distance
from the entry point so that we get a 1:3 or 1:2 risk-reward ratio.

Second Screening
The two questions we now seek to answer are:

1. Can we find a stop loss that meets our risk and money management criteria given our planned
entry around 1.2700?
Risk Management: Not likely to be hit by random price movements but rather only if the
breakout is truly failing, yet less than 90 pips from the entry point (about a third of the
potential gain for a 1:3 rrr) or at least no more than 140 pips from the entry point (for a 1:2
rrr) from our preferred entry at a price that suggests a decisive breakout. The 90 pip limit
means a stop loss no lower than 1.2630, and the 140 pip limit means a stop loss no lower
than 1.2560.
Money Management: Doesn't risk more that 1 to 3 percent of our capital.
2. Is there any support or resistance we need to consider for planning entries or exits that we
didn't see on the weekly chart?
For the answers to these questions we zoom in on the daily chart for the prior weeks (see Figure
7.6).
FIGURE 7.6 EURUSD Daily Chart, April 16 to July 9, 2010 (Ends Week Beginning Sunday, July 4,
2010)
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

FIGURE 7.7 EURUSD Daily Chart, July 9 to October 1, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

TA and RAMM Considerations—Daily Chart
For an entry around 1.2700, the TA and RAMM picture is not great. Here's why. While there is some
minor resistance around 1.2735 (Resistance 1), there is stronger resistance around 1.2800
(Resistance 2) from both the price level itself and the 100 day EMA.

RRR Evaluation
To see if this trade offers the rrr we want, we first consider stop loss placement.

Stop Loss Placement
There isn't firm support until around 1.2435, where four kinds of support converge (at the bottom of
ellipsis B):
The 1.2435 price area itself (ellipsis A)
The 10-day EMA
The 50-day EMA
The 20-day EMA
So if we enter at 1.2700, we could get stopped by resistance at around 1.2800 for only a 100 pip
gain, and a trustworthy stop loss around 1.2435 would, if hit, inflict a 265 pip loss. That's a 2.65:1
rrr, the opposite of what we want. No, thanks.
Before we give up, here's another idea. What about if we entered at a breakout above Resistance 1
and Resistance 2 at around 1.2830, with an eye to ride the EURUSD higher until the next significant
resistance area between the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement (the same one as on the weekly chart)
and the 200-day EMA at ∼1.3145?

Potential Gain: Likely Profit-Taking Point
Planned entry point: 1.2830
Planned exit point: 1.3145

Potential gain:

0.0315 or 315 pips

Potential Loss: Stop Loss Placement and RRR
We still don't have any trustworthy support until around 1.2435, given that the 23.6 percent Fib
retracement did not provide strong s/r back in May 2010 on the daily chart.
Planned entry point: 1.2830
Planned stop loss:

1.2435

Potential loss:

0.0395 or 395 pips

Risk-reward ratio

395/315 = 1.25:1

Again, more risk than reward, not tempting. Given that the likely loss is higher than the likely gain,
we needn't even bother considering whether this trade risks less than three percent of our account.

Fundamental Analysis Context
There is nothing to add from the fundamentals mentioned earlier.

Conclusion: Know When to Walk Away
We pass on this one. Yes, I know you're thinking, Cliff, WTF? This is supposed to be a full real-life
trade example. Baby, there is nothing more real-life about trading than investing time and effort to
study a trade, and then concluding it's not worthwhile.
Is this as exciting a conclusion as opening a new trade? No. So what? If you want action while
sitting at your computer, play video games.
Was this analysis wasted time? Hardly. As you'll learn if you start taking questionable trades out of
a need for some action, some of your most profitable trading decisions will be to reject trades that
don't meet your standards, thus avoiding a loss.
Hey, a penny saved is a penny earned.

Trade Postmortem: Was I Right?
The next question is: did I just blow an opportunity? Have I just become the trading version of Peter
Best, the original Beatles drummer, the one whom Ringo Starr replaced just before they made it big?
Or much worse, have I become the trading version of Ronald Wayne? He's the little-known third
founder of Apple Computer (along with Jobs and Wozniak) who sold his 10 percent stake for $2,300.
As of this writing it would be worth about $22 billion, and would have made him among the world's
top 20 richest people.3
Ah, the road not taken.
Fortunately, we have no regrets this time.
Our maximum affordable stop loss was 140 pips. From our 1.2700 entry that would have been
1.25600.
As we can see in Figure 7.7, my stop loss would have been hit a few days later on July 13, when
the low was about 1.2520. So in the short term, I was definitely right.
However, even if I had missed an opportunity, that would have been okay, because the rrr was

terrible. With a 1.25:1 rrr, I'd have to be right on over 60 percent of my trades just to break even.
That's too much risk; the odds are against me. Those odds would catch up to me eventually, as surely
as they get most amateur gamblers in casinos.

The Second-Guessing Game
However, if I wanted to second-guess myself about this trade, I could look at what happened after that
July 13 exit.
If I had taken on extra risk with a wider stop loss (and thus a lower rrr), stayed in the trade, and put
on a trailing stop of, say, 20 to 50 pips (depending on a variety of variables) once it moved about 50
to 100 pips in my favor to lock in some profit, I could have probably gotten out during the July
21 pullback (candle A) somewhere around 1.2865 (50 pips from the high of 1.2915, assuming a
trailing stop of 50 pips) for a gain of 165 pips from our 1.2700 entry at about an rrr of about 1:1,
maybe worse. That's poor risk management because it means I have to be right on most of my trades to
be profitable, which isn't a great assumption for most traders.
If I had somehow stayed in the trade, either with a wider fixed or trailing stop, I might have ridden
it higher to somewhere around the early August highs of 1.3200 (candle B on the chart, a gain of 500
pips from our 1.2700 entry). Again, however, this would have required a very wide fixed initial stop
loss or a nearly 200 pip trailing stop loss in order to have stayed in during the July 21 pullback
(candle A). That's a lot of risk considering our initial goal was only 200 pips, and again gives us
about a 1:1 risk-reward ratio, which means we need to be right most of the time to be profitable and
that we're exposed to much larger losses. As illustrated in Appendix E, big losses hurt us more than
big gains help us.
This case of taking on extra risk for potentially winning trades brings us to another very key lesson
in how to have a professional trader's mindset.

MORE KEY TRADER PSYCHOLOGY:
DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN GOOD TRADES AND
WINNING TRADES
A winning trade is not a good trade if you took on too much risk, because that habit is likely to kill
you in the end.
A good trade is not necessarily a winning trade. If you had a good plan, stayed with it, incurred a
small but affordable loss, and then learned something from the trade, you just had a successful trade.
You're keeping the odds on your side, so, like a casino, you should be profitable in the long run as
long as you refine your methods and systems and keep risk low.
Would higher-risk alternatives have been better trades in retrospect?
No! Any profits from higher-risk trades would have been more a matter of luck than skill. Like a
casino, we take calculated risks, but only trade when the odds are in our favor.
Eventually the odds will catch up with traders with poor (or nonexistent) RAMM and who regularly
trade with risk-to-reward ratios around 1:1 or worse, and they'll join the 80 percent or more of forex
traders who fail.

I'm not saying anything original here, and pardon me for repeating myself, but it's really worth
repeating.
If you followed your plan and it included proper RAMM, that is a good trade even if you missed
out on profits or even took a small but acceptable loss. You'll live to fight another day, unlike the
reckless and undisciplined traders. Once you find a system (and style) that works, you'll be able to
execute it and be consistently profitable.
Pat yourself on the back, pour yourself a good glass of something, study the trade and strategy for
possible mistakes or faults, and move on. These things happen, a lot. That's why we love trades with
risk-to-reward ratios of 1:3 or better. Our conservative assumption is that most of our trades won't
work out. As long as we're profitable at the end of the month, that's fine.
Markets are hard to predict, and that is what you're trying to do. So part of having realistic
expectations is to accept that you'll have a lot of losing trades, even a majority of losing trades.
As mentioned in Chapter 5, if you need a certain percentage of wins to keep from getting
discouraged, consider taking partial profits early on trades that are moving in your favor. Your rrr
may fall to below 1:2 overall, but you'll be happier and able to continue trading. You'll also be able
to build confidence that may allow you to accept more losing trades in exchange for higher profits as
you mature as a trader.
