
returned three weeks earlier from running Salomon’s Asian operations.73 Maughan, forty-three years old,
now headed the investment-banking group. He was not a trader, and he was English, not American. He had
the least resemblance to Mozer or any of Salomon’s frat-house trading boys of anyone that could be found.
He was viewed as both ethical and possessed of common sense. Thanks to Liar’s Poker, the public thought
of Salomon as a place full of people who stuffed their faces with onion cheeseburgers for breakfast and
dangled strippers’ panties from their trading screens.74 Salomon, after all, was the firm where, as Lewis had
written, a vice chairman was more like a chairman of vice.75 Maughan, however, was the very portrait of a
dignified, impeccably tailored Englishman. Since he had spent the past several years in Tokyo, the chance
that he was tainted by the Treasury auction scandal was remote.
Of all Maughan’s qualifications, possibly the most valuable was his distance from the crime. Within Salomon,
land of the long knives, all of the other candidates had enemies. Maughan was a question mark, like the token
black guy in the movie Putney Swope, who gets elected to the job of CEO of a backstabbing advertising
agency when the old CEO croaks during a boardroom meeting. The other executives try to sabotage one
another’s chances of getting his job by voting for Putney Swope, who ends up being elected by a huge
majority.76 Maughan was respected, but no one knew him all that well. As one of the other warlords put it,
they all voted for Maughan because it’s “better to choose someone you don’t know than someone you think
is bad.”
In the movie, Putney Swope had had the sense to vote for himself. When Buffett asked Maughan who should
run Salomon, Maughan replied adroitly: “I’m afraid you’re going to find out that it’s me,” then added that he
would serve whomever Buffett chose.77
Two other things got Buffett’s attention. Maughan did not ask him for protection against being sued. And
Buffett—who, as much as he hated admitting it, did not enjoy paying people—was mightily impressed that
Maughan did not ask how much the job would pay.
Maughan and two others were told to come to the office for the board meeting the next day. That afternoon,
Buffett taxied back uptown to Graham’s UN Plaza apartment, where the arb boys met him to plead “with
passion and logic” for Meriwether’s job. If J.M. left, Buffett knew, there had to be a risk that the arb boys
would eventually join him.78 Without Meriwether, the main source of Salomon’s profits would drain away.
Buffett’s investment in Salomon could become worth far less. Then Meriwether himself arrived, shaken. He
did not want to resign, and he talked to Buffett at length. Buffett began to waver. He focused on
Meriwether’s straightforwardness in reporting the problem.
“After listening to all of this, my reaction was not to ask for his resignation. As best I knew at the time, and
this is still my belief, when he had heard of his subordinate’s misdeeds, he had gone straight upstairs to his
superiors and the general counsel and had reported it. It seemed to me that it was the job of his superiors
and the general counsel of the firm to then take action. No one, at this point, was suggesting that the
general counsel should resign.”
Then Gutfreund called. His flight to Nantucket had been thwarted by Hurricane Bob and he was headed back
to New York. “I have no future,” he said, agitated.79 They made plans to go to dinner. Gutfreund insisted
that first they talk to his newly hired lawyer, Philip Howard, about severance pay.
Buffett and Munger called Howard, with Munger doing most of the talking. Gutfreund felt the firm owed him
$35 million.
“As he was laying all this out, I was listening like the Japanese, saying, ‘Yes, I understand your position.’
Not ‘Yes, I agree with you.’ We had no interest whatsoever in trying to arrange a compensation agreement
with anyone who was in the middle of a scandal of this proportion without knowing the full facts.”
Buffett then said that they could not agree upon an overall number, because no matter what the figure was,
“Salomon Gives $XX Severance Package to Gutfreund” would “be the headline,” rather than the break with

former management.80 They laid on praise of Gutfreund’s character, however; they told Howard that
Gutfreund would be treated fairly, that they had the power to make it happen and had never broken a
promise before. Buffett said, “The only way this won’t happen is if both Charlie and I die.” He later
explained that this was a way of avoiding confrontation; that is, “deflecting Mr. Howard and getting him off
this kick” because it would be a “little abrupt” to say they didn’t want to reach a settlement because “we
don’t know the full facts” yet.
Buffett and Munger then went out for a steak with Gutfreund at Christ Cella. Gutfreund offered to stay on as
a consultant at no charge in the days ahead. “I’m going to need all the help I can get,” Buffett said fervently.
They talked about the problems of the firm, and Gutfreund said he thought Deryck Maughan was the right
guy to run Salomon.
At one point, however, Gutfreund—who still knew a number of facts of which Buffett was not yet
aware—said something that contradicted the warm and cozy scene of a few minutes before. “You guys are
smarter than I am,” he told them. “You guys are going to fuck me.”81
It was with relief that Buffett and Munger escaped and went back to Kay Graham’s apartment. A large suite
filled with Asian art, it had many happy associations for Buffett. Graham always kept the kitchen stocked
with his favorite foods. He, Carol Loomis, and George Gillespie often got together there for a bridge game,
ordering in deli sandwiches on the side. But he was not having nearly as much fun tonight.
Almost as soon as they arrived, Philip Howard showed up, carrying a sheaf of papers about Gutfreund’s
severance, which he wanted Munger to sign.82 He talked to both of them for a while, until Buffett left them
alone and went off to make some phone calls. Munger started getting irritable. They discussed the matter for
perhaps an hour or more.
Munger had already made up his mind that he was going to say no to this deal. As he recalled later, “I was
deliberately not listening. I was being polite, but I wasn’t paying much attention…. I sort of turned off my
mind…. I was just sitting there politely with my head turned off.”
When Howard reached the end of his lengthy list of demands, Munger refused to sign the papers, but stressed
that Gutfreund would eventually be treated fairly.83 On the way out the door, Howard hesitated. It bothered
him that he still had nothing in writing. “You can’t get paid after the divorce,” he said. Munger reassured
him: “Phil, you have to practice law the way my father did, by trusting in a man’s word.”84
While Howard and Munger were talking, Meriwether and his lawyer, Ted Levine, arrived. Meriwether had
changed his mind. He said that he was in an impossible position and had to leave Salomon.
He “at least partially understood the seriousness of the company’s situation. He was pacing back and forth,
and he was smoking cigarettes as fast as he could light them. He said that the best thing for him to do was to
resign.”
Munger would later express feelings of guilt over agreeing to put Meriwether’s name in the press release,
which he viewed as a mistake he had made under pressure.85 Both he and Buffett thought Meriwether could
stay and fight it out, but they accepted his resignation.
“We talked for a considerable length of time. They stayed until midnight.”
Finally, it was just Buffett and Munger. Buffett went to bed, feeling that matters were, if not under control, at
least starting to be straightened out.
The next day, Sunday, August 18, no one would rest.
Early in the morning, Buffett, Gutfreund, and Strauss met in one of the many conference rooms on the
forty-fifth floor of Salomon’s office downtown before the meeting at which the board would ratify Buffett’s

role as interim chairman. The board gathered outside, and one of the members, Gedale Horowitz, took Marty
Lipton aside and told him that he and several others had been talking for two days. He said that Meriwether
had failed to keep Mozer under control and they would resign unless Meriwether was fired for the good of
the firm. He told Buffett a softer version—that he would not attend the board meeting if Meriwether was still
employed. Buffett said the situation had resolved itself, because Meriwether was going to step down on his
own.86
Suddenly, a lawyer appeared in the conference room where Buffett was meeting with Gutfreund and Strauss,
waving a message from the Treasury Department. It was going to announce in a few minutes that Salomon
was barred from bidding at Treasury auctions, both for customers and for its own account. All of them
understood that in minutes, Salomon would be shot in the head. “We immediately saw that this would put us
out of business—not because of the economic loss, but because the message that would go out to the rest of
the world in headlines in the papers on Monday would be ‘Treasury to Salomon: Drop Dead.’ In effect, the
response to installation of new management and banishment of the old would be an extraordinary censure
delivered at an equally extraordinary time exactly coincident with the first actions of the new
management.”
Buffett went off to another conference room to call the Treasury, seeking a stay of execution. The phone was
busy. He got the phone company to agree to interrupt the call. They called back and said it was not a working
phone. After many minutes of confusion, problems, and delays, Buffett finally spoke to someone in the
Treasury Department. It was too late, he was told; the announcement had already gone out. The world now
knew that Salomon was banned from doing business with the government.
Many of the board members were seeing their net worth evaporate in front of their eyes. Another slew of
lawsuits, on top of those they already anticipated, would arrive on Salomon’s doorstep. Buffett appeared
calm but determined. He had come to a realization. Gutfreund was being drummed out for having created a
nightmare. Now he, Warren Buffett, was actually on the brink—not of overseeing the salvation of a
business—but of steering a zombie Salomon through the night of the living dead. Buffett balked.
He said to the board that he was going to tell Treasury Secretary Brady he would not serve as interim
chairman; he had come to save the firm, not to oversee its dismemberment. His reputation would be shot
either way, he thought, and the fallout from resigning would be less than the grief from staying on. The board
understood and agreed. It was the only card that Buffett had to play with Brady. Meanwhile, the board
decided to pursue two other courses simultaneously. Buffett turned to Marty Lipton. “Do you know a
bankruptcy lawyer?” he asked. Everyone sat frozen for a split second. Then Feuerstein and Lipton went off
and began to set in motion the wheels of filing for bankruptcy. If necessary, the firm would fail in an orderly
manner, rather than a rout.
Four and a half hours remained to try to reverse the Treasury’s decision before a press conference that
Salomon had already called for two-thirty p.m. to announce that Buffett would officially become interim
chairman. Less than seven hours remained until the Japanese markets would begin to open for the week’s
business, and London seven hours after that. When Tokyo opened, the landslide would begin.87 Lenders
would start pulling their credits immediately. To plead for clemency had become immeasurably harder. They
had not only to change the Treasury’s mind but to convince it to reverse itself in public.
John Macfarlane, Salomon’s treasurer, came in wearing a warm-up suit, directly from competing in a
triathlon. He talked to the board about what the Treasury’s action meant to the firm.88 Banks had already
started notifying Salomon they were pulling the firm’s commercial paper lines. Solly was careening toward
what would almost certainly be the largest failure of a financial firm in history. If the government withdrew
its endorsement of Salomon and the firm lost its funding, it would have to liquidate assets at fire-sale prices.
That would be followed by severe consequences in the world markets, as some of Salomon’s creditors and
counterparties, themselves unpaid, also began to fail. It was all going down the tubes. Buffett feared the
regulators were going to regret their uncompromising stance.
“If I’d been free to act and wanted to maximize my gain in the ensuing week, not only would I have shorted

any Salomon security that I could have in Tokyo that afternoon and in London late that night, but I would
have also shorted equities everywhere.
“We were going to find a judge someplace in Manhattan, walk in on him while he’s watching baseball
probably and eating popcorn at two in the afternoon, and tell him, we’re handing you the keys. You’re
running the place now. By the way, what do you know about Japanese law, because we owe ten or twelve
billion dollars in Japan? We owe ten or twelve billion in Europe. London will open at two in the morning.
And as of this very moment, you’re running the place.”
Corrigan was hard to reach. Asking to speak directly to Treasury Secretary Nick Brady, Buffett found that he
was not available either.
Brady was the patrician former CEO of brokerage firm Dillon, Read & Co., and Malcolm Chace Jr.’s
nephew, thus a member of the family that had sold Berkshire Fine Spinning to Hathaway Manufacturing. It
was he who had written his college thesis on Berkshire, which depressed him so much that he had decided to
sell his stock. Through Malcolm Chace, Buffett had once gone to visit Brady at Dillon, Read. The two
weren’t close friends, but they had a “fine feeling about each other,” Buffett says. There was no particular
reason, however, why the blue-blooded Brady, who hailed from the old-line firm Dillon, Read, would have a
fine feeling about a social parvenu like John Gutfreund—or a fine feeling about an arrogant upstart firm like
Salomon.
Nonetheless, Brady called Buffett back. He expressed empathy but made it clear that reversing the decision
was an enormous problem.
“They were going to look silly. And I felt they looked silly too, but they would look a whole lot sillier a few
days later when financial carnage was spread from this act.”89
Brady said he thought Buffett was overreacting but agreed to call back again. He needed to consult with SEC
Chairman Breeden, with Corrigan, and with Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan.
Buffett sat and waited for Brady’s call. He couldn’t call Brady. He didn’t know that Brady was sitting on
Ogden Phipps’s porch in Saratoga Springs, at the horse races. It was Brady’s prerogative to call him—or not.
The phone system on the conference floor didn’t ring on Sundays. To keep from missing an incoming call,
someone had to stare continually at the phone to see whether a little green light lit up. For a while, Buffett
stared at the phone, “as depressed as I have ever been.” Finally, someone enlisted a hastily-called-in
secretary to stare at the light.
Behind the scenes, the regulators were talking. Corrigan had contacted Paul Volcker, former chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board and now chairman at a prestigious investment-banking firm. Volcker, like Breeden,
was incensed at Salomon. None of the regulators believed that Buffett would walk; they felt he had too much
money and reputation at stake. They knew the decision would have an adverse impact on Salomon and they
thought that was appropriate. They didn’t believe that Salomon would fail even if the Treasury pulled its
imprimatur. The markets had so much confidence in Buffett that they assumed that simply by standing over
Salomon holding his umbrella, he could save the firm. But they could not be certain of that. They considered
whether the financial markets could survive a meltdown of one of its largest firms. The Federal Reserve
would have to pump huge sums of money into the market to keep other banks afloat after Salomon failed to
pay them. No rescue on this order of magnitude had ever been attempted. They were well aware of the likely
second-order effects. The global financial market could potentially collapse. Did they think the Federal
Reserve could handle it? “I was always an optimist,” Corrigan says. “I always said to myself, ‘You do what
you have to do.’”90
Hours passed while Buffett waited for the phone to ring. Alan Greenspan called once, saying, no matter what,
he wanted Buffett to stay. “It was a plea to just sort of stand there at the bridge regardless of what
happened.”

Little by little, the trading floor began to fill with people, as if summoned by some invisible jungle drum. They
lit their cigarettes and their cigars, sat around The Room, and waited. The arbs huddled, mourning
Meriwether. Nobody knew what was going on upstairs. Slowly, the clock ticked toward the hour when
trading would begin in Tokyo, sounding the firm’s death knell.
Upstairs, the board milled around uselessly, waiting while the regulators talked. Brady called Buffett back
periodically but had nothing meaningful to say. Several times Buffett repeated his case in the gravelly voice
that always betrayed him when under stress. He told Brady that Salomon’s attorneys were working on a
bankruptcy filing. He invoked Salomon’s importance to the markets. He told Brady of the domino effect that
the firm’s failure could cause.
“I said to Nick, I’d talked to Jerry Corrigan. This thing was going to implode. Tokyo was going to open, and
we weren’t going to buy back our paper. It was over. Hour after hour, from ten o’clock, I kept telling the
consequences of all these things, and it didn’t mean anything to him.”
Brady went back to his fellow regulators and talked. Most of them felt that this was special pleading. Buffett
was asking for some kind of gold-star treatment for Salomon, and the firm did not deserve it.91
Salomon’s board couldn’t understand why Buffett’s arguments weren’t getting through to the regulators.
They ran the financial markets. Why wasn’t it obvious to them that Salomon was going down?
As the afternoon wore on, Buffett’s logic failed, on this most critical occasion, to win over a key ally.
He had only one choice left. Of all avenues open to him, of all resources on which he could draw, this one
was the most precious, the huge pool of crystal essence that he was most reluctant to tap. Buffett would
undertake almost any item from his short list of most-loathed tasks—get into an angry, critical confrontation;
fire someone; cut off a long friendship carefully cultivated; eat Japanese food; give away a vast sum of
money; almost anything—than make a withdrawal from the Bank of Reputation. For all these many decades,
he had brooded over, nurtured, cultivated, and stored that priceless commodity in its vault. Never had he
drawn down so much as a drop on behalf of himself or anyone else, except when the odds hugely favored
getting back even more in return.
Now the debacle at Salomon had exposed him utterly, putting the entirety at stake. And the only remaining
hope was to ask, to literally beg as a personal favor, drawn purely on his own credibility, for help.
He would be putting himself eternally in Brady’s debt. He was staking his entire reputation—the reputation
that takes a lifetime to build and five minutes to lose—on whatever happened afterward.92 He had to
summon more courage than he knew he had.
Buffett’s voice cracked. “Nick,” he said, anguished, “this is the most important day of my life.”
Brady had his own problems to deal with. He didn’t think Buffett’s arguments were any good. But he heard
the feelings behind the words. He could hear in Buffett’s voice that the man thought Salomon had thrown
him over Niagara Falls in a barrel.
“Don’t worry, Warren,” Brady finally said. “We’ll get through this.” He hung up the phone and went off to
consult.
But as the clock crawled toward two-thirty p.m., when the press conference was scheduled to begin, Brady
had not called back.
Buffett decided to play the one card he could use with Corrigan. He picked up a phone. “Jerry,” he said, “I
haven’t taken the job yet as interim chairman. We did not hold our meeting this morning because of what the
Treasury did. So I am not the chairman of Salomon now. I could become the chairman in thirty seconds, but I
am not going to spend the rest of my life shepherding the greatest financial disaster in history. I’m going to
get sued either way by fifty people, but I don’t want to spend my life trying to mop up a total disaster on Wall

Street. However, I don’t mind spending some of my life trying to save this damned place.”
Charlie Munger was telling him not to do it under any circumstances. “Forget it,” he said. “Some sort of
surprise could happen the first day and you won’t be able to extricate yourself and will spend the next twenty
years of your life in court.”
Corrigan took Buffett’s threat to leave more seriously than the other regulators had, however. “I’ll call you
back,” he said.
Buffett sat and waited, envisioning his next move. He pictured himself getting on an elevator, riding down six
floors, walking onto the stage at the press conference all alone, and opening with the words “We’ve just
declared bankruptcy.”
Downstairs, in the August heat, more than a hundred reporters and photographers who had been pulled away
unexpectedly from their baseball games and swimming pools and family picnics swarmed into Salomon’s
auditorium for the press conference. The only thing they had to fill their interrupted Sunday afternoon was
the sight of Salomon’s blood-drenched gladiators, gutted before their eyes on the sand of the Colosseum.
“This crowd was sitting there expecting big news. And I was thinking about the old story about the reporter
sent to file a story on a wedding, and he went back and told the editor, ‘Well, there wasn’t any story,
because the groom didn’t show up.’ That was the mood those reporters were in.”
As the minutes passed, a white and shaken Meriwether arrived. He had gone, as instructed, to see Dick
Breeden, chairman of the SEC, asking for help. Meriwether reported that Breeden had turned them down
flat. Twice in the conversation, Breeden had said Salomon was “rotten to the core.”
“Rotten to the core,” Meriwether repeated in shock, “rotten to the core.” All of them suddenly realized that
the Treasury’s move had been a joint decision among the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and the SEC, their
condemnation a sudden reversal of the world’s opinion of Salomon, a dramatic payback for years of pride
and arrogance.
The hour of the press conference came and went, while the reporters fidgeted and grew more irritable
downstairs. Brady did not call. The phone sat unblinking.
Finally, Jerome Powell, assistant secretary of the Treasury, called. The Treasury would not fully reverse
itself, he said. Salomon could not bid in Treasury auctions for customers. Yet it would compromise on
Salomon’s most important point: The firm could bid for its own accounts.
“Will that do?” Powell asked.
“I think it will,” Buffett said.
He loped back into the boardroom and told them. The room erupted with relief and joy. As rapidly as he
could talk, Buffett oversaw the election of himself as interim chairman and Deryck Maughan as director and
operating head of Salomon Brothers. At about a quarter to three, he walked outside and had somebody call
downstairs to the trading floor.
Maughan was sitting with the traders, watching the clock. At a nearby desk, John Macfarlane’s team was
working on a contingency plan to dump the firm’s assets in Japan as fast as they could work the phones.
Somebody called from upstairs and told Maughan to meet Buffett at the elevator bank for a talk. Maughan
was uncertain whether he was about to be made the boss—or told he had a new one. He walked over to the
elevator. The door opened, and he saw Buffett standing inside. “You’ve been tagged,” Buffett said, and
motioned for Maughan to get in. Instead of riding back up to the boardroom, they descended two more floors
into the jaws of the waiting press.93
“The press was unruly. They were like animals. Every question was a trick question. It was a big story, and
