
Table 19-1

26 506455-ch19.indd 302

Putting Volume and Price Together

If a stock . . .

. . . and trading
volume is . . .

Technical analysts are . . .

Rises

Higher

Bullish

Rises

Lower

Cautiously bullish

Falls

Higher

Bearish

Falls

Lower

Cautiously bearish

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

303

Your next question, though, might be how you can determine whether trading volume is higher or lower. The major stock market exchanges, including
the Nasdaq and New York Stock Exchange, provide trading volume for the
day and the average daily volume to most of the financial Web sites. Technical
analysts compare a stock’s trading volume for the day with its average daily
volume to determine whether buying and selling is active or not.
Using MSN Money’s site, you can obtain a stock’s daily and average daily
volume following these steps:
1. Log into MSN Money at money.msn.com.
2. Enter the stock’s symbol in the blank and click the Get Quote button.
3. Read and interpret the volume.
You’ll find the stock’s volume, as well as its average daily volume over
the past 13 weeks, listed on the page. When the day’s volume is considerably higher than average, then you can use that insight to analyze the
significance of the stock price’s move.

The ABC’s of Beta
Beta, or the beta coefficient, is one of those rare market indicators that both
fundamental and technical analysts can agree has value. Beta is a statistical
measure of how volatile a stock is relative to the stock market at large. You
might recall, from Chapter 11, how beta is used in the capital asset pricing
model used to build a discounted cash flow model.
While beta is based on a somewhat complex statistical technique, as an investor, most of what you need is pretty simple. If an individual stock has a beta of
1, that means it is equally volatile as the general stock market. If beta is less
than 1, then the stock tends to swing up and down less than the market. And if
a stock’s beta is greater than 1, it is less volatile than the market.
A technical analyst might look at beta to provide clues on how wild to expect a
stock’s ups and downs to be. Beta is available from nearly all financial Web sites.

The long and short of short interest
It might seem strange, but there may be other investors who are hoping, and
betting, that a stock you own will go down. These investors, called short sellers, use a series of maneuvers to position themselves to profit if a stock falls.

26 506455-ch19.indd 303

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

304 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Investors short a stock by first borrowing shares from another investor who
owns them. The short seller, then, turns around and sells the shares immediately, pockets the proceeds and waits. The short seller then must buy the
shares, hopefully at a lower price, and return them to the investor they borrowed from. If the stock falls, the investor makes money by buying the shares
back at a lower cost than they sold them for.
You might never decide to bet against a stock yourself. But it may be useful
for a fundamental analyst to know just how many people are shorting a stock
they do own. There are three things to pay attention to when it comes to
short interest:
✓ Short interest: A stock’s short interest is a measurement of how many
shares of a company’s stock have been sold short.
Just looking at short interest doesn’t tell you a whole lot. A company
with more shares outstanding, or shares in investors’ hands, would naturally have more short interest than a company with fewer shares outstanding. You’ll want to compare short interest with another measure to
get proper perspective, as I describe below.
✓ Average daily share volume: Remember volume, mentioned above?
This data will be helpful again in interpreting how significant short interest is by putting short interest into perspective.
✓ Days to cover: Days to cover tells you how large a company’s short interest really is. Days to cover is calculated by dividing a stock’s short interest by its average daily volume. This statistic indicates how many days
of typical trading it would take for the number of shares being shorted
to trade hands.
The higher a stock’s days to cover is, the more heavily shorted it is. Fortunately,
all three types of shorting data described above are available at Nasdaq.com.
Just enter a stock’s symbol into the site and a window will pop open. Click on
the Short Interest option listed below where it says “Fundamentals.”
Determining what short interest means to a fundamental analyst is bit tricky.
Some fundamental analysts actually like to see a stock that’s heavily shorted.
If you’re completely confident in your fundamental analysis and know what a
company is worth, and believe the stock is undervalued, heavy short interest
can actually be a good thing. When stocks are heavily shorted, if the company delivers solid earnings, investors who shorted the stock may scurry to
buy back the stock.
A rush by nervous short sellers to buy back a stock they wrongly bet against
is called a short squeeze. Short squeezes can cause powerful stock rallies.

26 506455-ch19.indd 304

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

305

But fundamental analysts tend to view a heavily shorted stock as a warning
sign. After all, an investor who shorts a stock is exposed to a theoretically
infinite loss, since there’s no real limit to how high a stock can rise. If investors are that confident a stock is going to fall, you want to make absolutely
sure you’ve done a complete job with your fundamental analysis.

Keeping a Close Eye on Options
To be sure, fundamental analysis is all about knowing how to study a company from top to bottom and understand what it’s really worth. A classic
fundamental analyst only pays attention to a market price for a stock when
deciding whether it’s undervalued and should be bought, or overvalued and
should be sold.
And for the most part, looking at the stock’s current price is enough to tell
you what the market measures a stock’s value to be. A stock price is the
result of a vigorous back-and-forth between buyers and sellers. Through an
auction, conducted largely over vast and rapid electronic trading networks,
a stock’s price rises and falls until buyers are satisfied with the price they’re
paying, and sellers are OK with the price they’re getting.
But there’s an entirely separate layer of trading that takes place beyond the
buying and selling of the stock itself in the options market. Options are financial contracts that give investors the right, but not the obligation, to buy or
sell stocks at a prearranged price at a set time in the future.
Watching the prices of stock options can give you a better idea of not only
what investors are willing to pay for stocks now, but their belief of where a
stock might be in the future. You might want to factor in the prices of options
in your fundamental analysis.

Understanding the types of options
Options come in two most basic forms, put options and call options. Put
options give investors the right, but not the obligation, to sell a stock at a
predetermined price at a set time in the future. Call options, on the other
hand, give investors the right, but not the obligation, to buy a stock at a predetermined price at a set time in the future.
Investors may buy and sell both put and call options, driving their prices up
and down, just as they would trade stocks. Table 19-2 shows you the four
most basic options strategies, which you’ll want to understand in order to
know how to interpret prices on options.

26 506455-ch19.indd 305

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

306 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Table 19-2

The Four Basic Options Strategies
Calls

Puts

Buy

A bet the stock
price will rise.

A bet the stock price will fall

Sell

A bet the stock
price will fall.

A bet the stock will rise

Paying attention to put
and call price levels
If you want to get an idea of what investors are expecting from a stock, you’ll
want to take a look at its option chain. An option chain tells you how much
investors are paying for both put and call options that expire, or come due, at
different times in the future.
Option chains are usually sorted by strike price, or the price at which the
option kicks in. For instance, imagine you bought a call option for stock ABC
at a strike price of $25 that expires in December. That means you have the
right, but not the obligation, to buy the stock at $25 a share in December.
Fast-forward to November. Imagine the stock is now trading at $100 a share.
Suddenly, having the right to buy a $100-a-share stock for just $25 a share
is valuable, or in the money. However, if instead of trading for $100 a share,
what if the stock is trading for $2.50? Not many people would want the right
to buy a $2.50 stock for $25. At that point, your option is considered to be out
of the money.
If you start noticing the price of call options with strike prices above the current market price going up, that’s an indication investors are expecting good
things from the stock in the future.
Some technical analysts also pay attention to the volume, or level of trading
activity, in options, too. In fact, the amount of trading in put and call options
is the basis of another thing technical analysts watch, the put-to-call ratio, discussed below.

Watching the put-to-call ratio
Now that you understand what puts and calls are, you might wonder how
you might put the information to use. Again, as a fundamental analyst, you’re
much more concerned about a company’s revenue and earnings rather than

26 506455-ch19.indd 306

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

307

short-term trading noise. But, monitoring the level of puts and calls can tell
you how many other investors either agree, or disagree, with your assessment of a company’s value.
The put-to-call ratio gives investors a quick look at how bullish or bearish
investors are on a stock’s prospects. The ratio is simply the number of puts
(which are bearish) divided by the number of calls (which are bullish).
The higher a stock’s put-to-call ratio, the more pessimistic investors are
about a stock’s future.
You could calculate a stock’s put-to-call ratio yourself, but it’s easier to use
online resources that do it for you. You can get the put-to-call ratio from
Schaeffer’s Investment Research at www.schaeffersresearch.com. Enter
the stock’s symbol in the upper right-hand corner and click the ‘get quote’
button. Scroll down and click on the Put/Call Open Interest Ratio option, and
you’ll see the put-call ratio plotted for you.

Using the market’s fear gauge: The Vix
One of the great strengths of fundamental analysis is that it gives you a framework to assess how much a business is worth. That way you can make an
intelligent decision on whether the stock’s price is higher or lower than the
business’ value. Fundamental analysts, in fact, often get their best deals when
other investors are afraid to buy stocks and push stock prices down. Warren
Buffett, in his 1986 letter to shareholders, put it this way: “We simply attempt
to be fearful when others are greedy and to be greedy only when others are
fearful.”
One of the biggest reasons why fundamental analysts might choose to pay
attention to technical analysis and options is that they may help you see when
other investors are feeling greedy and when they’re feeling nervous. And when
they’re nervous, you can be greedy.
There are many ways to get an idea of when other investors are fearful, which
is valuable information for fundamental analysts. One popular indictor of
investors’ fear is based on options trading. This indictor, called the Chicago
Board of Options Exchange Volatility Index or Vix, is often looked at as a pretty
valuable measure of investors’ fear. When the Vix is rising, that means investors are getting increasingly nervous. And when the Vix is falling, that means
investors are getting complacent.
You can obtain current values of the Vix from the CBOE at http://www.
cboe.com/data/mktstat.aspx. Historical values of the Vix are available
at http://www.cboe.com/micro/vix/historical.aspx. Most financial
Web sites will also let you plot the Vix, if you enter the symbol. For instance,
if you enter $vix.x in MSN Money, you can view its value over time.

26 506455-ch19.indd 307

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

308 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Applying Technical Analysis Techniques
to Fundamental Analysis
As you’ve probably picked up from earlier in the chapter, fundamental analysts and technical analysts take very different approaches when checking
out stocks. If you put technical analysts and fundamental analysts in a room,
while a fight not break out, there certainly would be some dirty looks being
exchanged.
Perhaps you’re reading this book because you disagree with technical analysis for the reasons highlighted above. Maybe you’ve tried technical analysis
before and gotten burned. Still, even if you’re primarily interested in a company’s fundamentals, don’t assume this chapter doesn’t apply to you. While
technical analysis is often a dirty word among fundamental analysts, there
are some techniques used by technical analysts that can easily be carried
over to fundamental analysis.
In the sections above, you find out how to add technical analysis to your
investment style. You may have skipped that section, figuring you want nothing to do with technical analysis.
But in this section, I attempt to show you ways to some tricks and techniques
used by technical analysts directly to fundamental analysis. This isn’t as
strange as it might seem. After all, realize one of the most valuable things
technical analysts do is turn mountains of complex numerical data into
charts and graphs. Numbers that are indecipherable in huge spreadsheets
can suddenly become enlightening when turned into a chart. Suddenly,
charts can help investors quickly spot trends in data they might have otherwise of missed.
Even if you’re a die-hard fundamental analyst, there is something to be said
about placing investment data on charts that can be closely studied. In fact,
the technical analysts are onto something when it comes to a few of their
techniques, which can be applied to fundamental analysis.
One of the great drawbacks of fundamental analysis is timing. A cheap stock,
based on fundamental analysis, can get even cheaper if it has technical trends
working against it. By applying some of the tricks of the technical analysis
trade to fundamental analysis, you might spot trends you might have overlooked if you were just focusing on the income statement and balance sheet.

26 506455-ch19.indd 308

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

309

Giving fundamental data the technical
analysis treatment
Some technical analysts love charts so much, they might even plot out some
data that are traditionally considered to be for fundamental analysts. Even
if you’re not onboard with technical analysis, there’s no question that sometimes, seeing fundamental data presented graphically may help you spot
trends.
Plotting fundamental information, rather than just looking at table stuffed
with data, may give you a unique perspective and help you to spot trends you
didn’t notice before.
Price-to-earnings ratios, or P-Es, and dividend yields are two of the fundamental pieces of data that technical analysts most often will place on a chart.
Looking at how P-E ratios are rising, or falling, over time can help you determine whether or not investors are getting overly giddy or cautious about a
stock. You can read about the P-E ratio in more detail in Chapter 8 and the
dividend yield in Chapter 10.
Slapping fundamental information on a chart may bring to light trends your
eyes glanced over. And there are online tools that make this pretty easy to
do. Nasdaq.com, for instance, provides a free charting service that allows
you to plot both P-E ratios and dividend yields. You can do this by following
these steps.
1. Log onto Nasdaq’s site at www.nasdaq.com.
2. Enter the symbol of the stock you’re interested in.
After you enter the stock symbol into the blank, click on the Company
Charts button.
3. Select the fundamental data you would like to see plotted.
Hover your mouse pointer over the Technical Indicators button, then
choose Lower Indicators, and then P/E ratio. If you want to plot dividend
yield instead, choose dividend yield.
4. View the data.
The data are then plotted for you in a rectangle below the stock’s price
chart.

26 506455-ch19.indd 309

9/24/09 10:41:58 PM

310 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Following the momentum of fundamentals
Technical analysts are often interested in following the momentum of stock
prices, meaning the prevalent trend either upward or downward. Just as college basketball teams often get momentum during big games and start going
on a hot streak, technical analysts believe stocks can turn hot and have the
gust of investor enthusiasm at their backs. Momentum investors hope to pile
into a stock while it’s still soaring, grab a quick gain and get out.
Classic momentum investing is contrary in most ways to fundamental analysis. But fundamental analysts might consider borrowing a bit from this concept, as strange as it sounds, when examining fundamental data.
By watching for momentum in a company’s fundamentals, you might get a tipoff that something meaningful is taking place at a company.
One way to apply the concept of momentum to fundamental analysis is by
studying earnings acceleration. Here, you’re not just looking for companies
that are increasing their profitability every quarter or year. You’re being even
pickier. You want to find companies that are increasing the rate at which
earnings are growing.
Fundamental analysts generally use quarterly earnings as their gauge for a
company with momentum. Momentum, by its nature, is short-term focused so
it makes sense to use short-term data.
To perform an earnings-acceleration analysis, you just need to have a company’s earnings growth rate for the last few periods. While it’s usually done
using quarterly results, the analysis can be done using quarters or years.
Below is an example of how you might do this analysis using Oracle’s net
income for four past years, shown in Table 19-3.

Table 19-3

Oracle’s Annual Net Income

Fiscal year

Net income ($ millions)

2008

$5,521

2007

$4,274

2006

$3,381

2005

$2,885

Source: Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ

26 506455-ch19.indd 310

9/24/09 10:41:58 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

311

Your first step is calculating the growth rate between each period. A growth
rate is the difference between the most recently reported quarter and the
same period in the previous year’s quarter. You can review how to calculate
growth rates in Chapter 4. Once you measure each year’s growth, you get a
chart that looks like what you see in Table 19-4.

Table 19-4

Oracle’s Annual Net Income Growth

Fiscal year

Annual Growth

2008

29.2%

2007

26.4%

2006

17.3%

As you can see from Table 19-4, what’s interesting is that Oracle’s annual
growth rate is accelerating. In other words, the growth of the most recent
period is greater than the one before it. This is the kind of trend that a fundamental analyst, looking for momentum, would be on the search for.
Fundamental analysts often look for quarterly earnings momentum, for instance,
when trying to figure out how successful a new product is. New products can be
critical to a company’s sustained earnings growth. And if something a company
introduces is catching on with customers, an earnings-acceleration analysis
might show something exciting is going on at the company.

26 506455-ch19.indd 311

9/24/09 10:41:58 PM

312 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis

26 506455-ch19.indd 312

9/24/09 10:41:58 PM

Part V

The Part of Tens

27 506455-pp05.indd 313

9/24/09 10:42:30 PM

N

In this part . . .

o For Dummies book would be complete without a
Part of Tens. In this part, I’ve saved a few of my favorite real-life examples of how fundamental analysis might
have alerted you to potential concerns as an investor
(Chapter 20). You can also read a list of the ten things you
should always do when analyzing the fundamentals of a
potential investment (Chapter 21). And as important as
fundamental analysis is, there are weaknesses that you
should be aware of, and I point those out in this part, too
(Chapter 22).

27 506455-pp05.indd 314

9/24/09 10:42:31 PM

Chapter 20

Ten Examples of Fundamental
Analysis Unearthing
Financial Secrets
In This Chapter
▶ Seeing how fundamental analysis can help pinpoint troubles at a company
▶ Applying the techniques common in fundamental analysis to actual examples
▶ Discovering some of the research required to carefully examine a company’s financials
▶ Using the Altman’s Z-score measure to spot a company that might not make it

L

et’s face it. Curling up with a warm cup of coffee and a stack of financial
statements just isn’t quite as appealing as cracking open a great book.
Sure, you might find some salacious details in some company reports -- some
are even famous, including one financial statement discussed in this chapter.
Overall, though, a company’s annual report filed with regulators, called the
10-K, probably isn’t going to be something you pass around in your next book
club meeting.
But, with that said, reading financial statements is still worthwhile. I’ve found
that investors appreciate the importance of reading financial reports when
they see real-life examples of how they could have pinpointed major issues at
companies well before they were known to the public.
This chapter highlights several actual examples of how investors could have
been tipped off to important developments at a company by reading the
financial statements. A couple of the examples in the chapter are fraud. And
certainly, knowing when a company is cooking its books is important, since
that means you cannot rely on the financials.

28 506455-ch20.indd 315

9/24/09 10:43:04 PM

316 Part V: The Part of Tens
But a vast majority of the time, fundamental analysts aren’t looking for executives that are lying. Rather, fundamentals analyst are looking for numbers
that are lying. Sometimes, the numbers might be completely accurate but
don’t paint a true picture of the condition a company is in. This chapter
shows you how to closely analyze a company’s fundamentals by using easyto-follow examples.
