
I

n Chapter 7, I discuss the nature and usefulness of bullish double-stick
patterns, but they aren’t the only double-stick show in town. As with most
bullish patterns, bearish two-day counterparts exist, too, and you should
know how to recognize and trade them, and that’s what I focus on in this
chapter. These patterns work as effective sell signals, and keep in mind that
when a sell signal pops up, even if you don’t have a long position on, you can
use the opportunity to initiate a successful short position.
Just like the bullish patterns in Chapter 7, the bearish double-stick patterns
in this chapter may appear as reversal patterns (signaling that an uptrend is
coming to an end) or as continuation patterns, which tell you that a prevailing downtrend will continue. These bearish examples have two parts: the
first day, which I refer to as the setup day, and the second day, which I call
the signal day.

Understanding Bearish Reversal Patterns
I’m definitely biased toward bearish reversal patterns. I’ve always been a bit
of a countertrend trader, and because many candlestick patterns signal trend
reversals, I’ve always found plenty to use in my trading. But trading in anticipation of trend reversals isn’t always a cakewalk. In fact, it almost put me out
of the business during the strong bullish markets that have become known as
the dot.com bubble. I managed to keep from going broke during that period,
and I learned some expensive lessons about money management and using
stops that I include in my explanations throughout this chapter.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 156

156 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
A bit of a warning about using short reversal patterns: First, remember that in
theory, a short has an unlimited loss. Also, keep in mind that when you’re
shorting stocks, you’re working against a general long-term uptrend in stock
prices. Some successful traders are exclusive shorts, but they’re pretty rare.
Don’t get me wrong. I do believe that shorting should be part of any trading
or investing program, but please use shorting as part of a larger trading strategy, not as your primary way of working the markets.
You can use many extremely useful patterns for shorting, as signals for exiting from a long, or as exercises in patience before buying. Take a look at this
section, which covers those patterns.

The bearish engulfing pattern
The bearish engulfing pattern is one of the best patterns to start with because
of the dramatic nature of the bearish second day that appears on the pattern.
The pattern involves the bears taking control after an extended period of
bullishness, and the trend is definitely one to watch.

Identifying the bearish engulfing pattern
Check out Figure 8-1 for an example of the bearish engulfing pattern.
Leading up to and including the setup day of this pattern, the bulls have been
in the driver’s seat. On the open of the signal day, the sellers or shorts finally
have had enough, and they decide that the price has gone up enough to bring
them into the action. They push the price down dramatically and quickly (in
one day). But these bears aren’t finished with their selling, and the close of
the signal day is near that day’s low. That will most likely continue — to the
point where a downtrend develops — because the sellers aren’t done putting
pressure on the stock or market.

Figure 8-1:
The bearish
engulfing
pattern.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 157

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns
Trading on the bearish engulfing pattern
For a real-world example of a bearish engulfing pattern that can be used for a
profitable trade, have a look at Figure 8-2. Here you see the pattern appear on
a chart of the exchange-traded fund (ETF) that represents the 30 stocks that
trade in the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA).
On this chart, there’s a bearish engulfing pattern right at the end of a nice
uptrend. The bulls control the setup day; an uptrend is in place, and those
bulls keep it going. At the start of the signal day, the bulls continue on their
buying spree and cause the opening to be higher than the setup day’s close.
Then the bears come in and push hard — so hard in fact that although the
price had opened higher than the setup day and even traded above that day’s
high, the bears are still able to push things down below the setup day’s low.
Those bears mean business!
The overwhelming push by the bears that stops an uptrend dead in its tracks
is the key to the bearish engulfing pattern. The DIA (the symbol of the ETF
that trades based on the level of the DJIA) chart in Figure 8-2 is a great example of a bearish engulfing pattern scenario that can lead you to profitable
results. After the bears reverse the uptrend, the signal holds, and the next
day’s trading doesn’t come near the pre-reversal prices. If you short at the
end of the pattern and ride the downtrend for a while before buying back,
you have a profitable trade.

Figure 8-2:
A bearish
engulfing
pattern
signaling a
sell on the
DJIA ETF.

157

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 158

158 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
The bearish engulfing pattern fails
I provide an example of a failing pattern for every successful pattern in this
book, and in Figure 8-3, I highlight what can happen when a bearish engulfing
pattern goes wrong. This unfortunate outcome occurs on a chart of the
Japanese Yen futures. The bearish engulfing pattern shows up but fails pretty
quickly, and the uptrend just keeps going higher.
This scenario looks ripe for a bearish engulfing pattern: A clear uptrend is in
place and actually appears to be slowing a bit (a good sign). The bulls continue the trend on the setup day, and then on the signal day, a small gap
opening appears. At first the bulls push prices much higher, but then the
bears take over, and when they start selling, it’s powerful enough to cover
the setup day’s bullishness, and then some. If you see this pattern on a chart,
you may have good reason to get excited, but things go sour quickly.
The day after the pattern appears, the bulls get back in on the action, and the
price closes higher than the opening of the signal day. The pattern clearly
fails, but if you trade on it, you can avoid heavy losses if you place a stop at
the right level.
When working with bearish engulfing patterns, I place my stops at the open
of the second day. That’s when I can tell that the bulls have again seized control of the price action, and I know that can continue for some time. It’s
always prudent to have a stop in place, and that may be a good level to
choose to put your stop. I advise you to place your stops at the same level.

Figure 8-3:
A bearish
engulfing
pattern that
fails on a
chart of the
Japanese
Yen futures.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 159

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

The bearish harami pattern
The bearish harami pattern can tip you off that an uptrend is about to be
reversed. Loosely translated from the Japanese, harami means pregnant. If
you use your imagination and squint a little, you can see in Figure 8-4 how the
pattern got its name. I guess if you draw a line to circle the area that a harami
covers, you end up with something that resembles the outline of a pregnant
woman. Okay, so it’s not going to fetch much at an art auction, but it can pay
off if you understand how to identify and trade on it.

Spotting a bearish harami
The setup day of a bearish harami pattern is a continuation of a prevailing
uptrend — a strong up day. At first glance, the signal day isn’t much to jump
up and shout about, either. It’s a day where the price action doesn’t stray outside of the high and low of the setup day, and it indicates that the bears take
over on the open, and neither side makes much progress pushing around the
price action. But since this trend occurs after a bullish day and during a
marked bullish trend, it can very well serve as a sign that the bears are starting to take control of the price action. Figure 8-4 shows an extremely straightforward illustration of the bearish harami pattern.

Figure 8-4:
The bearish
harami
pattern.

Another name for the signal day in this pattern is an inside day, where the
high is lower than the previous high, and the low is lower than the previous
low. When they occur on their own, inside days indicate a lack of conviction
by both the bulls and the bears. But combine an inside day with a preceding
bullish day and a bullish trend in place, and the combination can show you
that the bull run is coming to an end.
When a prevailing trend starts to fade away into indecision, the next dominant
trend is likely to go in the opposite direction.

159

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 160

160 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Using the bearish harami pattern for a clever trade
For a good look at what the bearish harami looks like on a real chart, check
out Figure 8-5. The chart is of the ETF that represents a group of the largest
retail stocks, including Wal-Mart, Home Depot, and Walgreens. The trading
symbol for this ETF is RTH. I have an affinity for retailers because I covered
them fundamentally, and I’ve traded them at various firms. I also like this ETF
and individual retailers as trading vehicles because their performances are
closely linked to the state of the economy. With fluctuations in economic
opinion comes volatility in these stocks, and with volatility comes trading
opportunities!
The setup day of this two-day bearish harami pattern is a very strong up day
that occurs in the midst of an uptrend that’s been in place for several weeks.
The signal day is an inside day that’s a little on the bearish side. After that
day the price falls quickly, back to the level where the uptrend began. The fall
occurs much more quickly than the ascent, which is often the case with
downward moves. They tend to happen much more quickly than uptrends. I
guess fear is stronger than greed in the stock market.

A failing bearish harami pattern
Figure 8-6 provides a solid example of how the bearish harami can fail, because
it happens twice in a row on this chart. This double dose of pattern failure
should open your eyes to what can go wrong when the bearish harami doesn’t
play out favorably.
Figure 8-6 is a chart of the futures contract that trades based on the price of
crude oil. As you can see, the bearish harami appears twice in a row. The
setup day of each pattern is a nice up day (in the middle of an uptrend), and
both of the signal days are inside days with dark candles that indicate bearish trading. These two patterns have something else in common, as well.
They both fail immediately! Both patterns crash and burn the day after they
appear on the chart. If you trade these patterns and take a small loss, I bet
the next time a bearish harami rears its head, you think twice before putting
on a trade.
The setup day of the second bearish harami on this chart is actually the same
day that the first pattern fails. I define a bearish harami failure as a violation of
the high of the signal day. This violation occurs on both patterns in Figure 8-6,
and both fail the day after the pattern appears. (My definition for failure on a
bearish harami pattern isn’t the only one; a failure can also be a violation of
the close of the setup day, or even the high of the setup day.) After trading
achieves any of these levels, the prevailing uptrend becomes apparent. You
need to figure out your level of risk tolerance and decide for yourself what
level to use as a failure point for the bearish harami, but using my definition
(the violation of the signal day’s high) is a good starting point. This level is a
good one to place a stop order to avoid a loss getting out of control.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 161

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 8-5:
A
successful
bearish
harami
working on
a chart of
the RTH ETF.

Figure 8-6:
A bearish
harami
pattern
failing twice
on a crude
oil futures
chart.

The bearish harami cross pattern
The next bearish two-day pattern is closely related to the pattern I discuss in
the previous section (“The bearish harami pattern”), and it can be used in a
similar manner. This pattern — the bearish harami cross — also marks the
first return of the doji in this chapter. A doji is a candlestick pattern that
looks like a cross and usually indicates some sort of indecision in the market.
(Dojis are covered more in Chapter 6.) When this indecision occurs in a
trend, it may signal that the trend is preparing to reverse.

161

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 162

162 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Recognizing the bearish harami cross
The bearish harami cross occurs in an uptrend and consists of an up setup
day followed by a doji for the signal day. The signal day doji must be both a
cross and an inside day. Take a look at Figure 8-7 for an illustration of the
bearish harami cross.

Figure 8-7:
The bearish
harami
cross.

Because the doji indicates that indecision ruled the day, I actually prefer the
bearish harami cross to the plain old harami reversal pattern. Dojis are rare,
and the occurrence of a bearish harami cross pattern is more of an event
than the appearance of the bearish harami.

Trading on the bearish harami cross
The chart in Figure 8-8 gives you an idea of how the bearish harami cross can
spell market success for you. This figure shows the pattern appearing on a
chart of one of my favorite commodity contracts: frozen concentrated orange
juice, or OJ.
In the movie Trading Places (one of my favorites), commodities are being
explained to ersatz trader Eddie Murphy. There’s a table that displays several
traded commodities (including orange juice), and when the conniving old
Dukes brothers get to the OJ, one of them says, “orange juice, like you may
have had for breakfast this morning” in a tone he could’ve used to explain the
concept to a first grader. The look Eddie Murphy gives the camera is priceless.
Anyway, Figure 8-8 shows the bearish harami cross appearing in a choppy
uptrend. The setup day is clearly an up day, and the contract reaches new
highs. The cross or doji day follows, and the bulls are clearly running out of
steam. After that, you see a very bearish day with no violation of the high for
the setup day, which is what I like to use as the failure level for this pattern,
and then a downtrend that lasts a few weeks. If you put on a short position
and ride the downtrend for a while, you end up with an attractive profit.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 163

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns
For a failing bearish harami cross, I use Transocean Offshore (RIG). This company builds drilling rigs for use in deep water. The stock is a great trading
vehicle due to the company’s exposure to the energy markets.

Signaling a losing trade
In Figure 8-9 you can see that during an uptrend, a little cross appears after a
bullish day. This cross or doji is actually a slight up day, but a doji just the
same in my book. Much like the price of energy, the stock prices of energyrelated stocks have been on a tear, and RIG is no exception. This bearish
harami fails pretty quickly, and the uptrend stays intact.

Figure 8-8:
A bearish
harami
cross that
produces a
favorable
result on a
chart of OJ.

Figure 8-9:
A bearish
harami
cross
pattern fails
on a chart
of RIG.

163

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 164

164 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
You may notice that although this signal failed, there were a few days after
the failure where the chart still appears to reveal a change in trend. This
confusing start-stop-start situation is part of the game.
Signals sometimes fail and trades get stopped out temporarily, only to eventually reveal price action that could’ve produced profitable results. These
occurrences are frustrating, but I’ve never been upset with myself for following trading rules or signals, even when it’s clear a few hours or days later that
I could’ve made money if I had overridden a stop or ignored a failure signal.
When I consistently follow the rules, I can’t second guess myself, but if I don’t
follow the rules and a trade fails, I can only blame myself. I suggest that you
adopt the same philosophy, especially if you’re just starting to trade.
I can’t emphasize enough that sticking with a trading plan and following your
rules may be the most key components to becoming a successful trader.

The bearish inverted hammer pattern
Like many of the bearish reversal patterns described in this chapter, the bearish inverted hammer is set up with a long white candle that occurs during an
uptrend. Then there’s a gap opening and even more buying to start the signal
day. However, at some point the bears are called to action and start to push
prices lower, and if you keep your eyes peeled for that move and trade accordingly, you should be able to turn a profit.

Identifying the bearish inverted hammer
The bearish inverted hammer is depicted in Figure 8-10. The inverted hammer
is actually the second day of the pattern. The setup day is a long white candle,
which indicates a very bullish day. The start of the signal day (also called the
hammer day) sees a gap opening and continued bullishness; that process
carries on for part of the day, and higher prices are achieved. At some point
during the signal day, the bears have had enough and selling begins. The
bearish action pushes prices down below the opening price, and the close
is equal to or very near the day’s low.

Using the bearish inverted hammer in your trades
To provide you with a winning scenario for the bearish inverted hammer
(Figure 8-11), I offer a pattern that actually came up while I was searching
for an example for this section. This chart is for the Financial Select Sector
Fund, symbol XLF, which is an ETF that represents a handful of large financial
stocks such as Citigroup, American International Group, and Bank of America.
You can see the bearish inverted hammer near the top of the chart. When I
saw the pattern, I figured I should put my money where my mouth is. I knew
that even if the trade didn’t work out, I’d still have an example of a failing pattern for later in this section. Luckily, though, that wasn’t the case.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 165

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 8-10:
The bearish
inverted
hammer.

Figure 8-11:
A bearish
inverted
hammer
that works
on a chart of
the XLF ETF.

I shorted the XLF on the signal day of the pattern, held it for four days, and
exited on the first up day. I also placed a buy stop order at the open of the
signal (or hammer) day. That’s a very tight stop, but this trade was outside of
my normal trading activity, and I felt it was prudent to place a close stop. More
aggressive traders may have chosen the high of the signal day for their stop.
The example in Figure 8-11 is doubly useful because it also shows you how to
exit a trade. I don’t discuss exiting trades much in this book — too many
methods and goals exist once a trade has been initiated to cover here — but

165

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 166

166 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
this situation is definitely worth pointing out. I chose my exit in this trade
because the reciprocal version of the bearish inverted pattern appeared. I
saw the bullish pattern, and I was happy to exit and take a profit of just over
a dollar on one hundred shares — I’ll let you do the math — and take my wife
to dinner on the proceeds. I ended up with material for this book and a nice
dinner for Merribeth. Now that’s a perfect trade.

Recognizing a losing trade
On a somewhat gloomier note, have a look at Figure 8-12 for an example of a
couple of failing bearish inverted hammers. Figure 8-12 is a chart of the ETF
that represents the 30 stocks that comprise the Dow Jones Industrial Average
and trade with the symbol DIA, sometimes called the Diamonds. Luckily for
this author and trader, there wasn’t a real-life trade involved with this example.
Both patterns appear in an uptrend, and both feature an up setup day followed
by a gap opening and strong activity during the signal day that reverses with a
lower close. Although usually an indication of a reversal, both times these signals were proven to be false fairly quickly.
In the case of the first pattern, all possible resistance levels were violated and
the uptrend continued. For the second pattern, I highlight two failures:
 One is a violation of the open of the hammer day.
 The other is a violation of that day’s high.

Figure 8-12:
Two bearish
inverted
hammer
failures on a
chart of the
DIA ETF.

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 167

Chapter 8: Utilizing Bearish Double-Stick Patterns
The second pattern takes a little longer to fail, but it does eventually. The
second pattern is interesting because it does occur toward the end of the
uptrend. But the signal is violated, and a trader following the rules would
have exited the short. This additional illustration shows how you sometimes
have to just follow the rules and move on, even when it’s clear later that you
could’ve turned a profit if you’d stuck with the position. Don’t look back and
say “what if?” Be confident in the fact that you followed set rules and that over
the long haul, following the rules results in more consistent trading profits.

The bearish doji star
The bearish doji star is another bearish reversal pattern that contains — you
guessed it — a doji. This pattern is also an extension of the bearish inverted
hammer, which I discuss in the previous section.

Spotting the bearish doji star
The bearish doji star always occurs in an uptrend, and the setup day is an up
day. The signal day is a doji that’s sort of hanging out there by itself, because
the opening of the signal day is gap down from the previous day’s price action.
Figure 8-13 is an example of how the two days that make up a bearish doji
star appear together on a chart.

Figure 8-13:
The bearish
doji star
pattern.

167

13_178089 ch08.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 168

168 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Understanding how to trade using the bearish doji star
Figure 8-14 is a chart that shows the bearish doji star in action. In this example, this doji star pattern is working well to signal an impending drop in the
stock for microchip maker Intel (symbol INTC). An uptrend is in place, and
the setup day of the pattern is a bullish day in accordance with the trend.
The signal day is a doji, with the combined open and close outside of the
range covered by the setup day’s trading activity. After all the bullishness
of the previous few days, the bears are finally making a stand.
The day after the pattern is a very bearish day, so if a trader didn’t put on the
trade during the doji day, he doesn’t have a chance. Then the day after the
long black candle appears, the stock gaps down tremendously. This change is
a quick victory for any sellers that are attracted to short this bearish doji star.
