
Cowin was nine years older, with deep-set eyes and a penetrating gaze. When the two of them were together,
it seemed, on the surface, like a grown man hobnobbing with a college boy, but they had much in common.
Cowin had grown up poor during the Depression after his father lost the family’s money, and as a teenager he
had supported his family. He put the money he got for a thirteenth-birthday gift into stocks.55 He gravitated
toward a career in investing after his Navy service, working independently even at an investment house,
keeping his ideas to himself. Unlike Buffett, however, he had a strong appreciation for cutting-edge art, was
creative around the house—spraying pinecones silver for the Christmas dinner table—and collected
photography and antiques. What attracted Buffett to him was that Cowin traded well and worked his own
ideas.56 Cowin had also endeared himself to Warren early on, when he was at Graham-Newman, by lending
him $50,000 for a week so that Warren could buy some mutual-fund shares to achieve a thousand-dollar tax
saving.57 Over time, they collaborated, with Dan the balding senior partner: more experienced and with more
money to invest, but sharing information and ideas.
Buffett and Cowin used to call each other weekly when the Pink Sheets that listed small stocks came out, and
compare notes. “Did you get that one?” “Yes! I bought that, that’s mine!”—both feeling like winners when
they had picked the same ones. “It was like picking a horse,” says Dan’s wife, Joyce.58 They thought about
taking over the National Casket Company, code-naming it the Container Company. “Dan was a digger,”
Buffett says, “which I guess makes sense.”
Once, Buffett says, they had even tried to buy a Maryland “town” that the Federal Housing Authority was
auctioning off for peanuts: it consisted of the post office, the town hall, and a large number of rental
properties that were charging below-market rents. The town had been built during the Depression. Buffett
recalls that the ad for the town made them salivate with Snidely Whiplash dreams of quickly raising the rents
to a market rate. But even for “peanuts,” the town was expensive and they couldn’t get together enough
cash.59
Warren could never get enough cash. He was always trying to raise money. The Graham connection was
about to pay off again. Bernie Sarnat—a pioneer in plastic and reconstructive surgery—went to have a chat
one day with Ben Graham, his wife’s first cousin. Ben had moved across the street from the Sarnats when he
and Estey retired to California. Sarnat says he asked Graham what he should do with his money now, “what
little money he had in his partnership. Well,” recalls Sarnat, “he said, ‘Oh, buy AT&T,’ and he handed me
shares in three closed-end funds and some stock. And then he very casually mentioned, ‘One of my former
students is doing some investing. Warren Buffett.’ And that was it. So casually that I didn’t even pick it up.”
Hardly anybody knew Warren Buffett. He might as well have been a patch of moss hidden under a rock in
Omaha. Sarnat’s wife, Rhoda, a social worker, took a walk every day with her cousin-in-law Estey. “One day
not long after,” she recalls, “Estey said to me, ‘Listen, Rhoda, people are always approaching us to invest in
their partnerships, because if they can tell people that Ben Graham invests in them, they have it made. We
say no to everybody. But that Warren Buffett—he has potential. We’re investing with him, and you’d better
do it too.’
“My only question was,” says Rhoda, “‘Estey, I know you think he’s bright, but I’m more interested in
whether he’s honest.’ Estey said, ‘Absolutely. Totally. I trust him a hundred percent.’” The Sarnats and Estey
Graham put $10,000 and $15,000, respectively, into Mo-Buff. By then, the Monens’ investment had grown
to $100,000.
Some of the students in Warren’s investing classes had also joined the partnerships, as had Wally Keenan, his
former Dale Carnegie instructor. In fact, by 1959, he was getting somewhat of a name around town, in part
through his teaching. No longer hidden, his qualities—good and bad—had begun to be recognized in Omaha.
The side of him that had taken the counterposition in the teenage radio show American School of the Air
came across in Omaha as brash, a know-it-all. “I used to love to take the opposite side of any argument,” he
says, “no matter what. I could turn in a second.” People thought it was nervy of him to ask for money to
invest without telling them what he would be buying. “There were people in Omaha who thought what I was
doing was some sort of Ponzi scheme,” he recalls. It had repercussions. When Warren had reapplied for full
membership in the Omaha Country Club, he was blackballed. To be blackballed from the country club was a

serious matter; someone disliked him enough to show it in a tangible and embarrassing way. It was one thing
to identify with outsiders, but he also wanted to belong. Besides, Warren liked to play golf, and the club had
a good course. Through connections, he worked at it until he got off the blacklist.
But his talents shone through to many more people now, and brought him partners of increasing prominence.
In February 1959, Casper Offutt and his son, Cap Jr., members of one of Omaha’s most prominent families,
approached him about a partnership of their own. When Warren explained that they would not know what he
was buying, Cap Sr. said, “Well, I’m not going to put any money in if I don’t know what it is, if you’ve got
complete control and I don’t have any voice in it.”60 But Cap Jr., together with his brother John and William
Glenn, a businessman for whom Chuck Peterson managed real estate properties, invested anyway. They put
$50,000 into Glenoff, the seventh partnership.
And all the while that Warren was investing during these early years of the partnerships, he never deviated
from the principles of Ben Graham. Everything he bought was extraordinarily cheap, cigar butts all, soggy
stogies containing one free puff. But that was before he met Charlie Munger.

23
The Omaha Club
Omaha • 1959

Like a steel bank vault door, the arched portals of the Omaha Club swung closed behind the bankers and
insurance men and railroad executives of the city as George, the black doorman, welcomed them inside.
Come from playing squash in the basement or from their offices downtown, the men loitered by the tiled
fireplace in the front hall, chatting until the women entered through a separate side door in the building’s
Italian Renaissance facade to join them. The assembled parties ascended the curving mahogany staircase to
the second floor, passing on the way the life-size painting of a Scotsman catching a trout in a stream. The
Omaha Club was where the town came to dance, to raise money, to get married, and to celebrate
anniversaries. But above all, it was where the town came to do business, for at its tables you were left to talk
in peace.
One summer Friday in 1959, Buffett strode through the club’s entrance to have lunch with two of his
partners, Neal Davis and his brother-in-law Lee Seeman, who had arranged for him to meet Davis’s best
friend since childhood. It was Neal’s father, Dr. Eddie Davis, who had said to Warren, “You remind me of
Charlie Munger” when the Davises had joined the partnership. Now Munger was in town to settle his father’s
estate.1
Munger knew only a few facts about the crew-cut Buffett kid, six years his junior. But, consistent with his
expectations of life in general, his expectations of this meeting were not high.2 He had developed the habit of
expecting little so as never to be disappointed. And rarely did Charles T. Munger meet anyone to whom he
enjoyed listening as much as himself.
The Mungers had started in poverty, but by the latter part of the nineteenth century, T. C. Munger, Charlie’s
grandfather, a federal judge, had brought the family to prominence, welcome in every drawing room in
Omaha—rather than only at the back door, delivering groceries, like the Buffetts. Judge Munger, an iron
disciplinarian, had forced the whole family to read Robinson Crusoe to absorb the book’s portrayal of the
conquest of nature through discipline. He was known for giving longer jury instructions than any judge in the
middle west.3 He liked to lecture his relatives on the virtue of saving and the vices of gambling and saloons.
Charlie’s straitlaced aunt Ufie, who listened, had “kept hard at two separate careers until past eighty,

dominated her church, saved her money, and, duty-ridden, attended as a matter of course her beloved
husband’s autopsy.”4
Judge Munger’s son Al followed his father into the law, becoming a respectable but not rich attorney who
counted among his clients the Omaha World-Herald and other important local institutions. Lighthearted,
unlike his father, he was often seen enjoying a pipe, hunting, or catching a fish. His son later said of him that
Al Munger “achieved exactly what he wished to achieve, no more or less…with less fuss than either his
father or his son, each of whom spent considerable time foreseeing troubles that never happened.”5
Al’s wife, the beautiful, witty Florence “Toody” Russell, came from another clan raised on duty and moral
rectitude, an enterprising family of New England intellectuals known for what Charlie referred to as “plenty
of plain living and high thinking.” When she announced she was marrying Al Munger, her elderly
grandmother observed his thick spectacles and five-foot, five-and-a-half-inch frame and was flabbergasted.
“Whoever would have thought she had the sense?” she supposedly exclaimed.
Al and Toody Munger had three children: Charles, Carol, and Mary. A photograph of Charlie as an infant
shows him already wearing the petulant expression so typical of him later in life. At Dundee Elementary
School, his most prominent features were a pair of huge elfin ears and, when he chose to reveal it, a broad
smile. He was recognized as intelligent, “lively,” and “too independent-minded to bow down to meet certain
teachers’ expectations,” according to his sister Carol Estabrook.6 “Smart, and a smarty,” is how the
Mungers’ neighbor Dorothy Davis recalls Charlie from his earliest childhood.7 Mrs. Davis tried to control
Charlie’s influence on her son, Neal, but nothing tamed Charlie’s mouth, not even the sight of her with a
switch in her hand, coming after the boys to lash their bare calves.
Warren had borne the indignities of childhood with only brief rebellion before learning to hide his misery and
adopt artful strategies to cope. Too proud to submit, Charlie suffered through the woes of youth by
employing his talent for wounding sarcasm. Matched as a dance partner every single Friday at Addie Fogg’s
dance class with Mary McArthur, the only girl shorter than he, Charlie made no secret of his irritation at the
routine that emphasized his status as the second-shortest child in the class.8 At Central High School, he
gained the nickname “Brains” and a reputation for hyperactiveness—and for being aloof.9
From a family that treasured learning, he grew up intellectually ambitious and enrolled in the University of
Michigan at seventeen, majoring in mathematics. He enlisted in the Army a year after Pearl Harbor, halfway
through his sophomore year. While in the service he attended the University of New Mexico and California
Institute of Technology for credits in meteorology, though he never actually graduated. After more
coursework he worked in Nome, Alaska, as an Army meteorologist. Later, Munger would make a point of
saying that he never saw active duty and would emphasize his luck in having been stationed out of harm’s
way. The main risk that he took was financial: He augmented his army pay by playing poker. He found he
was good at it. It turned out to be his version of the racetrack. He said he learned to fold fast when odds were
bad and bet heavily when they were good, lessons he would use to advantage later in life.
With the help of well-oiled family connections, he brazened his way into Harvard Law School after the war
without ever having finished his undergraduate degree.10 By then he was married to Nancy Huggins, an
impulsive match entered into when he was twenty-one and she nineteen. He had sprouted into a mediumheight, well-dressed young man whose close-cut dark hair and alert eyes gave him a polished look. But his
most prominent feature—apart from his ears, now only slightly winged from his skull—was a hallmark
skeptical expression. He wore it often while racing through Harvard—without learning anything, he says.11
Then, he later told his friends, he looked at a map and asked himself, “What city is growing and full of
opportunity, so that I could make a lot of money, but not so big and well developed that it would be hard to
rise into the ranks of the city’s prominent men?” He chose Los Angeles.12 Pasadena—the gracious old
Spanish-flavored Los Angeles suburb where he had attended Caltech—had impressed him. It was there that
he had met his wife, the daughter of a locally prominent family. Nancy was “willful, indulged,” says her
daughter Molly, not exactly ideal traits given her new husband’s temperament.13 Within a few years their
marriage was in trouble. Nonetheless, after Harvard they hightailed it back to her hometown, with their son,

Teddy, and settled in Pasadena, where Charlie became a successful lawyer.
By 1953, after three children and eight years of incompatibility, fighting, and misery, Munger found himself
divorcing at a time when divorce was a disgrace. Despite their problems, he and Nancy worked out a civilized
arrangement regarding their son and two daughters. Munger moved into a room at the University Club,
bought a dented yellow Pontiac with a bad paint job “to discourage gold diggers,” and became a devoted
Saturday father.14 Then, within a year of the separation, Teddy, now eight years old, was diagnosed with
leukemia. Munger and his ex-wife scoured the medical community but quickly discovered the disease was
incurable. They sat in the leukemia ward with the other parents and grandparents in different stages of
watching their children waste away.15
Teddy was in and out of the hospital often. Charlie would visit, hold him in his arms, then walk the streets of
Pasadena, crying for his son. He found the combination of his failed marriage and his son’s terminal illness
almost unbearable. The loneliness of living as a divorced single father in the 1950s also chafed at him. He felt
a failure without an intact family, and wanted to live surrounded by children.
When things went wrong, Munger would set out toward new goals rather than let himself dwell on the
negative.16 That could come across as pragmatic, or even callous, but he viewed it as keeping the horizon in
sight. “You should never, when facing some unbelievable tragedy, let one tragedy increase into two or three
through your failure of will,” he would later say.17
So even as he cared for his dying son, Munger decided to marry again. His method of analyzing the odds of a
successful match made him pessimistic, however.
“Charlie was despairing over whether he would ever meet anyone else. ‘How can I find somebody? Out of
twenty million people in California, half are women. Of these ten million, only two million are of an
appropriate age. From that group, a million and a half would be married, leaving five hundred thousand.
Three hundred thousand of them are too dumb, fifty thousand are too smart, and of the remaining hundred
fifty thousand, the number I would want to marry would fit on a basketball court. I’ve got to find one of
those. And then I’ve got to be on her basketball court.’”
Munger’s mental habit of setting low expectations was well established. He equated this with the route to
happiness, since he felt that high expectations led to fault-finding. Low expectations made it harder to be
disappointed. Paradoxically, however, they could also confound success.
Out of desperation, Munger started reviewing divorce and death notices to find newly single women. That got
his friends’ attention. Thinking this pathetic, they began to intervene. One of his law partners came up with
another Nancy, a divorcée with two young boys. Nancy Barry Borthwick, a petite brunette, played tennis
avidly, skied, and golfed. She was also a Phi Beta Kappa economics graduate of Stanford.
On their first date he warned her, “I’m didactic.” The thought of a man infected by the urge to preach failed
to put Nancy off, which augured well for their relationship. They started taking their children on outings. At
first Teddy went along with them, but he soon became too ill. Later, thirty-one-year-old Charlie spent much
of his son’s final weeks sitting by Teddy’s bedside. By the time Teddy died in 1955 at age nine, Charlie had
lost between ten and fifteen pounds. “I can’t imagine any experience in life worse than losing a child inch by
inch,” he said later.18
Charlie married Nancy Borthwick in January 1956. She quickly became his ballast. He desperately needed
someone to arrange his life. Nancy had moxie, pricking Charlie’s balloon without hesitation when it inflated
with too much hot air. She was an excellent manager, observant, calm, reasonable, and practical. Nancy
curbed his caprices when Charlie took off on occasional bolts of impulsiveness. In time, they added three
sons and a daughter to his two girls and her two boys. She set about raising eight children while keeping
house and taking care of Charlie.19 He became known to his children as a “book with legs,” constantly
studying science and the achievements of great men. Meanwhile, he continued seeking his fortune at the law
firm of Musick, Peeler & Garrett, but realized that the law would not make him rich. He began to develop

some profitable sidelines. “Charlie, as a very young lawyer, was probably getting $20 an hour. He thought
to himself, ‘Who’s my most valuable client?’ And he decided it was himself. So he decided to sell himself an
hour each day. He did it early in the morning, working on these construction projects and real estate deals.
Everybody should do this, be the client, and then work for other people, too, and sell yourself an hour a
day.”
“I had a considerable passion to get rich,” Munger said. “Not because I wanted Ferraris—I wanted the
independence. I desperately wanted it. I thought it was undignified to have to send invoices to other people. I
don’t know where I got that notion from, but I had it.”20 He saw himself as the gentleman squire. Money
wasn’t a competition to him. He wanted to join the right clubs but he didn’t care whether the other members
were richer than him. Beneath the surface arrogance, his deep respect for authentic achievement gave him a
genuine humility that would be crucial in forming a relationship with the man he was about to meet.
That man who sat across from him in a private room of the Omaha Club and started to talk was dressed like a
youngish salesman come to sell insurance to the gentleman squire. The worldly Munger by now was well
ensconced in Los Angeles business and society, and looked the part. As soon as the Davises and Seemans
had made the introductions, however, the two fell into a tête-à-tête. Charlie allowed that he had actually
“slaved” a short stint at the Buffett grocery store, where “you were just goddamn busy from the first hour of
morning until night.”21 Ernest had let the sons of favored customers like Toody Munger loaf, however, at
least compared to the rest of the beleaguered clerks.22 After the pleasantries, the conversation picked up
speed and the rest of the party listened, rapt, as Warren began to talk about investing and Ben Graham.
Charlie grasped the concepts right away. “He had spent plenty of time thinking about investing and business
by then,” Buffett says.
He told Charlie the story of National American insurance. Munger had gone to Central High with Howard
and Hayden Ahmanson. He was amazed that someone like Buffett, who was not from California, could know
so much about the Ahmansons and their savings and loan. Before long, the two men were talking
simultaneously, yet they seemed to understand each other perfectly.23 After a while, Charlie asked, “Warren,
what do you do specifically?”
Well, I’ve got these partnerships, Buffett explained, and I do this, and this, and that. In 1957, he said, his
partnerships had earned over ten percent in a year when the market had declined over eight percent. The
next year the partnerships’ investments had risen more than forty percent in value.24 Buffett’s fees so far
from managing the partnerships, reinvested, came to $83,085. These fees had mushroomed his initial
contribution of only $700—$100 contributed to each of the seven partnerships25—into a stake worth 9.5
percent of the combined value of all the partnerships. Moreover, his performance was well on its way to
beating the Dow again in 1959, which would make him richer still and raise his stake again. Meanwhile, his
investors were thrilled; new partners kept joining. Charlie listened. Eventually he asked, “Do you think that I
could do something like that out in California?” Warren paused for a moment and looked at him. This was an
unconventional question coming from a successful Los Angeles lawyer. “Yeah,” he said, “I’m quite sure you
could do it.”26 As the luncheon wound its way to an end, the Seemans and the Davises decided it was time to
go. When they got on the elevator, their last sight was of Buffett and Munger, still sitting at the table,
engrossed.27
A few nights later, the two men took their wives to Johnny’s Café, a red-velvet steak joint, where Munger
became so self-intoxicated at one of his own jokes that he slipped out of the booth and began rolling on the
floor with laughter. When the Mungers returned to Los Angeles, the conversation continued in installments,
the two men talking on the phone for an hour or two with increasing frequency. Buffett, once obsessed with
Ping-Pong, had found something far more interesting.
“Why are you paying so much attention to him?” Nancy asked her husband.
“You don’t understand,” said Charlie. “That is no ordinary human being.”28
