
Figure 7.23

The 1.618 XA projection defined the top range of the PRZ and the Alternate 1.618 AB=CD
with the 3.14 BC projection complemented the harmonic resistance in the 17.20 area.
This is another example of a typical extreme price move into the PRZ for a Crab pattern.
Although the stock rallied sharply, as it gapped up on the open, into the harmonic resistance,
the stock stalled immediately and rolled over, completing an ideal reversal.

148

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The Crab Pattern Summary
Although the structural variations of the Crab may seem to define the same pattern, the
alignment of Fibonacci ratios clearly differentiates each type as a unique situation. The Crab
typically defines extreme overbought and oversold situations, as the 1.618 XA leg is the most
important Fibonacci measurement of the pattern and it represents the most critical number in
the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).
Unlike the other patterns within the Harmonic Trading approach, the AB=CD is not as critical
at the completion point. Although it is important to differentiate the AB=CD possibilities for each
variation, the Alternate 1.618 AB=CD pattern is the preferred structure in most Crab patterns.
However, the 1.27 AB=CD pattern is typically found in the original version, while it is not
unusual for the Deep Crab to possess an equivalent AB=CD.
The extreme BC projection—usually a 2.618, 3.14, or 3.618 extension—underscores the
nature of this structure. Although the Deep Crab permits a wider range of BC possibilities, this
projection should converge closely with the 1.618 XA.
1. Precise 0.618 B point retracement or less of the XA leg. (.382 and 0.50 are
common B points in the structure.)
2. Extreme 2.618, 3.14 or 3.618BC projection. (Sometimes 2.24 BC projections form
in the structure.)
3. Minimum AB=CD completion. Alternate 1.27 AB=CD or 1.618 AB=CD patterns are
most common.
4. C point retracement can vary between a 0.382 to an 0.886.
5. This is an extreme pattern!
The volatile nature of this pattern must be emphasized. Reversals from these PRZs can be
sharp and possess extreme price action. The Crab is a distinctive pattern and possesses
unique qualities that identify remarkable harmonic opportunities. The differentiation of this
pattern is critical to define each variation.
From a harmonic perspective, valid Crab structures identify extreme oversold or overbought
conditions. These patterns usually offer some type of reaction on the initial test of the
Potential Reversal Zone. The price action frequently responds to extreme Fibonacci projection
combinations within the Crab pattern of the 1.618 XA leg and the 2.618 or greater BC leg.
The Crab is an incredibly accurate and consistently effective pattern within the Harmonic
Trading arsenal to identify critical turning points in the markets.

Chapter 8

The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

Bryce Gilmore discovered the structure of the Butterfly pattern in his Wave Trader software
program. Although his interpretation of the structure encompasses a multitude of Fibonacci
combinations, I believe the specification of each point within the structure is essential to be
able to successfully trade the pattern. As the example of the Crab pattern demonstrated, the
alignment of pattern points is critical. The Butterfly pattern is no different, as specific alignments
within this 5-point extension structure are the key to finding the best opportunities.
In my experience, I believe an ideal Butterfly pattern requires a specific alignment of
Fibonacci measurements at each point within the structure. Most important, a mandatory 0.786
retracement of the XA leg as the B point is the defining element of an ideal Butterfly pattern,
and it acts as the primary measuring point to define a specific Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).
In many ways, the ideal Butterfly pattern is like the Gartley pattern because it requires a specific
B point retracement and possesses a tighter array of Fibonacci ratios within the structure.
Specifically, the Butterfly incorporates a 1.27 XA projection with a “tame” BC projection, which is
usually only a 1.618. In addition, the Butterfly usually possesses an equivalent AB=CD pattern or
an Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern. Although the equivalent AB=CD is a minimum requirement, valid
Butterfly structures rarely exceed the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD completion point.

The Crab Pattern Versus the Butterfly Pattern
The difference between a Crab and a Butterfly is vast. Although these price structures appear
similar since they represent two types of extension patterns, their measurements clearly
differentiate their characteristics. The Crab utilizes a 1.618 XA projection, while the ideal
Butterfly pattern utilizes a 1.27 XA projection exclusively. Essentially, the Crab is a reactionary
pattern that attempts to define extreme oversold and overbought situations. An ideal Butterfly
pattern is differentiated by a 0.786 retracement at the B point. Utilizing this alignment for an
ideal Butterfly pattern can eliminate many invalid imposters—those price structures “posing” as
potential valid patterns that are common failures.
The AB=CD pattern is another critical element for an ideal Butterfly pattern to be a valid
signal. It is important to note that the AB=CD pattern frequently will possess an alternate
149

150

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

structure that is typically 1.27 of the AB leg. Although this is an important requirement for a
valid trade signal, the most critical number in the ideal Butterfly pattern is the 1.27 XA leg. The
XA calculation is usually complemented by a 1.618, 2.00, or 2.24 BC projection. Although the
2.618 is sometimes utilized to complement a PRZ, the smaller BC projections work the best
with the 1.27 XA primary price leg. In essence, the BC projection should complete in a
“compact” area with the 1.27 XA leg. These numbers create a specific PRZ that can yield
powerful reversals, especially when the pattern is in all-time (new highs/new lows) price levels.
The ideal Butterfly works well in new high/low territory because valid patterns frequently
represent critical 5-point reversal structures that frequently trigger the end of the predominant
trend. The following illustrations and examples demonstrate these concepts.
Ideal Butterfly pattern elements:
• Precise 78.6% B point retracement of XA leg.
• BC projection must be at least a 1.618.
• Equivalent AB=CD pattern is minimum requirement, but the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD
is the most common.
• 1.27 XA projection most critical number in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).
• No 1.618 XA projection.
• C point within range of 0.382–0.886 retracement.

The Bullish Butterfly Pattern
Beginning with a precise 0.786 B point retracement, the Bullish Butterfly (see Figure 8.1)
encompasses a minimum AB=CD pattern with the 1.27 XA and the 1.618 BC projections as
mandatory requirements to define the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).

X

A

0.382;
C
0.886

0.786

1.6

B

18;

2.2

4

1.27
Figure 8.1

D

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

151

Standard and Poor’s 500 Tracking Stock
(SPY): Daily
In Figure 8.2, the SPY formed this ideal Butterfly pattern that exemplified the proper alignment
of Fibonacci ratios required to validate the structure. The 0.786 B point retracement of the
XA leg is the defining element in this example that establishes the structure. The 1.27 XA
projection defined the lower range of the PRZ, while the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD and the 1.618
BC projection contributed to the harmonic support just under the $70 level.

Figure 8.2

152

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

This was a substantial structural signal, as it was the defining pattern that marked the 2009
bear market low. The following chart of the price action in the PRZ shows an ideal reversal after
all the numbers were tested (see Figure 8.3). After a steady decline, the SPY stabilized just
below the projected harmonic support.

Figure 8.3

This example possessed a dramatic reversal. On the day the price action tested all of the
numbers in the PRZ, the downtrend started to stabilize. The following two days challenged the
PRZ. After the reversal was complete, the price action rallied convincingly, as it closed above
harmonic support. Although the price action required a few more days to stabilize, the
completion of the pattern clearly marked a critical low for the SPY.

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

153

American Express
(AXP): 60-Minute
This Bullish Butterfly on the 60-minute chart of American Express is an excellent example of a
precise 0.786 B point retracement that defined the structure (see Figure 8.4). The 1.618 BC
projection and the Alternate 1.618 AB=CD complemented the harmonic support at the $32
level.

Figure 8.4

The pattern formed on this 60-minute chart over the course of several sessions and signaled
a resumption of the predominant uptrend. After a week of consolidation, the distinct pattern
defined critical support in a narrow ten-cent range in the $32 area. The price action rallied
immediately following the completion of the pattern.

154

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Such a close congregation of numbers in the PRZ is another sign of a significant
harmonic setup. Furthermore, the pattern’s structure possessed ideal symmetry and reversed
convincingly after the initial PRZ test (see Figure 8.5). All of these factors were solid indicators
that signaled a potential reversal. Although such setups do not guarantee a successful reversal,
these are the traits that define the best opportunities.

Figure 8.5

It is important to note that the Butterfly is similar to the Gartley because the B point is
so critical in validating the structure as a harmonic pattern. For a Butterfly, the B point must
possess a 78.6% retracement. As this enlarged chart of AXP illustrates, the precise B point
established the proper alignment of ratios, resulting in a defined completion area for the
pattern. Although the ideal conditions do not occur in every situation, these guidelines serve to
define the clearest opportunities and differentiate various structures as precisely as possible.

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

155

Petrobras
(PBR): Daily 60-Minute
This daily chart of Petrobras exemplifies the ideal structure that valid Bullish Butterfly patterns
should possess (see Figure 8.6). The setup possessed an ideal alignment of Fibonacci ratios to
validate the structure, including an exact 0.786 B point retracement of the XA leg.

Figure 8.6

156

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The 1.27 XA leg defined the lower range of the PRZ at 82.75, while the 1.618 BC projection
and the 1.27 AB=CD pattern complemented this area at 84.06 and 83.45, respectively. The
price action was able to stabilize on the day the stock tested all of the numbers in the PRZ. In
fact, the reversal was ideal, as the stock dropped sharply into the PRZ, hit the entire range of
numbers, and closed above the harmonic support. Although this was a dramatic reversal, the
Bullish Butterfly clearly defined the area for a critical turning point in the trend of the stock.
Petrobras stabilized above the PRZ and accelerated to the upside several days later to confirm
the pattern completion (see Figure 8.7).

Figure 8.7

Although the price action declined sharply as it entered the PRZ, the pattern completion
point put a floor under the stock. The fact that the stock was able to close above the top range
of the harmonic support was another indication of a valid reversal in the works.

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

157

Standard and Poor’s 500 Mini-Contract
(September 2009)
(ES_U9): 60-Minute
The Bullish Butterfly on the 60-minute chart of the Standard and Poor’s 500 September
2009 Mini-Contract (see Figure 8.8) is another excellent example of a precise 0.786 B point
retracement that defined the structure. The 2.0 BC projection and the AB=CD pattern
complemented the harmonic support at the 977 level.

Figure 8.8

This distinct pattern materialized in ideal fashion on this 60-minute chart over the course
of several sessions. Although the price action required two complete tests of the PRZ as it
consolidated following a steep three-day decline, the completion area for the setup defined
critical support just under the 980 level and pinpointed the optimal entry for the long position.

158

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The Bearish Butterfly Pattern
The ideal Bearish Butterfly structure is defined by a precise 0.786 B point retracement of the
XA leg (see Figure 8.9). The setup requires an AB=CD pattern that should converge with the
1.27 XA and the 1.618 BC projections as minimum conditions to define the PRZ.

D

1.27
X
0.78

6

A

B

1.6

;
0.382
0.886
Figure 8.9

;
8
1

4
2
.
2

C

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

159

Citigroup
(C): Weekly
The weekly chart of Citigroup (see Figure 8.10) was the fateful long-term pattern that marked
the top in the stock before its remarkable demise. This long-term pattern formed over the
course of four years before reversing dramatically.

Figure 8.10

The Butterfly possessed the ideal elements for a valid structure, including a precise B point
retracement at the 0.786 of the XA leg. The Alternate 1.27 AB=CD complemented the 1.27 XA
projection that clearly defined harmonic resistance just above the $55 level. In fact, these two

160

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

extensions overlapped each other at 55.80, defining the optimal entry for the trade. Figure 8.11
of the price action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) shows an ideal reversal the week after
the entire range was tested. The price action stalled the following price bar after the completion
of the pattern and the stock declined sharply immediately after the initial reaction. In fact, the
weekly price bar that initially tested the entire range of numbers closed below the PRZ. In
addition, the subsequent weekly price bars nominally retested the PRZ but repeatedly closed
below the harmonic resistance. Such price action is indicative of a valid reversal and represents
one of the clear signs of a potential change in trend.

Figure 8.11

This example of Citigroup emphasizes the ability of harmonic patterns to identify critical
turning points in the financial markets on any timeframe. In this case, the long-term nature of
the setup was quite significant. Although the complete collapse of the stock could not have
been predicted based upon the Butterfly pattern alone, the weekly price action clearly indicated
major resistance that was to be regarded. At a minimum, the setup indicated a substantial
selling opportunity. As the stock rolled over the next several months, the severity of the decline
became evident.

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

161

Swiss Franc
(CHF_A0-FX): 60-Minute
The next example of a Bearish Butterfly in the Swiss Franc shows another excellent harmonic
pattern in the currency markets (see Figure 8.12). The 60-minute chart possessed a distinct
pattern that clearly defined the critical resistance. The pattern formed the required Fibonacci
alignment to validate the Butterfly structure and the price action rolled over nicely after testing
the entire PRZ. The pattern marked an important reversal of the predominant intra-day trend.

Figure 8.12

Although the CD was somewhat extended, the structure was quite distinct with a tight range
of numbers to define the completion of the pattern. The reversal occurred shortly after testing
the entire range of harmonic resistance.

162

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Figure 8.13 of the price action in the Potential Reversal Zone shows an ideal reversal after
the entire range was tested. The Swiss Franc stalled in an ideal fashion immediately following
the completion of the pattern.

Figure 8.13

The last two examples exhibited similar reversals on two different timeframes. The weekly
Butterfly in Citigroup and the 60-minute setup in the Swiss Franc possessed almost exactly
the same pattern alignments. The nature of each reversal was similar, despite the difference of
the respective timeframes. These examples underscore the uniformity in the application of the
Harmonic Trading principles, regardless of the timeframe and market being analyzed. Each
situation should be handled in similar fashion while always being mindful of the respective
timeframe that is being analyzed.

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

163

The Perfect Butterfly Pattern
The Perfect Butterfly pattern is defined by a B point retracement that an exact 78.6% of the XA
leg to set up the ideal alignment of Fibonacci ratios. Another distinctive aspect of the Perfect
Butterfly structure is a precise 1.618 BC leg that complements completion of the 1.27 XA leg.
Although the ideal Butterfly alignment permits some variation of the BC projection—up to a
2.24—the perfect structure possesses only a 1.618 BC. Although the ideal Butterfly alignment
permits either AB=CD type, only the Alternate pattern 1.27 AB=CD is valid for the perfect
pattern.
1. Exact 0.786 B point retracement of the XA leg.
2. 1.27 XA projection exclusively.
3. 1.618 BC projection.
4. Alternate 1.27 AB=CD in the PRZ.
5. C point with range between 0.50 to 0.886 retracement.

The Perfect Bullish Butterfly
The perfect Bullish Butterfly is a distinct 5-point extension structure that requires a specific
alignment of Fibonacci numbers, including a 1.27 XA projection as the lowest limit in the PRZ
(see Figure 8.14). The pattern must possess an Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern with a precise
1.618 BC projection, as well.

A

0.786

X

0.50;
0.886

B

1.27
Figure 8.14

C

1.6

18
D

164

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Japanese Yen
(JPY_A0-FX): 15-Minute
The Yen formed this perfect intra-day Bullish Butterfly that reversed exactly at the harmonic
support (see Figure 8.15).

Figure 8.15

The structure possessed the required alignment of Fibonacci ratios to validate the perfect
pattern. The 1.27 XA projection, the 1.618 BC projection and the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD
converged in the 93.50 area to define the Potential Reversal Zone. The price action reversed
exactly at the 1.27 XA leg and rallied sharply from this harmonic support.

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

165

The chart in Figure 8.16 of the price action in the PRZ shows the exact reversal at the
completion of the pattern. The Yen reversed immediately after testing the entire PRZ, and it
possessed an ideal bullish continuation shortly after the completion of the pattern. Clearly, the
price action stabilized as it initially tested the top range of the PRZ. After a brief consolidation
period, the Yen reversed several hours later on a full retest of the support zone.

Figure 8.16

The Yen reversed immediately after testing the entire PRZ and exploded to the upside.
The dramatic bullish continuation exemplifies the potential of valid Perfect Butterfly structures.
The perfect ratio alignment defines particularly reliable support zones and excellent trading
opportunities, as each pattern completion is well defined and typically possesses ideal price
action in the PRZ.

166

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The Perfect Bearish Butterfly
The perfect Bearish Butterfly in Figure 8.17 is a distinct 5-point extension structure that utilizes
the 1.27 XA projection as the highest limit in the PRZ. The pattern should possess an Alternate
1.27 AB=CD pattern with a 1.618 BC projection that complements the PRZ.

D

1.27

X
0.78

6

A

B

0.50;
0.886
Figure 8.17

8

1
6
.
1

C

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

Standard and Poor’s 500 Index
($SPX): 5-Minute
The S&P 500 Index formed this perfect Bearish Butterfly structure on the following 5-minute
chart that possessed an ideal reversal at the completion of the pattern (see Figure 8.18).

Figure 8.18

167

168

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

On the following day after the stock tested all the numbers in the PRZ, the price action
reversed sharply (see Figure 8.19). The resistance at the 1.27 XA projection defined the top
range of the PRZ at 1005.48. Complementing this area, the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern and
the 2.0 BC projections defined the bottom and top of the PRZ, respectively.

Figure 8.19

Although the price action required a second intra-day test before triggering a more
substantial reversal, the Perfect Bearish Butterfly clearly defined the critical short-term
resistance for the index. This pattern exemplifies the ideal structure that perfect patterns
should possess and illustrates their effectiveness to define excellent trading opportunities.

Chapter 8 The Ideal Butterfly Pattern

169

The Butterfly Pattern Summary
The Butterfly is a specific 5-point extension structure that possesses a distinct alignment of
Fibonacci ratios to validate the pattern. The primary determining element of the pattern is a
precise 0.786 B point retracement of the XA leg. The Butterfly utilizes only a 1.27 XA projection
as the most critical number in the PRZ. Furthermore, the equivalent AB=CD pattern serves as
a minimum requirement for the pattern’s completion. But, the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern is
more common to the structure. The BC projection is another defining element of the pattern, as
it must be at least a 1.618 extension. However, the BC projection is not as extreme in the
Butterfly as it is in the Crab.
1. Minimum AB=CD completion with Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern most common.
2. C point retracement can vary between a 0.382 to an 0.886, although 0.618 is
preferred.
3. BC projection can vary from 1.13 to 3.618 and depends upon the C point
retracement.
4. Alternate AB=CD patterns are common within the structure.
The Butterfly is similar to the Gartley because it requires a specific alignment of Fibonacci
ratios—especially a precise B point—to validate the structure. Although such a strict definition
reduces the number of possible trading opportunities, this precision reduces those invalid
situations that may appear similar but fail to yield consistently accurate setups.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 9

Trade Execution

After accurately identifying a potential trade opportunity, the actual price level for the execution
must be determined. Several considerations must be assessed within a specific time period, as
defined by the potential opportunity. Primarily, the validity of the pattern must be determined
and the final action of whether or not to execute the trade or must be determined. Therefore,
effective execution strategies can facilitate the process and optimize trading results.
