
PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

59

been observed to help the illegal numbers business, rather than replace it,40
and thus it might also have promoted other capricious risk‑taking activities.
Gambling suppresses natural inhibitions against taking risks, and some of
the gambling contracts, in particular the lotteries, superficially resemble
financial markets: one deals with a computer, one receives a certificate (the
lottery ticket), and, in the case of the so‑called mega‑lottos, one participates
in a much‑talked‑about national phenomenon. Having established a habit of
participating in such gambling, it would be natural to graduate to its more
upscale form, speculation in securities.
The highest U.S. stock market volatility occurred between 1929 and 1933—
when it was more than twice as high as had ever been previously recorded.
This period of volatility occurred during a “gambling craze” that was brought
on not by legalization, but by the organized crime that was inadvertently
created by the prohibition of alcoholic beverages from 1920 to 1933.41 The
criminal gangs that grew after 1920 to satisfy the nation’s thirst for alcohol
found it natural to branch out into numbers games or speakeasy versions of
craps and roulette. Organized crime developed a modern and efficient distribution, marketing, and retail system to supply the nation at large with liquor,
going far beyond its traditional neighborhood strongholds, and this same
infrastructure served to facilitate illegal gambling activities on a much larger
scale. Certainly the widespread disrespect for the law fostered by Prohibition
helped legitimize gambling.
A spillover from gambling to financial volatility may come about because
gambling, and the institutions that promote it, yield an inflated estimate of
one’s own ultimate potential for good luck, a heightened interest in how one
performs compared with others, and a new way to stimulate oneself out of
a feeling of boredom or monotony. At the end of the 1990s, people were constantly subjected to highly professional advertisements that tried to foster
such attitudes, even radio and television advertisements that depict typical
gamblers’ self‑justifications as expressed by professional actors. These marketing efforts, and the experience of gambling or seeing others gamble, may
well have the effect of encouraging frivolous risk‑taking behavior in the stock
market as well. Such ads were sometimes startlingly explicit. In 1999, near
the peak of the stock market, a Connecticut billboard advertising off‑track
betting touted it, in big letters, as being “Like the Stock Market, Only Faster.”

Precipitating Factors That Propelled
the Ownership-Society Boom, 2003–7
When the second edition of this book came out in 2005, five years after
I compiled the above list, I felt that some of the twelve precipitating factors
whose psychological im­­pacts were driving the market had gone away or

60

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

had diminished. The Internet boom was still going strong, but the most
optimistic inferences had become discredited by the bursting of the dotcom bubble. The Republican majority in both chambers in Congress, with
its highly pro-business predilections, was gone. The 2006 election created
a Democratic majority in both chambers. The triumph of capitalism in the
former Soviet Union and China was now no longer news. But many of
the precipitating factors were still operative. These factors need not have
changed for the market to have turned down between 2000 and 2003—as
we shall see in the next chapter, on amplification mechanisms—and these
precipitating factors may still have been around to help with the upturn
from 2003 to 2007.
Other boosts to the market, other precipitating factors, also appeared after
2003, as described in the second edition of this book. These additional factors
also revved up both the stock market and the housing market.

The Ownership Society
The capitalist ideal at the beginning of the twenty-first century seemed to
be evolving into an even more extreme ideal, one in which the value of our
private property has a bigger influence on our lives. We had witnessed the
demise of traditional communism and socialism, the decline in labor unions,
and the end of the cooperative movement and other communal social movements. But now we witnessed such capitalist innovations as online auctions
and brokerages.
President George W. Bush named this new society the “ownership society” and featured this phrase prominently in his successful 2004 presidential
reelection campaign: “And there is a source of upward mobility in America
that comes with ownership. When a woman owns her own business she’s
upwardly mobile. When a Latino or an African American starts his or her
own business they become upwardly mobile. Ownership is a powerful part
of the American Dream.”42
Bush wanted to see homeownership extended to a larger portion of our society, and he tried (and failed) to alter the structure of Social Security to encourage people to invest in the stock market through individual retirement savings
accounts. This model saw private property extending far beyond its traditional
realm, into health savings accounts and school vouchers. Economists have
extolled the virtues of private property in aligning incentives and creating
committed citizens, and these ideas shaped public policy then.43
This political philosophy did not emphasize the importance of government
monitoring of mortgage lending practices. Regulators in the years leading up
to the financial crisis of 2007–9 left the rapidly growing subprime lenders in the
United States to their own ambitious devices, allowing them to take great risks

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

61

to make it possible for more people to own homes, by giving mortgages to borrowers having poor credit ratings or poorly documented mortgage applications.
Feeling that they had increasingly to rely on their own resources, people felt
themselves less secure. They felt increasingly thrust into a rapidly changing
world job market that might make them rich—or might suddenly dump them.
In a survey of homebuyers in 2004, Karl Case and I asked: “Do you worry that
your (or your household’s) ability to earn as much income in future years as
you expect might be in danger because of changes in the economy (someone
in China competing for your job, a computer replacing your job, etc.)?” Nearly
half of our 442 respondents (48%) said they were worried. Some of them said
that one motivation for buying their house was the sense of security that
homeownership provides in the face of the other insecurities.44
Paradoxically, the fears that drove people to look to investments for
security in an increasingly capitalist economy may actually have lowered
the personal savings rate, since the demand-induced increase in the price
of their investments may have given them an illusion that they were saving through the appreciation of their assets. The increases in home values
in the early 2000s far exceeded the amounts people were saving from their
paychecks. The appreciation in households’ real estate holdings from 2001
to 2003 increased U.S. household wealth on average ten times as much as
personal savings did in that period.45 For homeowners, actually saving
from one’s paycheck for the future seemed almost irrelevant in view of the
increase in asset values that came from doing nothing more than just buying and holding.

Supportive Monetary Policy
Alan Greenspan continued to be Chair of the Federal Reserve until 2006,
thus guiding the economy for most of the 2003–7 expansion. His reputation
for believing in free markets thus remained as one of the reasons for thinking that the stock market, or the housing boom, would not be stifled by the
Fed, even as the price-earnings ratio grew alarmingly high. His reputation
increasingly encouraged optimism for the markets.
During the boom years of the late 1990s, Alan Greenspan and his Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) had done nothing to stop the growth of the
stock market until the very end, watching the dramatic bull market charge for
over four years without any effort to rein it in. On the contrary, it appeared
to many people during the Ownership-Society Boom that the Fed would act
only to prevent a drop in the market, because of the fears Greenspan had
mentioned that such a drop would impair the real economy.
Greenspan talked repeatedly of the “flexibility” of the U.S. economy. “The
more flexible an economy,” he said in a 2005 speech, “the greater its ability to

62

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

self-correct after inevitable, often unanticipated disturbances.”46 The implication was that he would do nothing as Fed Chair to stop the Ownership-Society
Boom.
Many thought that Greenspan was so supportive of the stock market that
his presence as Fed chair was as good as having a put on the stock market to
protect us from stock market declines. The rationale behind this talk of the
Greenspan put was that Greenspan had used his power to prevent a stock
market debacle: in 1987, after the stock market crash; in 1998, after the Russian
debt crisis and the collapse of Long Term Capital Management, the flagship
hedge fund; and on the eve of the millennium, when he took steps to prevent
the “Y2K crisis.” It was thought that he had proven through his actions that
he would never let the market fall sharply.
Later, of course, some people would also credit him for cutting interest
rates very aggressively on January 3, 2001, when the evidence of a recession
on the horizon was only rather weak. In fact, the rate cut came two months
before the beginning of the recession of 2001. The stock market was indeed
significantly buoyed by the news that the Fed would cut rates so aggressively,
and the NASDAQ index experienced its largest one-day increase ever: 14%.
Ultimately, the Fed cut interest rates as the stock market fell, to a low of 1%
by 2003. This aggressive rate cut, which put real (inflation-corrected) interest
rates well into negative territory, was probably a significant contributing factor
to the housing boom after 2001.
Expansionary monetary policy has not been a consistent factor in asset
price booms. A 2003 study by Adam Posen of the Institute for International
Economics concluded that of twenty-four stock market booms around the
world since 1970, only six were accompanied by monetary easing, and of
eighteen property price booms, again only six.47 But his conclusion in no
way contradicts my conclusion that the generally supportive stance of Alan
Greenspan and other central bankers was a contributing factor both to the
Millennium Boom and to the Ownership-Society Boom that came on its
heels.

Precipitating Factors That Propelled the New-Normal Boom
After the 2007–9 stock market crash, stock markets around the world began
another dizzy climb upward. The puzzle in understanding this is that the
climb upward occurred while the world economy was still depressed from the
financial crisis, and nations were increasingly troubled by political impasses
and, after the Arab Spring revolts in 2011, roiled by heightened tensions internationally. The new precipitating factors this time had to do particularly with
the decline in fears of an acute financial crisis and with the government policies to try to cure it, as well as with some new impressions of the technological
revolution and the insecurity of our jobs. The new precipitating factors seem

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

63

less starry-eyed-everything-is-wonderful than was the case for the events leading up to the 2000 peak.

From Depression Scare to New Normal
At the height of the 2007–9 financial crisis, national leaders across the world
talked of the risk of a repeat of the Great Depression of the 1930s. They did so
because they needed to get support for their controversial economic stimulus
policies and efforts to bail out failing financial institutions. But by 2009, this
talk had quite a serious effect on public confidence, and there was genuine
anxiety that, despite the governments’ efforts, there would indeed be another
Great Depression and another 1929-style stock market crash.
In 2009, the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment survey found a
sharp increase in the percentage of Americans who worried about a repeat
of the Great Depression. Their question was: “Looking ahead, which would
you say is more likely—that in the country as a whole we’ll have continuous
good times during the next five years or so, or that we will have periods of
widespread unemployment or recession, or what?”48 The confidence index that
the Michigan survey administrators derive from answers to this question fell
in 2009 to its lowest value since the recession of 1990–91 and then followed an
irregular trend upward for the next five years.
Under the auspices of the International Center for Finance at the Yale School
of Management, I have constructed a number of indices of high-income investor
confidence from our questionnaire surveys. We regularly survey both highincome individual and institutional investors in the United States. One of the
indices is a “crash confidence” index, which is based on the question: “What do
you think is the probability of a catastrophic stock market crash in the U.S., like
that of October 28, 1929 or October 19, 1987, in the next six months, including
the case that a crash occurs in the other countries and spreads to the U.S.?”49
In 2009, crash confidence set a record low (the surveys began in 1989), both
for individual and institutional investors, and then started an irregular trend
upward for the next five years. The market may have been low in 2009, but
people were temporarily really worried then in the heat of the most extreme
moments of the financial crisis that it could fall much lower.
The U.S. Federal Reserve launched a series of “stress tests” of financial
institutions, starting with the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program in
2009. Miraculously, these tests concluded that many bank holding companies had adequate capital to survive even an adverse economic scenario, and
others were given an estimated amount of capital to raise so that they, too,
could survive. The stress tests reassured markets.
U.S. corporate earnings, which had almost hit zero for the S&P 500 in
2009, rebounded quickly as companies instituted policies of cost cutting to
restore earnings and investor confidence. Massive layoffs of their employees

64

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

helped restore profits but led to high unemployment and a loss of consumer
confidence. The cost cutting may also have lowered profits in the longer run,
if the companies lost the help of these employees in preserving long-term
value, but only time will tell if this has happened. However, the cost cutting
did restore accounting earnings quickly, which was interpreted as a favorable
sign by many investors who were looking for signs of hope at a fearful time.
In 2009 Bill Gross, founder of the investment management firm PIMCO, now
at Janus Capital, summed up this weak optimism, which he called the “new
normal”: “it’s time to recognize that things have changed and that they will
continue to change for the next—yes, the next 10 years and maybe even the
next 20 years. We are heading into what we call the New Normal, which is a
period of time in which economies grow very slowly as opposed to growing
like weeds, the way children do.”50
The same moderately optimistic situation did not prevail in Europe, where
the sovereign debt crisis intervened in 2010, leading to great worries of longterm stagnation there. Hence, the rebound in the stock markets after 2009 was
not uniform around the world, and European stock markets still tend to be
less highly priced as of this writing.

Extremely Loose Monetary Policy and Quantitative Easing
Short-term interest rates were driven to virtually zero in the New Normal
by the Federal Reserve and other central banks through open market policy
in response to the 2007–9 financial crisis. Long-term interest rates began to
follow them down. In 2008, the Fed announced the first of its three quantitative easing programs, which had the Fed buying mortgage securities and
treasury securities. Ultimately, through such purchases, the Fed increased
its assets from less than one trillion dollars to over four trillion dollars, a
radical departure from past practice.
In 2008, the Fed began a policy of “forward guidance,” of preannouncing that it would not raise interest rates for some time to come, thereby
encouraging long-term interest rates to fall more than they otherwise would.
Ten-year Treasury yields fell to an all-time record low of 1.43% in July 2012,
from over 5% before the crisis in 2007–9. The result was a situation in which
most investors felt very disappointed with their return on bond investments,
leading to a “reach for yield” attitude after the crisis. Even though the stock
market was still perceived as risky, many thought that at least it had some
real upside potential, encouraging them to buy stocks at higher and higher
earnings multiples.
The very fact that U.S. long-term home mortgage rates in the fall of 2012
were at all-time record lows created an unprecedented demand for housing,
despite a still-weak economy, since prospective homebuyers did not want to
lose out on an opportunity that was perceived as once-in-a-lifetime.

65

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

End-of-Career Anxieties
The 2007–9 financial crisis spawned a massive decline in the labor force participation rate in the United States, from 66.4% in January 2007 to 62.8% in
June 2014, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The anxieties of
being out of the labor force (or suspecting that one might soon be) may help
further propel the “reaching for yield” in investing that low interest rates have
already encouraged: people may take greater risks with their investments
to keep alive a hope of living comfortably for years into the future without
employment. The meaning of the term “reaching for yield” seems to have
shifted somewhat around the time of the New-Normal Boom. It was most
often used to describe investing in high-interest-rate bonds or mortgages with
diminished regard for their risk. Now, with real interest rates near zero, it is
more often used to describe aggressive investing in risky stocks or complicated
new investment products.
Part of this decline in the percentage of the population working is due to the
long-expected retirement of Baby Boomers. But there is another, more worrisome component. Those laid off during or after the 2007–9 financial crisis may
have viewed the experience as the end of an era, because many layoffs have
been described as long-term cost cutting—the corporation becoming leaner
and meaner—not as jobs that are likely to come back when the crisis recedes.
Those losing jobs may have felt that in the current economy it would be pointless to start retraining for a different job. They may have retired earlier than
they planned, sometimes much earlier, perhaps by claiming disabilities. The
U.S. Social Security Administration has documented a significant increase in
disability benefit applications since the financial crisis.
Even for young people, there are vivid, psychologically salient, new career
risks that are apparently increasing a desire to save, and a wishful-thinking
bias toward speculative investments like stocks. New job-replacing technology has been highly visible. Particularly noticeable is the rapid expansion
of mobile connections to computers and the Internet, with tablet computers,
smart phones, and soon even Google Glass. These are vivid new images in
our minds, because everywhere one goes in 2014 one sees people fiddling with
these devices, which were not so prominent before 2009. One now even hears
people talking to their devices. Apple introduced their automated assistant
“Siri” for the iPhone in 2011. I now can talk to my mobile phone in my pocket
and ask, “OK: what is the traffic to work like right now?” and a voice comes
out from my pocket, providing the estimated driving time to work (it already
knows where I am and where I work and the best route to work). One naturally
wonders: where is all this technology going, and what jobs will it replace?
Other technological talk since the Ownership-Society Boom has raised further existential angst about employment. Testing of driverless cars on public
streets began in 2011. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Computer

66

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory has more recently unveiled a
BakeBot robot that can bake a cake in a conventional kitchen, and the lab is
working on a robot that will change a baby’s diapers.51
Most people have some new worries about their jobs since the New-Normal
Boom began in 2009, and that increased worry probably should be on the list
of precipitating factors for the stock market boom (as well as being considered
as a source of weakness for the aggregate economy).
Many people are accustomed to thinking that bad news about projected
future employment income, or bad news about its uncertainty, should tend to
push stock prices down rather than up, but economic theory (as explicated by
Robert E. Lucas, for example) suggests just the opposite.52 One might call this
a “life preservers on the Titanic theory.” When passengers on a ship think the
vessel is in danger of sinking, a life preserver, a table, or anything that floats
may suddenly become extremely valuable, and not because these assets have
changed their physical attributes. Similarly, at a time when people are worried about the sustainability of their labor income, and there are not enough
really good investment opportunities, they may tend to bid up prices of all
manner of existing long-term assets in their efforts to save for the dangerous
lean years seen ahead. They may not manage to save more in real terms. They
may hold such assets even if they now believe the assets are overpriced and
in danger of losing value in the future.
The actual effects of changes in perceived risk further depend on psycho­
logical and sociological factors. The perceived increase in risks in the
employment market—the perceptions of rapid technological and industrial
change—have broad cultural effects that are sometimes blamed for other
problems as well, such as the rise of nationalism around the world and a
tendency to aggression between nations, as exemplified by the 2014 conflict
in Ukraine and tensions in many other places.53
