
second floor. The reason for this failure on the price chart, may well have been as a result of sustained areas of
old price congestion in the same region, and failures at this level in the past. If the market has failed at this level
previously, which as a trader you will see on your price chart with areas of price congestion on the longer time
frames, then there is every chance that it will fail at this level again. After all, there was a reason. This could
have been a selling climax, occurring years previously and what was once considered overbought at this level
is now considered fair value.
Nevertheless, as traders, this is a key level, and volume will give us all the clues we need to validate the
subsequent price action. If this is in fact an old area of price congestion, at which level the market failed and
reversed previously, then if it does succeed in breaching the ceiling on this occasion, then this adds greater
significance to the move higher, and a strong platform of support would then be in place. Equally a failure would
suggest an extremely weak market, and something we will look at when considering key price patterns.
This is the power of support and resistance. It is the market signalling all those areas of price congestion which
come into play constantly. They are the DNA of the market. Its history and life story rolled into one, and as you
would expect works exactly the same way regardless of whether markets are falling or rising. In this example
the market reversed from resistance, but equally powerful is the concept of old support regions when a market is
falling. These areas then provide natural platforms of support, to stop any further decline in the market, and just
as in a rising market, if these areas are deep and wide, then they take on increased significance, which is
further enhanced if there has been any major reversal at this level in the past.
Naturally, price congestion areas come in all shapes and sizes, and in all time frames. A stock index may trade
in a narrow range for days or even weeks. A currency pair may move sideways for months. Bonds often trade in
very narrow ranges, particularly in the current financial crisis. Stocks may remain waterlogged for months.
Conversely, areas of price congestion may last for a few minutes or a few hours. The underlying concepts
remain the same, because as VPA traders all we have to remember is that cause and effect go hand in hand.
An area of price congestion on a 5 minute chart will still offer support and resistance to the intra day trader,
along with any breakout trading opportunities, but in the context of the longer term will have little effect.
However, move to the same instrument on the daily chart, and if we see a deep area of price congestion, then
any move through the ceiling or floor will be significant.
This is yet another reason for trading using multiple charts and time frames. Price congestion on a 5 minute
chart will have less significance than on a 15 minute, than an hourly chart. In other words the longer the time
frame then the greater the significance, all other things being equal.
Support and resistance is a powerful concept in its own right. Match it with VPA, and it will become another of
the cornerstones of your trading methodology, based on volume and price.

Chapter Eight
Dynamic Trends And Trend Lines
The loss was not bad luck. It was bad analysis.
David Einhorn (1968-)
In this chapter I want to explore the concept of trends and trend lines. And no doubt you will have heard the oft
quoted term 'let the trend be your friend', which in my humble opinion is more or less meaningless mumbo
jumbo.
It is the one mantra that people who profess to be mentors and coaches parrot to their students in an effort to
impress. However, just like price congestion where, with hindsight any fool can see when the market has been
trading sideways, so it is with trends. And anyone who quotes this axiom has clearly little, live trading
experience, in my view. Generally they will show you a lovely trend with several lines on, and sagely advise
that this was the place to enter and then hold for the duration of the trend, before finally exiting at the end of the
trend run higher or lower. All easy stuff when you are considering an historic chart.
Let me start with some basic thoughts on trends, as I want to dispel some of the nonsense that has been written
on the subject. And the first, and most important question is this - how do we know when a trend has started?
Just as with support and resistance, the short answer is that we won't, until it's over. It's that simple. It was the
same with our congestion phase. We have to have some parameters to give us the clues as to whether a trend
is beginning to develop in whatever time frame we are considering. As a trader, it is pointless to look back over
an extended period, draw some lines on the chart, and then decide that this is a trend. By then you will have
missed most, if not all of the trend, and are probably just getting in, when the insiders are getting out.
This is why VPA is so powerful. It validates the price action for us, and reveals where we are in the longer term
trend. After all, if we see a selling climax or a buying climax, then we KNOW that a new trend is about to begin.
We are in at the start, which is where we want to be, NOT at the end, which is where trend lines inevitably point
to, particularly if you only rely on this technique. I must stress that I am not saying trend lines are not useful, they
are, but only when used in the correct way which is what I am going to teach you in this chapter.
Let's start with Charles Dow who really laid down the foundations of trend analysis. His core beliefs in this
aspect of price behaviour were founded on one simple principle which was this – that the trend in an index, was
far more revealing and valuable than the trend in an individual stock. His view was very simple. An individual
stock could be influenced by any number of factors, from earnings reports, broker recommendations, and
analysts views, all of which would affect the price. An index, on the other hand, was far more representative of
the broader sentiment in the market and therefore far more likely to be of use in identifying market trends. One of
his many axioms, that have since been absorbed into modern day technical analysis, is the concept of
systematic and unsystematic market risks.
Systematic risks affect all stocks in an index, whilst unsystematic risks may affect only one or a group of stocks
in one particular market. Dow's own work centred around the creation of indices, which now form the
cornerstones of the financial markets, with the S&P 500, the Dow Jones (DJIA), the Nasdaq (NQ100) and many
more around the world. In addition, the concept of an index has been adopted by virtually every other market
and instrument and led to the creation of volatility indices, such as the VIX, sector indices for stocks, currency
indices such as the Dollar Index (DXY) and commodity indices such as the CRB, with hundreds of others in
between. In some markets, indices are now considered more attractive to trade than the underlying assets from
which they are derived.
Another of Dow's guiding principles was the concept that trends were classified into three broad time related
phases, which he referred to as primary, secondary and minor trends. Now in his world, of course, the ticker
tape was still the main source of data, and for Charles Dow and the other iconic traders of his day and later, the
time frames were very different to those of today. A minor trend for example would be one lasting for 2 to 3 days,
whilst a secondary trend might be 2 to 3 weeks and a primary trend for 2 to 3 months. For our purposes, with
electronic charts, our time horizons are much shorter. For intra day traders, a minor trend might last 2 to 3 hours,
whilst a secondary trend may last 2 to 3 days and a primary trend 2 to 3 weeks. These are much more realistic,

and indeed for many markets, the days of extended trends which last for months or longer are almost a thing of
the past. The markets have changed beyond all recognition. High frequency trading, market manipulation and
the move to electronic trading have all seen to that.
Nevertheless, Dow's original and pioneering work gives us a hook on which to hang our hat. What is also
interesting is that in developing his ideas of trend, he also introduced the concept of the three stages of a trend
as follows :
1. The accumulation phase
2. The technical trend following stage
3. The distribution stage
If this sounds familiar, then it should because this is the cycle the insiders follow in the constant round of first
filling, and then emptying their warehouses, as developed and expanded by Richard Wyckoff. Charles Dow
referred to the insiders as the 'smart money' with the distribution phase of the trend where the 'smart money' is
taking its profits and heading for the sign marked 'Exit'.
Now at this point we are going to diverge from standard trend analysis and look at it in slightly different terms,
which I hope you will find marginally more useful when trading live, rather than the theoretical nonsense that
appears in most books. The above introduction has given us the framework to move on, but at this stage most
trend analysis would then present you with the schematic in Fig 8.10

Fig 8.10 A Bullish Trend Higher – Surely Not!
Here we have the traditional picture of a trend. The market has moved higher in a series of steps, and once we
have three steps in place, we can draw our upper and lower trend lines, which define the channel clearly. Most
text books will tell you that it is impossible to define a trend using two points, since the possibilities for

interpretation are endless and ultimately meaningless, which is why we have to wait for three points, before
joining them up to create the trend lines themselves.
These are the higher highs and higher lows which define the peaks and troughs as the market moves higher,
and lower highs and lower lows as the market falls.
Now we have a clear picture that a trend has been established, we are ready to enter the market, and wait for
this trend to develop further. That is the theory, but unfortunately, by the time we have waited for our three higher
highs and higher lows, the trend is already reaching a climax. We have already been through the technical
trend following stage and we are about to buy, at the start of a distribution phase.
But how do we know this? Because most likely you have been reading too many text books written by people
who have never traded or invested in their lives. This is all theoretical and, as I said earlier, very easy to see in
hindsight, and once the trend is this well developed, it is not of much use.
What is the answer? And for this we need to return to support and resistance which holds the key, and which is
why I covered it in such detail in the previous chapter.
Support and resistance is where trends are created, born and then propelled on their way. This is where trends
reverse and change direction. This is where accumulation and distribution phases occur, along with selling and
buying climaxes. It is the most important area of price behaviour on any chart. These areas are like the
spawning grounds at the head of a great river, to which the salmon ultimately return to spawn.
This is where we start to answer the question that ALL traders, investors and speculators have at the forefront of
their minds at all times. Is this the start of a trend, and if so, what is the strength of the trend and how far is it
likely to run? These questions can only be answered by understanding support and resistance in the context of
Volume Price Analysis.
To attempt to do so in any other way is doomed to failure, and drawing a few lines on a chart, is a pointless and
meaningless exercise. In my humble opinion. I do accept they may help to clarify the trend a little and may even
be of limited use once the trend has started, but in terms of getting you into a strong position, they are of no
value whatsoever.
However, let’s return to basics and revisit our congestion phase, where the market is moving sideways and
creating the floors and ceilings of price support. The market is preparing to breakout, and all we need to do as
traders, investors or speculators is to wait, be patient and then to validate the breakout using volume. How do
we know the extent of the trend at this stage? The short answer is we don't, but we do have several clues which
will allow us to make an educated guess at this stage.
First, is the extent of the price congestion phase. Again we must recall Wyckoff's cause and effect as this will
dictate whether we can expect to see a primary, a secondary trend or a minor trend develop. For an intraday
scalper, the trend will almost certainly be a minor trend, but this may well sit within the context of a longer term
trend in a slower time frame. In this context our scalper would then be trading, with the dominant trend in a
higher time frame. In other words the minor trend being traded, is in the same direction as the longer term trend,
which for an intra day trader may be the hourly chart.
This is one of the many reasons why trading using multiple charts is so powerful. It helps to frame the trend that
we are trading. However, there is nothing wrong with taking a trade against the dominant trend in whatever time
frame that may be. For example, the dominant trend in a stock market may be bullish on the index, but there
may be a bearish opportunity in a stock. This is fine, as long as we recognise that we are trading against the
'dominant trend'. This type of trading is often referred to as 'counter trend trading', and there are two points that
define this type of position.
First, it is a higher risk position as we are trading 'against the market flow' – swimming against the tide if you
like. Second, and following on from the first point, we are only likely to be holding such a position for a short
period of time, since by definition we are trading against the longer term dominant trend.
Next, in any congestion phase as VPA traders we are always analysing the volume from two standpoints. First
the volume associated with the sideways price action to determine whether this is a major reversal evidenced
by volume, as either a selling or a buying climax. Secondly, the volume and price action following any

associated breakout, which will then provide us with additional clues as to the likely extent of the trend. In turn
this will also be validated by considering the associated volume and price action on slower time frames along
with analysing potential support and resistance areas ahead, which might create pause points in any longer
term trend,
Therefore, the first step is always the price action, immediately following a move away from the price congestion
zone, and this is very similar to the way we identified our congestion entrance using the pivot high and the pivot
low, to give us our levels. This gave us our bearings. The previous price action (whatever it may have been)
has now paused and is taking a rest. Our pivots have alerted us to this pause, which may be an extended one,
in which case the levels will be further reinforced with further pivots to the upper and lower levels, or it may be a
temporary one, with few pivot points. It may be a reversal, in which case we can expect to see some extensive
VPA action, or a continuation of the previous trend. All this will be revealed as the price action in this area
unfolds into our traditional congestion area, with our ceilings and floors in place. However, at some point, the
market will break away, and this is where the pivots come into play once again, only this time to help us define
the trend as it develops. Furthermore, it allows us to take advantage as soon as possible and NOT have to wait
for the higher highs and higher lows (or lower highs and lower lows ) to develop before entering a position.
Let's take an example which shows a break out to the up side in Fig 8.11

Fig 8.11 First Marker – Pivot High
As we can see in Fig 8.11 the market has been in a consolidation phase and has broken out on robust volume.
Our analysis signals that this is a valid move, and we are now looking for signs that a trend is likely to develop.
The first signal we have is of a market that is rising on solid and generally rising volumes, and we take a
position.
What we are waiting for now is our first marker, which just as in the case of our congestion entrance in the

previous chapter, is a pivot, and as we are in a bullish phase we are looking for a pivot high.
As we know markets never go up or down in straight lines and this is the first sign of a reversal, which in turn
may also define the upper region of our trend as we break away. Remember the pivot high and the pivot low are
combinations of three candles as shown below in Fig 8.12

Fig 8.12 Pivot Creation
We now have our first point of reference in the price move higher, and since we have a pivot high, we know that
the market is going to reverse lower. This could be a major reversal, which is unlikely given the volume profile
and the recent price congestion, but at this stage we are never sure and must be patient. The volume is falling,
which a good sign, and in due course, the market stops, and reverses higher, posting a pivot low. We now have
the second marker in our journey higher, as we can see in Fig 8.13.

Fig 8.13 Second Marker – Pivot Low
Now we are starting to build a picture of the price action. Remember we have a position in the market, and
provided volume continues to confirm price, then all is well with the move higher.
The pivot points which are now forming, are our markers to highlight the journey and define the boundaries of
the trend. Unlike the trend lines which most people draw AFTER the event, these are dynamic and created
during the price action, and provided they build in a series of higher and lower levels, then we know that the
trend is developing and we stay in our position, provided the volume supports our analysis.
Let me scroll forward now and add two more levels to the chart, and based on exactly the same principle. From
our current position, we are now looking for the market to push higher, off the pivot low, and the next target for
us is a second pivot high, and PROVIDED this is above the previous pivot high, then we are in an upwards
trend. Once this second pivot high has formed we are then expecting the market to pullback, but hopefully only
in a minor way at this stage, and on low volume, at which point we are now looking for our second pivot low.
This is duly posted, and provided it is higher that the previous pivot low, we stay in our position, as we are now
expecting the market to push off this pivot low and develop the trend further.
The market continues higher as expected, and now we are looking for our third pivot high, higher than the
previous one, which will then define the upper region of our trend. If this is posted as expected then once again,
and I'm sure you are getting the picture now, the market pulls back off this pivot high and moves lower, to post,
another isolated pivot low. If this is higher than the previous pivot low, then we continue to hold and now have
our third pivot low to define the lower region of the trend.
This is how we build trend lines dynamically, whilst simultaneously holding a position in the market based on
Volume Price Analysis and the fundamental principles of VPA breakouts from sideways congestion, as we can
see in Fig 8.14.

Whilst the end result is the same, the journey in creating these trend lines is very different and allows you, as a
trader to join the trend at the best point, which is the start, and not the end!! This is shown in Fig 8.14 below.

Fig 8.14 Dynamic Trend Lines – Bullish Trend
We can imagine this whole process almost as one of 'scene setting'. The congestion phase sets the scene for
the price action, which is then delivered and supported by the volume. The pivots highlight the journey – they
are like the lights at the side of the road, giving us a clear view of where we are, whilst also giving us the
confidence to hold our position in the market.
Finally, at some point, we see a pivot high posted that is lower or perhaps at the same level as a previous pivot,
and it is at this point that we are looking at a market that is perhaps moving into a secondary congestion phase,
with a pivot low to follow. If this is at a similar level to a previous pivot low then we are in a second congestion
phase and our analysis continues. Now we are looking for confirming signals with further pivots and finally a
break out. Again, is this a trend reversal, or merely a trend pause? If we break to the downside then it is a trend
reversal, and we exit our position, but if it is a trend pause, and the trend continues on a break higher, then we
hold our position, and start the process of building our dynamic trend lines once again.
Naturally, the above is a text book example of what we want to see on every breakout from a congestion phase,
but trading life is rarely text book. Sometimes these pivots do not appear. For example on a break higher, the
pivot high may not appear, but the pivot low may do so in due course.
At this point we have to make a decision based on our VPA analysis, and judge whether the trend is developing
as expected. However, this may be the first early warning signal that this is not a trend which has any sustained
momentum. In general, we would expect to see the move away from congestion as having some momentum,
supported by volume. As markets move quickly, so buyers and sellers move equally quickly, either to get in, or

to get out creating the pivot points on the chart.
If these are missing, for whatever reason, then this alone suggests a market which is potentially lacking in
momentum which will always be evident from our volume analysis. If the market is moving higher, but the
volume is average or below average then this is a trend lacking momentum. Buyers and sellers are simply not
participating in the move higher, and the trend will therefore simply not develop. There is no energy, no activity,
and this is reflected in the volume and associated price action.
Therefore, don't expect to see the perfect scenario on each breakout. Every one will be different, characterised
by varying degrees of momentum and duration. What we have to do is to look for the clues using VPA, and then
wait for the pivots to appear as the price action unfolds. If they do not follow a logical pattern in the trend, then
the market is potentially weak, and may simply revert back into a period of congestion at a slightly higher level.
The price action and associated pivots for a move lower away from a congestion phase are created in just the
same way, but this time we are looking for a pivot low to form initially, followed by a pivot high, as we can see in
Fig 8.15.
