
– 10 –

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

30 industrials, 20 utilities and 40 bonds, in separate charts, and is the most valuable
daily publication for the perusal of charts already made.
The New York Daily Investment News publishes the long-range daily chart record of
a well-known average of 90 stocks. Most of these average charts also carry the daily
volume of sales on the New York Stock Exchange.
The New York Herald Tribune publishes every morning the picture up to the previous day’s closing of its own highly respected average of 100 stocks. The New York
Times also prints every morning a chart of the Times average of 50 stocks. The New
York Sun, among the evening papers, carries in its final editions a chart of its own
average of 50 stocks. And most of the other metropolitan newspapers of conservative appeal publish from time to time charts on a variety of financial and business
trends as well as stocks.

Magazines which Publish Charts
Magazines have been a little slower in keeping abreast of public interest in stock
charts but there are a number which carry regular charts on market averages. The
Magazine of Wall Street, published bi-weekly, is perhaps the best-known and carries
not only its own average chart, in which the prices of 295 common stocks are averaged, but a variety of other financial charts as well. Forbes Magazine publishes regularly a long-term chart of weekly ranges on the New York Times, or Annalist, average,
showing for the past four or five years the course of the three Times series, the groups
including 25 industrials, 25 rails and the 50 industrials and rails combined in a
single index.
The Annalist, published weekly by the New York Times, shows these same averages
for a shorter space of time and also carries a very interesting series of comparative
charts showing averages of groups of the leading stocks in practically every important field of industry. Barron’s, published weekly by Dow, Jones & Company, offers
approximately the same charts which the Wall Street Journal, published by the same
company, gives daily.
The New York Stock Exchange Bulletin, published monthly and sent free on application, contains a great valuable fund of statistical information as well as many
charts on a great variety of financial and stock trends.

Services Selling Daily Charts
Such average charts are useful in gauging the trend of the general market but for the
sincere student who wants to make real progress in chart analysis for himself it is
mandatory to have at hand charts on individual stock issues, for they are the fundamental basis of all stock chart science.
– 11 –

STUDY I

The pioneer and probably best known publisher of ready-made stock charts is
Graphic Market Statistics, Inc., 11 Stone Street, New York City (estab. 1919). This
firm offers up-to-date daily or weekly (81/2″ × 11″) charts of all stocks listed on the
New York Curb or Stock Exchanges – daily back history being available from 1926,
or date of listing, and weekly from 1929.
This concern also publishes at regular intervals, in loose-leaf book form, a ‘‘Master Unit’’ of over 500 daily, weekly and monthly charts (1924 to date) on 100 active
individual stocks and the better known market averages. For the student who
wishes to follow a fewer number of stocks, a similar record (‘‘set’’) is also available
in either of two groups of 50 active stocks each.
Although daily, weekly and monthly charts are, when considered together, very
valuable tools in the study of technical action, those who prefer may obtain separate
single books of daily, weekly or monthly charts on either of two standard lists of 50
stocks each.
Graphic Market Statistics, Inc. also designs and constructs to order security and
commodity charts of any size, type or period.

Ready-made Charts
Such services offering ready-made charts probably find their greatest subscription
demand from banks, brokerage houses and other financial organizations, though
the demand from individual subscribers has increased in recent years. There is no
objection to the student of stock charts subscribing to such services; in fact, we
advise it as the easiest and quickest way to get a group of one’s own stock charts
started.
A supply of these ready-made charts can get the student off to a running start for
they give him immediately the background of past action necessary for the proper
analysis of the current picture as it develops. From then on, however, we advise the
student to construct his own charts. He may continue to purchase ready-made
charts if he chooses, perhaps as a means of keeping in touch with the weekly or
monthly picture on a larger number of stocks than he can conveniently chart for
himself each day, but to rely entirely on ready-made charts encourages a superficial
attitude toward the entire subject. The method is too easy. This may sound like the
philosophy of an enemy of progress but the statement is true, nevertheless.

Advantages of Making Your Own Charts
Purely from a psychological standpoint, the student who gets a new set of charts
already made up for him periodically is almost certain to view them from a less
important angle than the man who is under absolute necessity of making them up
– 12 –

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

for himself every day. Unless he is unusually gifted with determination and singleness of purpose the former is going to find himself pressed for time some morning
or some evening and either skim over them without study, or put them away without looking at them at all. He may return to his conscientious study tomorrow but
then again he may not, and the first day of flagging interest makes the next one that
much easier.
But the man who makes up his own charts is in an entirely different psychological position. He may be tempted to neglect his work on them for one day but he will
soon find that it is too difficult to ‘‘catch up’’ and he will make it a regular rule and
habit of his life to post up his (possibly ‘‘cursed’’) stock charts every single day.

Closer Personal Contact
Beside this psychological aspect, however, there is a much more practical advantage
to keeping up one’s own charts. That advantage emanates from keeping in constant
touch with each one of them every day. The man who has his charts before him
ready-made is quite likely to skip over all but a few of his temporary favorites and
thus fail to notice the development of important profitable signals in the remainder
of his series.
Not so with the student who keeps his own charts. He is forced by the rigor of his
undertaking to bestow a certain amount of time on each individual chart of his series
each day whether he happens to be especially interested in them all or not. Through
this forced, but none the less certain, closeness of contact with each single chart the
student who makes his own is much more likely to shift his study and watchful
attention to different charts in his series as each in turn develops more definite and
profitable pictures through the course of time.

Number of Charts Necessary
The first step for the student who is going to keep his own charts is to decide on the
number he wants to keep and the individual issues which will compose his portfolio. For the average beginner who is not yet certain that he wants to give much
time and effort to his study, a group of perhaps 15 or 20 individual charts should be
sufficient for temporary trial. For the average trader who knows he is deeply interested in chart study and technical action a list of 50 to 100 individual charts is not too
many.
After a few months of experience, when the matter of keeping the series up to date
has become something of a routine matter, the student will be surprised with the
rapid progress he can make. Once in full swing he should not need much over 45
seconds per chart. He should be able to fill in a day’s trading history on 10 charts in
– 13 –

STUDY I

say 8 minutes, 50 charts in 40 minutes, 100 charts in 80 minutes and so on. If he is
blessed with either a wife, a secretary or a devoted what-not who can read the necessary figures off to him from the daily papers, the time required can be more than
cut in half.

Selecting the Stocks
In selecting the individual issues to be charted, personal interest will naturally play
some part and the student’s ‘‘favorites’’ may be included. Other things being equal,
however, the most active and important stocks, like the ‘‘market leaders’’ lend themselves more suitably to chart study because they are most active, generally fluctuate
in more normal patterns, are more likely to be under almost constant ‘‘street’’ interest, and usually show more clearly the trend of the general market.
It is also well to select stocks which have at least a fair-sized number of shares outstanding. This makes for greater public interest, a more ready market, higher activity and generally clearer technical pictures.
The best results are gained in every way by setting aside one particular period of
time each day to make up one’s charts, preferably either before the market opens in
the morning or after it closes in the evening. The evening is better as a rule because
more time can then be given to leisurely study of the formations, the proper program
decided upon and, if actively trading, the brokerage orders may be sent in that
evening by mail.
Whatever the time decided upon, however, it is important for ultimate success that
the same time be adhered to steadfastly and by rule. There are so many reasons, so
many alibis, that can insinuate themselves into the time set apart for making up
charts that the program is almost hopeless unless it be made a matter of ironclad rule.

Chart Paper
The next step in starting one’s own portfolio of charts is to secure the proper and
necessary paper. There is room for a good deal of latitude in personal taste with
regard to this subject. Many chart students have their own pet types and makes of
chart paper and swear by none other. Most of the professional, services and chart
makers use a loose-leaf binder with paper measuring about 24′′ × 12′′, but the
average individual should find smaller sizes quite satisfactory, say the standard
81/2′′ × 11′′.
The smaller size has certain important advantages over the larger size because it
takes up less room, leaves less unused white space, can more easily be carried about
in a briefcase and can be more easily removed from the portfolio for individual handling and study.
– 14 –

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

The chief advantage claimed for the larger size paper is that new sheets are not
needed so often but, while this is true, there is also some advantage to the shorter
sheets which run out more quickly. When this happens the price scale can be moved
up or down on the new sheet so that the stock price range is not so likely to run off
the sheet before its completion with respect to time. And, for that reason also, it is
practicable to use on the smaller sheets a larger price scale which renders more conspicuous the technical patterns as they develop.
In any case, it is possible to put too much stress upon the correct type of paper.
This is a minor matter for just about any kind of paper will give satisfactory results
once the student becomes accustomed to using it and reading his own charts.

Co-ordinate Scales
About the only requisite for chart paper is that it must be ruled both horizontally
and vertically; i.e., what is generally termed co-ordinate paper. Up to the point of
confusion, the more lines in each direction the better. Some styles of co-ordinate
paper have a dated vertical line for each day of the year. This simplifies keeping
track of dates but it also distorts the picture at times, for it means that a space must
be left for regular and special holidays when there is no trading in the stock market.
Plain, standard, unlettered co-ordinate paper with rulings or ‘‘screen’’ of about 20
lines to the inch, both vertical and horizontal, is obtainable in most large stationery
stores and will serve perfectly well for all ordinary purposes. In our own work we
have found Keuffel & Esser’s No. 358-17 most practical of the special sheets prepared for charting security prices; this comes in the standard 81/2′′ × 11′′ size,
punched for insertion in a ring binder, and has its horizontal scale divided in sixths
to represent the six days of the normal business week, and the vertical scale in
eighths to conform with the standard eighth of a point price differential in trading.
Their No. 358-17L has the same scaling but measures 11′′ × 161/2′′. The Keuffel
& Esser Company publishes a variety of other styles of chart paper and binders to
fit which the student may buy from them direct if he wishes, and which are
described in their catalog of co-ordinate papers obtainable on request from their
own stores in New York or Chicago, or from their general office at Hoboken, New
Jersey.
The Codex Book Company, Inc. of Norwood, Mass. also prints a large variety of
types and sizes of co-ordinate paper, making a specialty of stock chart sheets.

Constructing the Scale
Having obtained the proper co-ordinate paper and decided upon the individual
– 15 –

STUDY I

stocks which it is desired to chart, the next step is to construct, the scale. The horizontal lines on the paper are used to measure the price and volume, so that the actual
scales for these factors will be on the vertical lines, preferably at the left hand margin.
The price scale may be altered in many ways and will depend chiefly on the size
and ruling of the paper and on the extent of the stock’s normal range. If, for example, we are using a sheet of ordinary co-ordinate paper with 20 lines each way to the
inch, and 10 inches high vertically, every inch, or every twentieth line, will generally
be found printed in heavier ink to serve as a guide. For the average stock selling
under 100 every heavy, inch, or twentieth, line on the vertical scale may be a unit of
five full points in the price of the stock. Thus each single line will be one-quarter of
a full point and the smaller fractional eighths of a point, will fall half way between
two lines.
When commencing a new chart it is well to glance back over the price range for
the past year and take the average price, say 65, as the price-mark for a heavy horizontal line near the middle of the page on the vertical scale. The next heavy, twentieth, or inch, line above will be 70, and the one below the first entry of 65 will be 60
and so on, as the vertical price scale is filled on the left-hand margin.
If the stock’s average range has been very large and its normal fluctuations are
wide then a larger price scale is in order. Each heavy, twentieth, or inch, line may be
marked to represent 10 points or even 20 points, making each horizontal line across
the sheet count for either a half point, or a full point, respectively. In such case it will
be more difficult to plot the fractions of a point but this detail of exactitude is not so
necessary for a satisfactory picture when the price swings are so large.
The same general principles apply if you are using a special stock chart paper such
as the K. & E. 358-17. For most stocks of average price range each heavy (eighth) line
on the vertical scale may be marked to represent a full point in the price and each
light line will then represent one-eighth of a point. For stocks with a wider swing or
higher price, such as American Can, AT & T. etc., each heavy line may represent two
points, and the fine lines one-quarter of a point; and for very low-priced stocks with
small swings, each heavy line may be marked to represent only half a point.

Plotting the Price Data
Having established the suitable price scale in the left-hand margin, the price-plotting is simple. The daily paper furnishes the necessary data – high, low, close and
volume of sales. Plot the high, plot the low, and join the two points with a vertical
line to give the day’s range. The closing price is an important part of any complete
daily stock chart; it is noted by a short, fine, horizontal line, extending across the vertical range line, just far enough to be noted.
– 16 –

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

Both opening and closing prices may, of course, be plotted if desired but we consider practical only the plotting of closing prices. It is seldom that opening prices
show material change from the previous close and they are not nearly so important
as the closing or ‘‘last’’ price.
Moreover, we feel that what advantage is gained by including the first or opening
price is more than lost by the tendency toward confusion in trying to include too
much and thus impairing the basic picture. If both the opening and closing are plotted then the opening price is noted by a horizontal mark to the left of the day’s range
and the closing price by a similar mark to the right of the range line.

Volume of Sales
Volume of sales is another important detail of the complete daily stock chart, and is
plotted by a vertical line somewhat similar to the price range from a fixed base line.
Take any horizontal, heavy line near the top or the bottom of the chart and let it represent zero, marking it on the vertical scale line at the left-hand margin, low enough
or high enough not to interfere, for the present, with the price picture.
If volume of sales is normally low for the stock let each heavy line above the zero
line represent 20,000 shares traded per day in that particular issue. If volume is normally heavy, or likely to become so, let each heavy line represent 100,000 shares of
volume. Plot the volume line by a vertical line, on the same vertical co-ordinate line
as the price range for the same day, extending the volume line upward from the zero
mark to the point on the volume scale representing the total volume of trading for
that day.
It is more satisfactory to try to keep the volume scale at the bottom of the chart.
This entails placing the price scale high enough so that the days of high volume will
not run up into the price range. If they threaten to do so, on abnormally heavy trading days, the chartist runs them up as high as practical and then simply breaks the
vertical line with small dots at its top, to show that the exact volume scale is being
temporarily disregarded, and then writes the actual volume of total sales above the
dotted line in small figures. This may conceivably become confusing if continued for
several days so only the figure for whole thousands of shares is written in, and noted
as small as possible.

Shifting the Volume Chart
If, however, the price range of the stock has declined for several months and has
dropped so low on the chart that it interferes with even only normal volume at the
bottom of the sheet, then the logical procedure is to take the liberty of lifting the
entire volume scale and moving it from the bottom of the chart to the top, so that it
– 17 –

STUDY I

now appears far above the price range instead of below it.
This, of course, breaks the continuity of the volume portion of the chart but it is a
liberty which the student may take when he is keeping his own charts, rather than
cutting off the sheet at the difficult point and starting a new one with the price scale
high enough not to conflict with the volume. It is a sort of emergency move for use
only in special periods of abnormal activity or rapid price movement.
In any case, such a move does not seriously impair the efficacy of the picture, since
it is an easy matter to compare the two portions of the volume chart, with the base
line at the bottom of the sheet for the first period of time covered, and the later portion at the top of the sheet. When moving the volume chart to the upper portion of
the chart it is advisable, of course, still to place the zero, or base, line for volume low
enough so that it will not habitually tend to run off the top of the sheet.

The Time Scale
The scale at the bottom of the chart is the date scale and marks, for future reference,
the continuous passage of time over which the chart extends. It is a simple affair, for
each vertical line counts as one day of trading. In commencing the chart on a new
stock the first day of price range and volume is properly dated. The practical type of
chart paper will have its vertical lines so close together that it would be confusing to
try to enter the date of each successive day. The student may decide upon his own
system. He may enter the date only on Saturdays, or Mondays, or at any interval so
long as he maintains the regularity of that interval throughout the time duration of
the entire chart.

Holidays on the Time Scale
Many stock charts skip one day’s vertical line for holidays on the New York Stock
Exchange, or even for Sundays, but we do not approve of such practice. From a theoretical, as well as a practical standpoint, it seems highly logical to completely
ignore days on which the New York Stock Exchange is closed, no matter for what
reason, unless, of course, the closing should be extended over a long period of time,
as at the opening of the World War in 1914, or the bank holidays in March, 1933.
So long as there is no opportunity for free and open trading in any stock or in the
general market it appears illogical to leave a blank vertical line where the range and
volume record should naturally appear. If such blanks are left it tends to distort the
true pictorial record of trading which is the basis for chart reading and analysis of
technical action.
To make our meaning perfectly clear let us assume, that, for any reason whatever,
the New York Stock Exchange decided to suspend trading on Tuesday and Wednes– 18 –

TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

day of a certain week. In such case, no empty spaces on the vertical lines would be
left on the chart. The range for Thursday would follow on the very next vertical line
after Monday.
Monday’s trading picture, in the normal sequence, always follows immediately
after Saturday’s, without any space left for the Sunday holiday. This theory is the
chief objection to yearly co-ordinate paper on which there is a line, dated, for each
day of the entire year. Of course, this objection applies to some extent also to special
stock chart papers which provide a time scale divided in sixths, but these sheets at
least omit Sundays.
On the other hand, however, it seems quite logical to leave vacant vertical lines on
days when the stock exchange is open as usual but when no transactions are
recorded in the individual stock being charted. This is an entirely different matter,
for in such a case there was ample opportunity to trade, and the fact that no trades
were made is an integral part of the trading history and should thus be included in
the chart picture.
In such cases we may adopt the simple expedient of leaving the vertical range line
blank but inserting a small x, or zero, slightly below the base line on the volume
scale to show that that day has been recorded but the volume of sales was zero.
Some chartists include a dotted vertical line on the price range scale in such a case,
showing the closing bid and asked price, but, in our opinion, this merely clouds the
chart picture and serves no very adequate purpose.
