
4

PROLOGUE

undetected patterns. We have been reading lengthy and complex
messages in just about any manifestation of nature that presents
jaggedness (such as the palm of a hand, the residues at the bottom of
Turkish coffee cups, etc.). Armed with home supercomputers and
chained processors, and helped by complexity and "chaos" theories, the
scientists, semi-scientists, and pseudoscientists will be able to find
portents. Second, we need to take into account the costs of mistakes; in
my opinion, mistaking the right column for the left one is not as costly
as an error in the opposite direction. Even popular opinion warns that
bad information is worse than no information at all.
However interesting these areas could be, their discussion would be a
tall order. In addition, they are not my current professional specialty.
There is one world in which I believe the habit of mistaking luck for skill
is most prevalent - and most conspicuous - and that is the world of
trading. By luck or misfortune, that is the world in which I operate. It is
my profession, and as such it will form the backbone of this book. It is
what I know best. In addition, business presents the best (and most
entertaining) laboratory for the understanding of these differences. For
it is the area of human undertaking where the confusion is greatest and
its effects the most pernicious. For instance, we often have the mistaken
impression that a strategy is an excellent strategy, or an entrepreneur a
person endowed with "vision", or a trader an excellent trader, only to
realize that 99.9% of their past performance is attributable to chance,
and chance alone. Ask a profitable investor to explain the reasons for his
success; he will offer some deep and convincing interpretation of the
results. Frequently, these delusions are intentional and deserve to bear
the name "charlatanism".
If there is one cause for this confusion between the left and the right
sides of our table, it is our inability to think critically - we may enjoy
presenting conjectures as truth. We are wired to be like that. We will see
that our mind is not equipped with the adequate hardware to handle
probabilities; such infirmity even strikes the expert, sometimes just the
expert. A critical mind, on the other hand, is someone who has the guts,
when confronting a given set of information, to attribute a large share of
its possible cause to the left column.
The 19th-century cartoon character, pot-bellied bourgeois Monsieur
Prudhomme, carried around a large sword with a double intent:

5 PROLOGUE

primarily to defend the Republic against its enemies, and secondarily to
attack it should it stray from its course. In the same manner, this book
has two purposes: to defend science (as a light beam across the noise of
randomness), and to attack the scientist when he strays from his course
(most disasters come from the fact that individual scientists do not have
an innate understanding of standard error or a clue about critical
thinking). As a practitioner of uncertainty I have seen more than my
share of snake-oil salesmen dressed in the garb of scientists. The greatest
fools of randomness will be found among these.
This author hates books that can be easily guessed from the table of
contents - but a hint of what comes next seems in order. The book is
composed of three parts. The first is an introspection into Solon's
warning, as his outburst on rare events became my lifelong motto. In it
we meditate on visible and invisible histories. The second presents a
collection of probability biases I encountered (and suffered from) in my
career in randomness - ones that continue to fool me. The third
concludes the book with the revelation that perhaps ridding ourselves of
our humanity is not in the works; we need tricks, not some grandiose
moralizing help. Again the elders can help us with some of their ruses.

PART I
" 4 *

SOLON'S WARNING - SKEWNESS,
A S Y M M E T R Y , INDUCTION

f
roesus, King of Lydia, was considered the richest man of his time.

C

To this day Romance languages use the expression "rich as
Croesus" to describe a person of excessive wealth. He was said to be
visited by Solon, the Greek legislator known for his dignity, reserve,
upright morals, humility, frugality, wisdom, intelligence, and courage.
Solon did not display the smallest surprise at the wealth and splendor
surrounding his host, nor the tiniest admiration for their owner. Croesus
was so irked by the manifest lack of impression on the part of this
illustrious visitor that he attempted to extract from him some
acknowledgment. He asked him if he had known a happier man than
him. Solon cited the life of a man who led a noble life and died while in
battle. Prodded for more, he gave similar examples of heroic but
terminated lives, until Croesus, irate, asked him point-blank if he was
not to be considered the happiest man of all. Solon answered: "The
observation of the numerous misfortunes that attend all conditions
forbids us to grow insolent upon our present enjoyments, or to admire a
man's happiness that may yet, in course of time, suffer change. For the
uncertain future has yet to come, with all variety of future; and him only
to whom the divinity has [guaranteed] continued happiness until the end
we may call happy."1
The modern equivalent has been no less eloquently voiced by the
baseball coach Yogi Berra, who seems to have translated Solon's

10

SOLON'S

WARNING

outburst from the pure Attic Greek into no less pure Brooklyn English
with "it ain't over until it's over", or, in a less dignified manner, with "it
ain't over until the fat lady sings". In addition, aside from his use of the
vernacular, the Yogi Berra quote presents an advantage of being true,
while the meeting between Croesus and Solon was one of these
historical facts that benefited from the imagination of the chroniclers, as
it was chronologically impossible for the two men to have been in the
same location.
Part I is concerned with the degree to which a situation may yet, in
the course of time, suffer change. For we can be tricked by situations
involving mostly the activities of the Goddess Fortuna - Jupiter's
firstborn daughter. Solon was wise enough to get the following point;
that which came with the help of luck could be taken away by luck (and
often rapidly and unexpectedly at that). The flipside, which deserves to
be considered as well (in fact it is even more of our concern), is that
things that come with little help from luck are more resistant to
randomness. Solon also had the intuition of a problem that has obsessed
science for the past three centuries. It is called the problem of induction.
I call it in this book the black swan or the rare event. Solon even
understood another linked problem, which I call the skewness issue; it
does not matter how frequently something succeeds if failure is too
costly to bear.
Yet the story of Croesus has another twist. Having lost a battle to the
redoubtable Persian king Cyrus, he was about to be burned alive when
he called Solon's name and shouted (something like) "Solon, you were
right" (again this is legend). Cyrus asked about the nature of such
unusual invocations, and he told him about Solon's warning. This
impressed Cyrus so much that he decided to spare Croesus' life, as he
reflected on the possibilities as far as his own fate was concerned. People
were thoughtful at that time.

ONE

An illustration of the effect of randomness on social pecking
order and jealousy, through two characters of opposite
attitudes. On the concealed rare event. How things in modern
life may change rather rapidly, except, perhaps, in dentistry.

Nero Tulip
HIT BY LIGHTNING

ero Tulip became obsessed with trading after witnessing a strange
scene one spring day as he was visiting the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange. A red convertible Porsche, driven at several times the city
speed limit, abruptly stopped in front of the entrance, its tires emitting
the sound of pigs being slaughtered. A visibly demented athletic man in
his thirties, his face flushed red, emerged and ran up the steps as if he
were chased by a tiger. He left the car double-parked, its engine running,
provoking an angry fanfare of horns. After a long minute, a bored
young man clad in a yellow jacket (yellow was the color reserved for
clerks) came down the steps, visibly untroubled by the traffic

N

12

SOLON'S

WARNING

commotion. He drove the car into the underground parking garage perfunctorily as if it were his daily chore.
That day Nero Tulip was hit with what the French call a coup de
foudre, a sudden intense (and obsessive) infatuation that strikes like
lightning. "This is for me!", he screamed enthusiastically - he could not
help comparing the life of a trader to the alternative lives that could
present themselves to him. Academia conjured up the image of a silent
university office with rude secretaries; business, the image of a quiet
office staffed with slow thinkers and semi-slow thinkers who express
themselves in full sentences.

TEMPORARY SANITY

Unlike a coup de foudre, the infatuation triggered by the Chicago
scene has not left him close to a decade-and-a-half after the incident. For
Nero swears that no other lawful profession in our times could be as
devoid of boredom as that of the trader. Furthermore, although he has
not yet practiced the profession of high-sea piracy, he is now convinced
that even the occupation of pirate would present more dull moments
than that of the trader.
Nero could best be described as someone who randomly (and
abruptly) swings between the deportment and speech manners of a
church historian and the verbally abusive intensity of a Chicago pit
trader. He can commit hundreds of millions of dollars in a transaction
without a blink or a shadow of second thoughts, yet agonize between
two appetizers on the menu, changing his mind back and forth and
wearing out the most patient of waiters.
Nero holds an undergraduate degree in ancient literature and
mathematics from Cambridge University. He enrolled in a Ph.D.
program in statistics at the University of Chicago but, after completing
the prerequisite coursework, as well as the bulk of his doctoral research,
he switched to the philosophy department. He called the switch "a
moment of temporary sanity", adding to the consternation of his thesis
director who warned him against philosophers and predicted his return
back to the fold. He finished writing his thesis in philosophy. But not the
Derrida continental style of incomprehensible philosophy (that is,

IF

YOU'RE

SO

RICH

WHY

AREN'T

YOU

SO

SMART?

.

13

incomprehensible to anyone outside of their ranks, like myself). It was
quite the opposite; his thesis was on the methodology of statistical
inference in its application to the social sciences. In fact, his thesis was
indistinguishable from a thesis in mathematical statistics - it was just a
bit more thoughtful (and twice as long).
It is often said that philosophy cannot feed its man - but that was not
the reason Nero left. He left because philosophy cannot entertain its
man. At first, it started looking futile; he recalled his statistics thesis
director's warnings. Then, suddenly, it started to look like work. As he
became tired of writing papers on some arcane details of his earlier
papers, he gave up the academy. These academic debates bored him to
tears, particularly when very small minute points (invisible to the noninitiated) were at stake. Action was what Nero required. The problem,
however, was that he selected the academy in the first place in order to
kill what he detected was the flatness and tempered submission of
employment life.
After witnessing the scene of the trader chased by a tiger, Nero found
a trainee spot on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the large exchange
where traders transact by shouting and gesticulating frenetically. There
he worked for a prestigious (but eccentric) local, who trained him in the
Chicago style, in return for Nero solving his mathematical equations.
The energy in the air proved motivating to Nero. He rapidly graduated
to the rank of self-employed trader. Then, when he got tired of standing
on his feet in the crowd, and straining his vocal cords, he decided to seek
employment "upstairs", that is, trading from a desk. He moved to the
New York area and took a position with an investment house.
Nero specialized in quantitative financial products, in which he had an
early moment of glory, became famous and in demand. Many investment
houses in New York and London flashed huge guaranteed bonuses at
him. Nero spent a couple of years shuttling between New York and
London, attending important "meetings" and wearing expensive suits.
But soon Nero went into hiding; he rapidly pulled back to anonymity the Wall Street stardom track did not quite fit his temperament. To stay a
"hot trader" requires some organizational ambitions and a power hunger
that he feels lucky not to possess. He was only in it for the fun - and his
idea of fun does not include administrative and managerial work. He is
susceptible to conference room boredom and is incapable of talking to

14

SOLON'S

WARNING

businessmen, particularly those run-of-the-mill variety. Nero is allergic
to the vocabulary of business talk, not just on plain aesthetic grounds.
Words like "game plan", "bottom line", "how to get there from here",
"we provide our clients with solutions", "our mission" and other
hackneyed expressions that dominate meetings lack both the precision
and the coloration that he prefers to hear. Whether people populate
silence with hollow sentences, or if such meetings present any true merit,
he does not know; at any rate he did not want to be part of it. Indeed
Nero's extensive social life includes almost no business people. But
unlike me (I can be extremely humiliating when someone rubs me the
wrong way with inelegant pompousness), Nero handles himself with
gentle aloofness in these circumstances.
So, Nero switched career to what is called proprietary trading.
Traders are set up as independent entities, internal funds with their own
allocation of capital. They are left alone to do as they please, provided
of course that their results satisfy the executives. The name proprietary
comes from the fact that they trade the company's own money. At the
end of the year they receive between 7% and 12% of the profits
generated. The proprietary trader has all the benefits of self
employment, and none of the burdens of running the mundane details
of his own business. He can work any hours he likes, can travel at a
whim and engage in all manner of personal pursuits. It is paradise for an
intellectual like Nero who dislikes manual work and values unscheduled
meditation. He has been doing that for the past ten years, in the
employment of two different trading firms.

MODUS OPERANDI

A word on Nero's methods. He is as conservative a trader as one can be
in such a business. In the past he has had good years and less than good
years - but virtually no truly "bad" years. Over these years he has slowly
built for himself a stable nest egg, thanks to an income ranging between
$300,000 and (at the peak) $2,500,000. On average, he manages to
accumulate $500,000 a year in after-tax money (from an average income
of about $1,000,000); this goes straight into his savings account. In
1993, he had a flat year and was made to feel uncomfortable in his

IF

YOU'RE

SO

RICH

WHY

AREN'T

YOU

SO

SMART?

.

15

company. Other traders made out much better, so the capital at his
disposal was severely reduced, and he was made to feel undesirable at the
institution. He then went to get an identical job, down to an identically
designed workspace, but in a different firm that was friendlier. In the fall
of 1994 the traders who had been competing for the great performance
award blew up in unison during the worldwide bond market crash that
resulted from the random tightening by the Federal Reserve Bank of the
United States. They are all currently out of the market, performing a
variety of tasks. This business has a high mortality rate.
Why doesn't Nero make more money? Because of his trading style or perhaps his personality. His risk aversion is extreme. Nero's objective
is not to maximize his profits, so much as it is to avoid having this
entertaining money machine called trading taken away from him.
Blowing up would mean returning to the tedium of the university or the
non-trading life. Every time his risks increase, he conjures up the image
of the quiet hallway at the university, the long mornings at his desk
spent in revising a paper, kept awake by bad coffee. No, he does not
want to have to face the solemn university library where he was bored to
tears. "I am shooting for longevity", he is wont to say.
Nero has seen many traders blow up, and does not want to get into
that situation. Blow up in the lingo has a precise meaning; it does not
just mean to lose money; it means to lose more money than one ever
expected, to the point of being thrown out of the business (the
equivalent of a doctor losing his license to practice or a lawyer being
disbarred). Nero rapidly exits trades after a predetermined loss. He
never sells "naked options" (a strategy that would leave him exposed to
large possible losses). He never puts himself in a situation where he can
lose more than, say, $1,000,000 - regardless of the probability of such
an event. That amount has always been variable; it depends on his
accumulated profits for the year. This risk aversion prevented him from
making as much money as the other traders on Wall Street who are
often called "Masters of the Universe". The firms he has worked for
generally allocate more money to traders with a different style, like John
whom we will encounter soon.
Nero's temperament is such that he does not mind losing small
money. "I love taking small losses", he says. "I just need my winners to
be large". In no circumstances does he want to be exposed to those rare

16

SOLON'S

WARNING

events, like panics and sudden crashes that wipe a trader out in a flash.
To the contrary, he wants to benefit from them. When people ask him
why he does not hold on to losers, he invariably answers that he was
trained by "the most chicken of them all", the Chicago trader Stevo who
taught him the business. This is not true; the real reason is his training in
probability and his innate skepticism.
There is another reason why Nero is not as rich as others in his
situation. His skepticism does not allow him to invest any of his own
money outside of treasury bonds. He therefore missed out on the great bull
market. The reason he offers is that it could have turned out to be a bear
market and a trap. Nero harbors a deep suspicion that the stock market is
some form of an investment scam and cannot bring himself to own a stock.
The difference with people around him who were enriched by the stock
market was that he was cash-flow rich, but his assets did not inflate at all
along with the rest of the world (his treasury bonds hardly changed in
value). He contrasts himself with one of those startup technology
companies that were massively cash-flow negative, but for which the
hordes developed some infatuation. This allowed the owners to become
rich from their stock valuation, and thus dependent on the randomness of
the market's election of the winner. The difference with his friends of the
investing variety is that he did not depend on the bull market, and,
accordingly, does not have to worry about a bear market at all. His net
worth is not a function of the investment of his savings - he does not want
to depend on his investments, but on his cash earnings, for his enrichment.
He takes not an inch of risk with his savings, which he invests in the safest
possible vehicles. Treasury bonds are safe; they are issued by the United
States Government, and governments can hardly go bankrupt since they
can freely print their own currency to pay back their obligation.

NO W O R K ETHICS

Today, at 39, after 14 years in the business, he can consider himself
comfortably settled. His personal portfolio contains several million
dollars in medium maturity Treasury Bonds, enough to eliminate any
worry about the future. What he likes most about proprietary trading is
that it requires considerably less time than other high-paying

IF

YOU'RE

SO

RICH

WHY

AREN'T

YOU

SO

SMART?

.

17

professions; in other words it is perfectly compatible with his nonmiddle-class work ethics. Trading forces someone to think hard; those
who merely work hard generally lose their focus and intellectual energy.
In addition, they end up drowning in randomness; work ethics, Nero
believes, draw people to focus on noise rather than the signal (the
difference we established in Table P.l on page 3).
This free time has allowed him to carry on a variety of personal
interests. As Nero reads voraciously and spends considerable time in the
gym and museums, he cannot have a lawyer's or a doctor's schedule.
Nero found the time to go back to the statistics department where he
started his doctoral studies and finished the "harder science" doctorate
in statistics, by rewriting his thesis in more concise terms. Nero now
teaches, once a year, a half-semester seminar called History of
Probabilistic Thinking in the mathematics department of New York
University, a class of great originality that draws excellent graduate
students. He has saved enough money to be able to maintain his lifestyle
in the future and has contingency plans perhaps to retire into writing
popular essays of the scientific-literary variety, with themes revolving
around probability and indeterminism - but only if some event in the
future causes the markets to shut down.

THERE ARE ALWAYS SECRETS

Nero's probabilistic introspection may have been helped out by some
dramatic event in his life - one that he kept to himself. A penetrating
observer might detect in Nero a measure of suspicious exuberance, an
unnatural drive. For his life is not as crystalline as it may seem. Nero
harbors a secret, one that will be discussed in time.

John the High-Yield

Trader

Through most of the 1990s, across the street from Nero's house stood
John's - a much larger one. John was a high-yield trader, but he was not

18

SOLON'S

WARNING

a trader in the style of Nero. A brief professional conversation with him
would have revealed that he presented the intellectual depth and
sharpness of mind of an aerobics instructor (though not the-physique). A
purblind man could have seen that John had been doing markedly better
than Nero (or, at least, felt compelled to show it). He parked two topof-the-line German cars in his driveway (his and hers), in addition to
two convertibles (one of which was a collectible Ferrari), while Nero
had been driving the same VW cabriolet for almost a decade - and still
does.
The wives of John and Nero were acquaintances, of the health-club
type of acquaintance, but Nero's wife felt extremely uncomfortable in
the company of John's. She felt that the lady was not merely trying to
impress her, but was treating her like someone inferior. While Nero had
become inured to the sight of traders getting rich (and trying too hard to
become sophisticated by turning into wine collectors and opera lovers),
his wife had rarely encountered repressed new wealth - the type of
people who have felt the sting of indigence at some point in their lives
and want to get even by exhibiting their wares. The only dark side of
being a trader, Nero often says, is the sight of money being showered on
unprepared people who are suddenly taught that Vivaldi's Four Seasons
is "refined" music. But it was hard for his spouse to be exposed almost
daily to the neighbor who kept boasting of the new decorator they just
hired. John and his wife were not the least uncomfortable with the fact
that their "library" came with the leather-bound books (her readings at
the health club was limited to People Magazine but her shelves included
a selection of untouched books by dead American authors). She also
kept discussing unpronounceable exotic locations where they would
repair during their vacations without so much as knowing the smallest
thing about the place - she would have been hard put to explain in
which continent the Seychelles Islands were located. Nero's wife is all
too human; although she kept telling herself that she did not want to be
in the shoes of John's wife, she felt as if she had been somewhat
swamped in the competition of life. Somehow words and reason became
ineffectual in front of an oversized diamond, a monstrous house, and a
sports car collection.
