
To foil the putative copycats, he decided to issue a new class of shares. Each B share—or “Baby B”—was
equal to 3.33 percent, or 1/30, of a pricy A share.
He had great fun with the B shares, writing: “Neither Mr. Buffett nor Mr. Munger would currently buy
Berkshire shares at that price, nor would they recommend that their families or friends do so.” He added
that “current shareholders will not suffer any diminution in per-share intrinsic value, no matter how many
Class B shares the Company decides it is necessary to sell.”9
By selling an unlimited amount of stock, they ensured that the price would not rise because of more demand
than supply. “You don’t want people who think of it as something that can double, you know. And you can
create your own market action for a while. I could have been a hero for a year as all the money poured into
a fixed supply of stock. Instead, we said we would sell as much of this stuff as the world wants, and that way
there is no way it can be a hot stock.”
At the same time, the inverted logic of selling stock that you wouldn’t buy yourself, and explicitly saying so,
pleased Buffett enormously. Moreover, issuing the B shares fulfilled a duty to his shareholder “partners.” All
that cash pouring in from the B shares would be a pretty good deal for them.
No CEO had ever done such a thing before. A small forest of trees was felled in media coverage of Buffett’s
honesty. Yet investors gobbled up the B shares anyway. Buffett thought them foolish and said so privately
and often. Yet there was no denying it was enormously flattering that they did, for they were clearly buying
only because of him. He would have been secretly disappointed had the B share offering been a flop. The B
shares were a Buffett no-risk deal: His shareholders won, and Buffett won, no matter how the offering turned
out.
The Baby Bs forever changed the character of Buffett’s “club.” After May 1996, forty thousand new owners
could call themselves shareholders. The next year he moved the meeting to the grimy old Ak-Sar-Ben
Coliseum, and 7,500 people showed up. They spent $5 million at the Nebraska Furniture Mart. The meeting
turned into Woodstock for Capitalists, or BRKfest. At the 1998 shareholder meeting, ten thousand people
came. Yet as the money and the people and the fame came rolling in, an underlying shift took place in the
world in which Buffett worked that would have profound effects on him and everybody else.
There really was no such thing as “Wall Street” anymore. Now financial markets were a string of blinking
terminals connected by computers hooked up to the Internet that reached every corner of the world. A guy
named Mike Bloomberg, whom Salomon had been dumb enough to fire back in the eighties, had created a
special computer that captured every piece of financial information that anyone could possibly want. It made
graphs, it made tables, it did calculations, it gave news, it gave quotes; it could do historic comparisons and
set up competitions between companies and bonds and currencies and commodities and industries for
whoever was lucky enough to have a Bloomberg terminal on his or her desk.
By the early 1990s, the Bloomberg terminal was becoming ubiquitous. The Bloomberg saleswoman had
called Berkshire Hathaway for three years in a row. “Nope” was the answer every time. Buffett felt that
following the market minute to minute and manipulating computers was not the way to invest. Finally it
became obvious even to computer-averse Buffett that to trade bonds you had to have a Bloomberg terminal.
But the Bloomberg sat some distance from Buffett’s office and he never looked at it; that was the job of
Mark Millard, the bond trader.10
***
The advent of the Bloomberg terminal, symbol of the new computerized trading, mirrored the ongoing
struggle over Salomon’s identity, which continued within the firm. Its laggard businesses had never gotten
back on their feet. In 1994, Maughan had tried to realign pay at Salomon on the theory that employees should
shoulder the same risk as shareholders. When times were good, they would get bonuses, but when times were
bad, they would suffer as well. There were people inside the firm who agreed with him.11 But that was not

the standard anywhere else on Wall Street, so thirty-five senior people walked out the door. Buffett was
disgusted with the employees’ unwillingness to share the risk.
Deprived of Meriwether to bonus-pimp for them, the arbs fought for their share. Buffett was willing to pay
them for results—the firm still made most of its money from arbitrage—but increasing competition made it
harder for them to produce.
Arbitrageurs make a bet that a temporary gap of prices between similar or related assets will eventually
tighten. For example, the bet may be whether two nearly identical bonds will trade at a closer price.12 With
so much new competition, the easy trades had become scarcer. The arbs took larger positions with more risk.
When they were losing, they doubled down and increased the size of their trades. In both cases, they did so
because margins on trades were falling, and doing bigger trades, often using debt, helped offset that.
The rules of the racetrack said not to do so, because you don’t have to make it back the way you lost it. The
reason is the math of losing money, which works like this: If someone has a dollar and she loses fifty cents,
she has to double her money to make back what she’s lost. That’s difficult to do. It is tempting to borrow
another fifty cents for the next bet. That way you only have to make fifty percent (plus the interest you owe
on the loan) to get back whole—much easier to do. But borrowing the money doubles your risk. If you lose
fifty percent again, you’re history. The loss has wiped out all your capital. Hence Buffett’s sayings: Rule
number one, don’t lose money. Rule number two, don’t forget rule number one. Rule number three, don’t go
into debt.
The arbs’ strategy, however, assumed that their estimate of value was right. Therefore, when the market
moved against them, they only had to wait to make the money back. But “risk” defined this way—in terms of
volatility—presumes the investor can be patient and wait. Of course, anyone who borrows to invest may not
have that luxury of time. Moreover, to actually enlarge a losing trade required extra capital stashed
somewhere that could be forked over on a moment’s notice if the need arose. And capital has an opportunity
cost.
Larry Hilibrand lost $400 million—an enormous sum—arbitraging the difference in interest rates on
mortgage-backed bonds. He was convinced that he could make back the loss on the mortgage arbitrage if the
firm would double his bet. Buffett agreed with Hilibrand in this instance and gave him the money for the
trade—which in fact reversed to become profitable.
The arbs had an almost supernatural belief in their own abilities, and as their corner of the market became
crowded, they wanted to expand into even more types of arbitrage that involved more variables and less
certainty. They relied heavily on computer models driven by complex mathematics, but always said these
were only guideposts. Buffett and Munger felt that using models to make investment decisions was like
driving a car on cruise control. The driver might think he was fully alert and attentive, but would find out
differently when the road turned winding, rain-slicked, and full of traffic.
What the arbs really wanted, however, even more than capital to invest, was J.M. During Salomon’s
recovery, Meriwether waited on the sidelines at first while the arbs begged to bring him back. But while
Deryck Maughan made polite noises, everybody knew he did not want Meriwether back. Nevertheless,
Buffett and Munger had given a thumbs-up, with some conditions. Meriwether had to have supervision. He
could return to his old position but would have to report to Maughan, with less freedom to run his operation.
Unwilling to work under a shorter leash, Meriwether had broken off negotiations and in 1994 went off to
found his own hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management. It would operate the same way as the bond
arbitrage unit at Salomon, except that Meriwether and his partners got to keep the profits.
One by one, Meriwether’s key lieutenants left Salomon to join him at the new harbor-front offices of
Long-Term Capital Management in Greenwich, Connecticut. Deprived of his biggest moneymakers, Deryck
Maughan saw the “for sale” sign heading for Buffett’s block of stock and began planning for the day when
Buffett would wash his hands of Salomon.13

In his 1996 shareholder letter, Buffett said that “virtually all stocks” were overvalued. Whenever the market
ran hot it was because Wall Street was in vogue. That year, Maughan thought it timely to pitch the restaurant
in front of Salomon’s casino to Sandy Weill, CEO of Travelers Insurance, as the anchor tenant in a global
financial shopping mall that could compete with Merrill Lynch. Weill supposedly still resented Buffett for the
sweet deal Berkshire got after Weill’s squeeze-out in the Fireman’s Fund sale more than a decade earlier. He
distrusted the arbitrage casino, but he saw an opportunity for the restaurant chain on a global scale. When he
bought Salomon for Travelers, some observers felt that since Solly hadn’t done well under Buffett, Weill saw
it as a chance to beat Buffett at his own game. Buffett hailed Weill for the decision as a genius at building
shareholder value.14 And Travelers paid $9 billion for Salomon, bailing Buffett out of his problem-child
investment.15
Meriwether, who knew that Buffett liked owning casinos, had gone to Omaha with one of his partners to try
to raise money for Long-Term Capital for its February 1994 launch. They ate the now-obligatory dinner at
Gorat’s, where J.M. pulled out a schedule over his steak to show Buffett different probabilities of results and
how much money Long-Term could make or lose. The strategy involved earning tiny profits on many
thousands of trades, leveraged by at least twenty-five times the firm’s capital. The highest loss that
Long-Term contemplated was twenty percent of its assets, the odds of which it estimated at no more than one
in a hundred.16 Nobody estimated the odds of losses bigger than that. (If they did, no one would invest; the
numbers wouldn’t make sense. The projections in virtually all these types of models in every financial
business always assumed the maximum “earthquake”-type loss could never happen—because the expected
returns were never high enough to compensate investors for taking that risk.)
The name Long-Term came from the fact that investors were locked in. Meriwether knew that if he started
losing money, he needed the investors to stay until the losses turned around. But so much leverage, combined
with no way to cap the risk completely, made Buffett and Munger uncomfortable.
“We thought they were very smart people,” says Munger. “But we were a little leery of the complexity and
leverage. We were very leery of being used as a sales lead. We knew others would follow if we got in.”
Munger thought Long-Term wanted Berkshire as a “Judas goat.” “The Judas goat led the animals to slaughter
in the stockyards,” he says, recalling Omaha. “The goat would live for fifteen years, and of course the
animals that followed it would die every day as it betrayed them. Not that we didn’t admire the intellect of
the people at Long-Term.”17
Long-Term charged its clients two cents off every dollar under management every year that they invested,
plus a quarter of any profits it earned. Clients signed up for the prestige, but the “invest with a genius”
approach put off other funds and firms on Wall Street. Nevertheless, it raised $1.25 billion, the largest
hedge-fund start-up in history. The old arb team at Salomon now worked together in secrecy, with no outside
interference and no more sharing of the profits with other parasitic Salomon departments. Indeed, the fund
smoked in its first three years, quadrupling its investors’ money. By the end of 1997, Long-Term had
amassed $7 billion of capital. Then competition from start-up hedge funds depressed returns. Meriwether sent
$2.3 billion of money back to investors; the rest was all the market could digest. The hedge fund in
Greenwich was now running more than $129 billion in assets—and a like amount of debt—on only $4.7
billion of capital. In a near-instant replication of Buffett’s steady accumulation of wealth, through the magic
of fees earned on borrowed money, nearly half of the capital belonged to the partners themselves.18 Despite
the fifty-year-old Meriwether’s difficulty making eye contact, he and his firm had a swagger to match their
brilliant reputations, and the partners took full advantage of the fund’s position to dictate terms to its clients,
to the fifty-something banks from which it borrowed, and to its brokers (in many cases these parties were one
and the same).
Beating Buffett’s record was now the goal of most money managers in worldwide finance. Some thought
Meriwether had at least an unconscious grudge against Buffett for failing to protect him at Salomon, then
subsequently not hiring him back.19 Unbeknownst to anyone, Long-Term Capital was shorting Berkshire

Hathaway, on the theory that BRK was overpriced relative to the value of the stocks that it owned.20 Not
only that, Long-Term set up a Bermuda reinsurance company, Osprey Re, named after the copper osprey
that sank its talons into helpless prey in the fountain outside Long-Term’s building. Osprey Re was going to
insure earthquakes, hurricanes, and similar natural disasters—it was, in other words, entering Ajit Jain
catastrophe reinsurance territory. The ditches on the roadside of the insurance highway were filled with
wreckage. Buffett, the soul of prudence, had barely escaped himself once or twice in his younger days.
Whenever a novice came along, better find the keys to the tow truck.
Gradually, as Long-Term’s coffers swelled and imitators followed for the next several years, through early
summer of 1998, lenders collectively began to realize that, as periodically happens, they had gotten too
euphoric about the prospects that all these people to whom they had lent money would pay them back.
Long-Term’s competitors started dumping their dodgier positions as interest rates rose. That pushed down
prices and set off a cycle of selling. But Long-Term had bet the opposite way, selling the safest assets and
buying the riskiest, which were relatively cheaper. Its intricate models basically said that over time the
financial markets were becoming more efficient, so the prices of risky assets would converge toward the
prices of safer assets. Its biggest trades were a formulaic guess that the market would become less volatile,
meaning that as the market bounced around, it would oscillate in smaller arcs. And historically that had been
so. But as history had also shown, generally did not mean always. Long-Term knew that. It had made
investors lock in their capital long enough to be safe—or so it thought.
On August 17, 1998, Russia suddenly defaulted on its ruble debt, meaning it would not pay its bills. When a
major government stiffs its lenders, worldwide financial markets shudder. Investors began dumping
everything in sight. A money manager had warned Long-Term, early on, that its strategy of eking out teensy
profits on a zillion trades was like “picking up nickels in front of a bulldozer.”21 Now—surprise—the
bulldozer turned out to have a Ferrari engine, and it was racing toward them at eighty miles an hour.
On Sunday, August 23, “I was playing bridge on the computer. I picked up the phone, and it was Eric
Rosenfeld at Long-Term.” The boyish Rosenfeld, forty-five years old and one of Meriwether’s key
lieutenants, was the person who had had the brain-numbing job of going through thousands of Mozer’s trades
at Salomon and reconstructing what went wrong. Buffett liked Rosenfeld. Now he had been deputized by
Meriwether to cut back the portfolio’s size by selling the firm’s merger arbitrage positions. “I hadn’t heard
from him for years. With fear in his voice, Eric started to talk about me taking out their whole big stock
arbitrage position, six billion dollars’ worth. They thought stock arbitrage was mathematical.”22
Responding reflexively, Warren Buffetted Rosenfeld. “I just said to Eric, I would take certain ones but not
all of them.”
By a few days later, the market’s gyrations had cost Long-Term half its capital. The partners had spent a
week talking to everybody in their well-connected database, trying to raise money before they had to report
this dire news to their investors on August 31. No dice. Now they agreed that Larry Hilibrand—the
superrationalist whose sobriquet on Wall Street was still “the $23 million man,” for the outsize bonus that had
set Mozer off on his tear—would make a pilgrimage to Omaha and reveal what Long-Term owned.
The next day the Dow dropped four percent in what the Wall Street Journal referred to as a “global margin
call,” with investors panicking and selling. Buffett picked up Hilibrand at the airport and drove him back to
Kiewit Plaza. The modesty of Buffett’s smaller office, staffed by a handful of people and piled with
Coca-Cola memorabilia, contrasted markedly with Long-Term’s enormous digs in Greenwich, which featured
two pool tables and a three-thousand-square-foot gym staffed by a full-time trainer.
Hilibrand had gone deep into debt to pump up his personal investment in the firm, leveraging the leverage
with which Long-Term had already leveraged itself. He spent the day going over every position the firm
owned and stressing the incredible opportunity he was offering to Buffett.23 “He wanted me to put in capital.
He described the seven or eight big fundamental positions. I knew what was happening with relationships
and on prices in these areas. I was getting more interested as time went along, because they were crazy
relationships and spreads. But he was proposing a deal to me that didn’t make any sense. They thought they
had time to play the hand out. But I said no, so that was that.” Buffett told him, “I am not an investor in

other people’s funds.”24 He was only interested as an owner.
Long-Term didn’t want an owner, only an investor. It came close to finding somebody else, but then he
backed out.25 By month-end, when it had to report to its investors, the fund had lost $1.9 billion—almost half
of its capital—through a historically unusual combination of stock-market declines and almost hysterical
aversion to risk in the bond markets.26 Since the model had contemplated losses of twenty percent as being a
one-in-one-hundred-year event—like a moderate West Coast earthquake—this was somewhat like a
Category 4 hurricane hitting New York City. Meriwether wrote his investors a letter saying losses of half the
fund’s money were a “shock,” but “the opportunity set in these trades at this time is believed to be among
the best that LTCM has ever seen…. The Fund is offering you the opportunity to invest in the Fund on
special terms related to LTCM fees.”27 Long-Term was behaving as though it could raise capital to wait out
the crisis and profit from its turnaround. But with the kind of leverage it had taken on, it didn’t have that
option. This was the fallacy of defining risk as anything other than losing money. Long-Term had not
prepared for that. The firm’s insular culture and years of getting its way had blinded the partners to the reality
that no investor would put in money to save it without also taking control.
The day he read this, Buffett wrote a letter to a colleague and forwarded Meriwether’s entreaty, saying:
Attached is an extraordinary example of what happens when you get 1) a dozen people with an average IQ of
160; 2) working in a field in which they collectively have 250 years of experience; 3) operating with a huge
percentage of their net worth in the business; 4) employing a ton of leverage.28
Anything times zero is zero, Buffett said. A total loss is a “zero.” No matter how small the likelihood of a
total loss on any given day, if you kept betting and betting, the risk kept stacking up and multiplying. If you
kept betting long enough, sooner or later, as long as a zero was not impossible, someday a zero was one
hundred percent certain to show up.29 Long-Term, however, had not even tried to estimate the risk of a loss
greater than twenty percent—much less a zero.
In September the earthquake kept rumbling. Long-Term searched desperately for money, having now lost
sixty percent of its capital. Other traders had started putting the squeeze on the fund, shorting positions they
knew Long-Term owned because they knew Long-Term needed to sell, which would force prices lower.
Investors were fleeing anything risky in favor of anything safe, to a point that Long-Term’s models had never
considered possible because it made no economic sense to them. Long-Term hired Goldman Sachs, which
came in as a partner to buy half the firm. It needed $4 billion, an almost unimaginable sum for a hedge fund
in distress to raise.
Goldman Sachs got in touch with Buffett to see if he was interested in a bailout. He wasn’t. However, he
would consider teaming with Goldman to buy the entire portfolio of assets and debt. Together they would be
strong enough to wait the crisis out and trade the positions deftly for a profit. But Buffett had a condition: no
Meriwether.
Long-Term owed money to a subsidiary of Berkshire. It owed money to people who owed money to
Berkshire. It owed money to people who owed money to people who owed money to Berkshire. “Derivatives
are like sex,” Buffett said. “It’s not who we’re sleeping with, it’s who they’re sleeping with that’s the
problem.” As Buffett headed to Seattle that Friday to meet the Gateses and embark on a thirteen-day “Gold
Rush” trip from Alaska to California, he called a manager and told him, “Accept no excuses from anyone
who doesn’t post collateral or make a margin call. Accept no excuses.”30 He meant that if the Howieequivalents out there paid the rent one day late, then seize their farms.
The next morning he, Susie, the Gateses, and three other couples flew to Juneau to helicopter over the ice
fields. They cruised up the fjords to view huge blue icebergs and waterfalls cascading over threethousand-foot cliffs. But as Buffett sat politely through a slide presentation on glaciology on board the ship
that evening, his mind wandered to whether Goldman Sachs would be able to put together a bid for
Long-Term. Predatory sellers had pushed prices so far down that Long-Term was a cigar butt. An
