
A : [say this to everyone now and I’ve been saying it most recently
in the following terms. I have a career as a back tester. Then, on

50


THE 100-PIP TRADER

the side, I have a part-time job and that’s being a trader [laughter].
So yeah, I still engage in that process of testing every day. In fact,
before we had the phone call today, I’ve been working with another
set of moving averages on another timeframe chart together with
people who have come out to my office to have a back testing
fiesta, as 1 like to call it. My entire office is organized so that groups
of people can enthusiastically engage in the process of testing
together.

Q.: 80 no one in the office knows Easy Language or any other
programming language?

A : Lactually now know Easy Language well enough to program
most of what I do, and additionally I work with at least two different
programmers if I needed to help optimize mechanical systems if
I chose to do so. But it’s very seldom that I'll optimize something
or program it until I actually have already proven that it works
just the way it is. So I might program it or optimize it in order to
facilitate the process of sounding off alarms or alerting me to the
opportunities, but I still don’t engage in any type of mechanical
trading whatsoever, meaning I never let the computer make the
entries and the exits.

Q.: 80 you back test more for reference and to create a founda-
tion?

A: Yes, absolutely. It’s a scientific process: hypothesis (the ideas
for a trading system), then experimentation, then results, and so
forth. If can’t verify it, | won’t trade it. If you and I plotted a ran-
dom indicator on price charts, on any timeframe, on any currency
pair, with at least 5,000 to 10,000 bars of data, and locked ourselves
in a room for six months, we could build a system from that one
indicator. It’s all about verification and experimentation for me. I
have no actual preference for one type of methodology, whether it
be fundamental analysis, price action analysis, order flow analysis,

S1


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

support and resistance trading, or astrology [laughter]. As long as
it can be verified, historically, Il take that preponderance of evi-
dence and say at least it shows a statistical advantage, historically.
And although past results are not indicative of future performance
exactly, they certainly provide a lot of evidence to support some
methodology that I’m considering. And if we don’t have any sta-
tistical basis for what we're trading? Then we're just taking the
random walk down Wall Street, as they say, and what good is
random trading?

Q.: How far back do you usually test?

A : Well, when I did short-term trading, which is any timeframe
below one hour, I generally don’t go back any further than the
advent of the euro, meaning I’m trying to take advantage of a
current market. I want to actually experiment with the market in a
similar way back then as it is to now. So I do not want to experiment
with the 15-minute charts in a time where the Deutsche mark and
the Italian lira and the Spanish pesetas were all basically floating
and affecting volume. I won’t do anything short term any further
back than 2000-2001. If I’m experimenting with the daily charts or
something longer term, I’m more willing to go back into the mid
to late 1990s. But if I go back too far, I’m going to go back to a
time when currency trading was all done with the good old boys
club and they were all using rotary phones. It feels uncomfortable
to me to go back any further than that.

Q.- Yes, the market was traded very differently back then.

A : Exactly. Traders were writing down their orders and the British
pound/U.S. dollar currency pair would have one-hour candles that
were 100 pips large each time. It doesn’t make as much sense to
me to expect the market to be similar then as it is now.

52


THE 100-PIP TRADER

Q-m the beginning we talked about how you focus primarily
on technical analysis. However, over the past few years have you
incorporated any aspect of news in your trading?

A : On a weekly basis I actually draft what I call “crib sheets” or
“cheat sheets” about economic fundamentals and I'll take an 8.5
by 11 sheet of paper and I'll write out major economics statistics
from around the world. I accumulate that information using free
resources on the Internet or paid resources like Bloomberg, and I
keep a regular accounting of statistics from all over the world.

Then I laminate those cheat sheets and I actually take them
in with me into the shower in the morning and I'll just put them
against the wall and, because they're laminated, they stick against
the wall and I just memorize and track economic statistics from
around the world. So that when I’m taking longer-term trades, for
instance, trades that are going to last from a day to as much as one,
two, or three weeks, I understand the underlying economic funda-
mentals. For instance, I might understand that inflation and wage
increases are still really strong in Australia, which might lead the
Australian central bank to either increase or keep their high base
interest rate. | might understand that, at the same time, Japan has
an economy that is finally coming out of a deflationary period, and
that interest rates are possibly going to rise over the next 18 months.
I might understand simultaneously that economic data coming out
from the U.S. shows that the Federal Reserve is likely to pause on
interest rates and then go into a cycle of loosening monetary policy.
If I understand those background economic fundamentals, it gives
me a little bit more information on why I’m taking the longer-term
trades that I’m picking. I generally never take a longer-term trade
or a shorter-term trade solely based on any type of economic fun-
damentals, meaning it won’t be the reason I picked the trade. But
it could factor into how long I stay in the trade. It could factor into
whether I feel more confident or less confident in a trade. Oil is a
perfect example, I track oil and I watch the Canadian dollar and its
response to oil prices. So I may use fundamental analysis as part
of the picture. But I never exclusively use fundamental analysis to
make a decision about a trade.

53


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q Now would you ever use fundamental analysis as a reason to
not get into the trade?

A : I'd use it to some degree. For example, I might not short the
British pound against the Japanese yen for any extended length of
time knowing that an interest rate differential is going to create
some sort of significant transaction cost to hold a short British
pound/Japanese yen trade for anything longer than a few days. So
I might be more reluctant to hold something longer, and I might
be reluctant to even initiate that type of a position in the first
place knowing those type of things about fundamentals. Although
I have in the past made short-term trades immediately following
major economic events such as the nonfarm payrolls report, it has
been quite some time now since I have done it. I think that it is
absolutely far more dangerous than it ever used to be. Far easier
to lose a significant amount of money and it has become, on the
retail investing side something of a scheme or a trick that people
want to teach other people to try and do that becomes a really,
really quick way to lose a lot of money. It’s sort of a get-rich-quick-
lottery/slot-machine-type mentality. So I will rarely participate in
any short-term moves around economic events. I'll usually let the
market settle down, and I'll just buy or sell depending upon how
it fits into the bigger picture.

: It’s interesting that you talk about interest rates or carry. Do
you ever factor it into your shorter-term trades, or just longer-term
i)
ones

A : Into my longer-term traders, absolutely. My good friend and
trading partner, Maxwell Fox, and I did a long-term interest rate
study that tracked the interest rates, the monthly average or the
monthly base rate for the Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, the
New Zealand Reserve Bank, the Bank of Japan, the U.S. Federal
Reserve, and the Swiss Central Bank and we plotted rate differ-
entials from the early ’70s, I can’t remember the exact year, but it
was 1974 or 1976, all the way through to the present, and then we

54


THE 100-PIP TRADER

tracked the average monthly spot price for each of the currency
pairs that would be affected individually. What we generally found
was that spot prices lag interest rate movements quite a bit. For
example, in August 1990, differential between the pound and the
yen interest rate peaked at about 10.5 percent—meaning that the
Bank the England has an astoundingly higher interest rate than
the Bank of Japan. I believe the Bank of England had a base rate
at 15 percent and the Bank of Japan had a base rate of something
like 4 percent, and what we found was even after that differential
started to come down to 10 percent, the spot price continued to
rise afterwards, meaning it took a while for those carry trades to
actually unwind. There wasn’t as quick of a process of unwind-
ing. It didn’t turn on dime. Actually, spot prices took a while to
catch up.

So, returning to your question, in my longer-term trading anal-
ysis, I might take into account the fact that although interest differ-
entials are converging or diverging, it takes the spot price a while
to catch up with some of that interest rate movement. But it does,
in fact, historically tend to catch up with the interest rate differ-
ential. So if there’s any primary long-term fundamental tool that I
use in forecasting currency movements, it’s definitely interest rate
differentials from nation to nation.

Q.- How many hours a day do you spend trading?

A : Three to six hours per day, which includes the planning of
trades and analysis, and so forth. The rest of the time I write, answer
e-mail, and spend time with my family or my other community
responsibilities.

Q.- what is your typical day like?

A : If you look at my day from a 24-hour perspective, it goes
something like this:

SS


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

I go into the office at about 7:00 A.M. Eastern time, and I trade
the short-term New York session if a setup comes along, and if
I haven’t already reached my profit goal for the week. I answer
e-mails and keep an eye on long-term charts at the same time. I
also chat on instant messaging with some of the best traders that
I know. By 12 noon, I’m done with the short-term trading, and
I move on to producing content for my Web site, and planning
long-term trades. In the afternoon I try as often as possible to also
go back home and spend time with my family, wrestle with my son,
or play with my baby daughter, and help out around the house. In
the evenings I do more long-term analysis, read with my wife and
kids, help put the kids to bed, and then do more long-term analysis.

I don’t often get up in the middle of the night any longer,
but when I do, that is a perfect time to check on some of the
longer-term trading.

Q.: What is your goal for the week?

A : [have a point target in my trading account, a goal for a number
of points of profit, or pips, that I want to make per week. But I
don’t have a dollar-based earnings target. I find that thinking too
much about a certain dollar amount, or an item that I want to buy,
takes my focus off what the market is able to give me, and puts
the emphasis dangerously upon what I want the market to give
me. I’ve pretty much consistently decided that Rob Booker is a 50-
to 100-pip a week trader, meaning I understand the limits of my
trading capacity—and over 50 to 100 points of profit, I start getting
a little bit crazy. I become a little bit less disciplined and a little
bit more euphoric to put it mildly. So I have not generally done a
lot to increase that pip target over time even though systems that
I build might produce bigger gains.

This is actually something that I strongly believe in. There are
two things that I haven’t mentioned so far that I feel are really
important, and one of them is that there is a misconception that,
in order to be considered successful as a trader, one has to earn
a certain dollar amount per week, or per month, or per day. One

56


THE 100-PIP TRADER

thing that I’ve tried to communicate to beginning traders is to never
be concerned with comparing your own pip results or percentage
results or dollar results to anyone else except for yourself. I’m
not in competition to make more money than Joe Trader. I’m in
competition to make sure that I make enough money to support
my family. So I’ve been to expos and conferences and I’ve spoken
around the world and traders who are new to trading will say,
“Well, Rob, how many pips did you make last year, or this month?”
and T’'ll discuss it with them and they'll say, “Well that is far less
than Joe Trader, or so and so making.”

And I will tell them all the time, well I wasn’t aware that Joe
Trader was trying to pay my bills. I wasn’t aware that I was under
some demand to compete with anyone else. That’s really important
for me and has been a real benefit to me in the long run. Just to
remember that I’m not in competition with anybody else for a
certain type of gain. So, no, the answer is I have not generally
increased that goal and when I have increased that pip goal, I
found that I become somewhat overconfident after a series of wins
or too despondent after a series of losses. What I do when I trade
for 50 to 100 pips a week is if I have a good week, then the next
week after, I start it all over again. I reset the clock. I reset the pip
count to zero and if I have a bad week the next week when I start
back up it’s a blank slate. It’s a 50- to 100-pip week. I don’t have to
make back what I lost the week before. I just have to produce what
I know statistically I can produce. Not what I have to produce in
order to make up for a previous loss, or prove that I’m better than
someone else. I just have to take advantage of what ever comes my
way during the week to reach that goal.

Q.-That's a good point. So you don’t increase your positions the
next week to cover losses that you may have made the prior week?

A : [Laughter.] No and that’s always been troublesome for me
and when I have done that, its certainly where I’ve gotten into
the deepest pit, which is when I’ve had a really good week and
I’ve thought the market’s just going to shower me with sweet profit

S7


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

forevermore and I will never see another losing week. Well, usually
that’s right after the market’s ranging in exactly the way I like and
then it’s going to break out into a trend the week after and just
savagely beat me to a pulp. So I try to say never trade the last trade,
only trade the opportunity that is in front of me. Once I reach my
weekly goal, I either stop trading or reduce the size of the trades
so far that I can’t possibly do any damage to my account. The
overarching goal for me is to protect the account, then all I have
to do after that is make money every week and build the account
bit by bit. The most amazing financial discovery in the history of
humankind is the principle of compounded gains. I tell this to
every new trader: If you can build your account, bit by bit, you
will realize spectacular profits over the long run, even if it doesn’t
look like much in the short term. I might be overemphasizing this
point. But it has been important for me to remember that making
money as a trader means that I grind out regular profits, over and
over again, and focus on consistency, not on the big score or a huge

lottery-type payoff.

QO. Let's talk a little bit about your trading tactics. Do you typically
make your first trade more of a probative trade or do you go all
into the position?

A : It depends on which trading system I’m going to be employing.
If I’m taking a short-term trade based on the 15-minute chart in
the New York session, which I call a New York-session box trade,
I’m all in on the first trade and all out at the exit point, meaning
that it’s a point-A to point-B trade. It’s not based on a news event.
It’s not based on a spike that’s created by any fundamental analysis
necessarily. But it’s basically a support-and-resistance system that
triggers an entry and triggers an exit that is very well defined and
I’m all in from the start. On my long-term trading I am much more
likely to initiate a position with between 30 percent and 50 percent
of my total available position size for that trade and then add to
the position as it goes in my favor and is proving to be the right

58


THE 100-PIP TRADER

decision. I prefer not to add to losing positions or cost-average.
That has never worked for me personally.

Q.- what timeframe charts do you look at?

A : My favorite timeframe chart is the one-hour chart. That’s
where it all happens for me. In the past I’ve extensively used the
15-minute chart and others, but right now my main focus is on the
one-hour.

I often take positions on the one-hour chart and hold them
for a day or longer. I regularly hold these positions overnight, and
because I’ve got a defined risk and a specific profit target, I can just
let the trade go without my attention. Like most traders, I check on
my trades regularly (and somewhat compulsively), but I generally
try my best to let them run their course.

Q:s0 you basically range trade more in the short-term and trend
trade more in the long term then?

A : [Laughter.] Well it is exactly the opposite. Historically, I
look for breakouts into trends on the short-term charts and in the
long-term, I have been far more successful trading the corrective
patterns in ranging markets.

Q_: 80 how many positions do you generally have at the same
time?

A : When I first started trading, I would have a whole basket
of positions open at the same time. I might have six or seven
positions based on a similar system on a similar timeframe chart
across a variety of currency pairs. So I might take a position on the
British pound/U.S. dollar and then simultaneously take a position,
for instance, in the euro/Canadian dollar. Although I wouldn’t
necessarily be trading the same currency pair and they wouldn’t be
very correlated, the same fundamental principals would be used

59


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

to initiate the trade, affording only a minor bit of currency pair
diversification. But as I became more familiar with the currency
pairs, I preferred one over the other. It is far more likely that I
would actually trade one currency pair that I felt most comfortable
with and maybe on occasion initiate a total of two or three separate
positions at any given time.

Q: 80 basically a total of maybe three positions, no more than
that at any time?

A : Right.

Q: Do you ever average down?

A : I am not a proponent of adding to a losing position, and
recently I took a 6 percent loss on one account I manage, because
averaged down against my own rules and then could not—per my
money management guidelines—add enough later on. So I exited
the position at the maximum loss I allow myself to take, and boom!
The trade turned just a bit later on. Whenever I break my rules, I
get burned.

I prefer instead to add to winning positions, and those have
been my big winners. When I’m on the way to a profit target that I
have tested to be better than 80 percent accurate, there are stages
along the way where it makes sense for me to capitalize on the
good decision. It’s not enough for me to always just let it run the
course to profit—I want to maximize to the full extent the possible
profit because my equity is growing as the trade is profitable, I can
add positions and still keep my risk low.

[like to use the analogy of a relationship. If you are in a terrible
relationship, and you can see that it’s not working out the way that
you wanted to, you should end the relationship. We've all been in
relationships we should have ended more quickly. Trading is the
same—if I’m in a position that is not doing what I expected it to do,
I don’t need to last it out or put more time and effort into it. I get
out and move on. Conversely, if I am in a good relationship, I want

60


THE 100-PIP TRADER

to nurture it and let it grow. That’s like a winning trade. You want
to watch it grow, not cut it off. People who take half their profit off
from a winning position are doing, in my opinion, the same thing
as walking out on a perfectly good relationship.

QO: Are there any currency pairs that you avoid trading and any

currency pairs that you love to trade?

A : One of my favorite currency pairs to trade in the short term,
meaning the New York session in particular, during hours that
I'm actually awake when the market is moving is the euro to
the Canadian dollar (EUR/CAD). That’s one of my all time favorite
currency pairs in the short term. I also have a huge preference in
the short term for the British pound/U.S. dollar just because it’s
what I’ve traded the longest and traded the most. I strongly dislike,
and that’s putting it mildly, the euro/U.S. dollar in the short term.
I find that it’s heavily traded, and there’s a zillion levels of support
and resistance. That means it has far less likelihood to break out of
a range and travel very far or even stay within a range and travel
far, and so in the short term, it does not provide the kind of oppor-
tunities that I’m interested in at all. In the longer term, the British
pound/U.S. dollar is still my all-star favorite, all-time greatest cur-
rency pair ever. I love it the most. I don’t trade the euro/Canadian
dollar ever in the longer term, it’s really a shorter-term type of
currency pair.

Q what is it about the euro/Canadian dollar that makes it such
an interesting pair for you, because we are sure many traders have
never even looked at that currency pair?

A : Well, in the shorter term, it’s one of my favorites because if
it tends to breakout, there’s very often nobody on the other side
to catch it, meaning there’s not another set of orders on the other
side waiting for it to get to some level based on an option or large
stop-loss orders. I mean when the euro/Canadian dollar starts to
move, it is because there is actual real momentum behind it and

61


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

therefore it is not advisable to get in the way of that in a short-
term. However, in the longer term, it doesn’t tend to trend for
long periods of time very much and isn’t susceptible to the type of
analysis that I do on the longer term for other currency pairs and it
therefore simply does not test well for me in the longer term. So,
if it breaks out of a recent level of support or resistance that’s been
intact for a couple of days, it’s far less likely to stop very quickly
like the euro/U.S. dollar or even the British pound/U.S. dollar to
a certain extent. I attribute that to the fact that its not as heavily
traded, there’s not as many people waiting for it to get to certain
level and so it is sort of off the radar or not really paid attention to.
