To my wife Erifili

Intermarket Trading Strategies

For other titles in the Wiley Trading Series
please see www.wiley.com/finance

INTERMARKET TRADING STRATEGIES

Markos Katsanos

A John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., Publication

C 2008 Markos Katsanos
Copyright 

Published by

John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England
Telephone (+44) 1243 779777

Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on www.wiley.com
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or
otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a
licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London,
ECIN 8TS, UK, without the permission in writing of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate,
Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to
(+44) 1243 770620.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The Publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering professional
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
Other Wiley Editorial Offices
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 42 McDougall Street, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 6045 Freemont Blvd, Mississauga, ONT, L5R 4J3, Canada
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Katsanos, Markos.
Intermarket trading strategies / Markos Katsanos.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-75810-6
1. Investment analysis. 2. Portfolio management. I. Title.
HG4529.K376 2008
332.64—dc22
2008040290
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-0-470-75810-6 (HB)
Typeset in 10/12pt Times by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall, UK

Contents

Acknowledgments

ix

Introduction

xi

PART I

1

1 Intermarket Analysis

3

2 Correlation

17

3 Regression

33

4 International Indices and Commodities

41

5 The S&P 500

69

6 European Indices

85

7 Gold

93

8 Intraday Correlations

111

9 Intermarket Indicators

121

PART II

145

10 Trading System Design

147

11 A Comparison of Fourteen Technical Systems for Trading Gold

175

viii

Contents

12 Trading the S&P 500 ETF and the e-mini

189

13 Trading DAX Futures

201

14 A Comparison of a Neural Network and a Conventional System
for Trading FTSE Futures

215

15 The Use of Intermarket Systems in Trading Stocks

235

16 A Relative Strength Asset Allocation Trading System

247

17 Forex Trading Using Intermarket Analysis

261

18 Conclusion

293

Appendix A MetaStock Code and Test Specifications

297

Appendix B Neural Network Systems

357

Appendix C Rectangles

367

Glossary

371

Bibliography

385

Index

391

Acknowledgments

I am particularly indebted to Dr Evangelos Falaris, Professor of Economics at the
University of Delaware, who took the time to review selected chapters and offered
both technical and expositional comments.
Many thanks also to Murray Ruggiero, one of the world’s leading experts in
intermarket analysis, who contributed to improving the final version of the book by
making valuable comments and suggestions on a preliminary manuscript. Murray is
Vice President of Research and Development of TradersStudio, contributing editor
for Futures Magazine and author of several books on trading systems.
Special thanks to my wife, Erifili, for her love and patient support, and for putting
up with late nights, despite having no actual interest in the subject.
I also want to thank Jayanthi Gopalakrishnan, the editor of Technical Analysis of
Stocks & Commodities magazine, for encouraging me to write the articles for the
magazine and helping me later with the task of finding the best publisher for the
book. Many thanks also to Caitlin Cornish, my editor at John Wiley & Sons, and to
her assistant Aimée Dibbens, for their guidance and support during the publication
process.
It is difficult to appreciate the effort and hours that go into researching and writing a
book of this nature until you’ve had a chance to work on one yourself. The correlation
studies involved a huge amount of historical data and I would like to thank Peter Day
for helping out with the VBA to manage the data in Excel and Rubi Cabal, marketing
director at CSI data, for allowing me access to CSI’s correlation reports.
Finally, I would like to thank the technical support staff at Ward Systems Inc., and
also Lynn Dufrenne, Lead Support Representative at Equis Technical Support for
their help in solving the unavoidable software problems.

Introduction

With the emergence of the internet and international cross border trading, the world’s
futures and equity markets started to converge, making intermarket analysis an
essential constituent of technical analysis.
Single market technical analysis indicators were designed in the 1980s for national markets, and are no longer sufficient nor can be relied upon for analyzing the
constantly changing market dynamics.
But how do markets interact and influence each other and how can we use intermarket relationships to construct a viable technical system?
Because the answers have been so elusive, they became the motivation for my
research. The more I looked into it, the more I became convinced that there is clear and
incontrovertible evidence that the markets are linked to each other, and incorporating
intermarket correlations into a trading discipline can give a trading advantage. Two
years of research later, I finally came up with some rules and mathematical formulae
for intermarket trading.
It has been more than 15 years since John Murphy, a pioneer on the subject, wrote
his first book on intermarket analysis. The material in my book is based on original
research not published anywhere else and, unlike Murphy’s intuitive chart-based
approach, I am going to use mathematical and statistical principles to develop and
design intermarket trading systems appropriate for long- and short-term and even day
trading.
Although the book makes extensive use of market statistics obtained from hundreds
of correlation studies, the data and empirical findings are not its heart. They serve
as a background in developing the trading systems presented in the second part of
the book, as well as help shape our thinking about the way the financial markets
work.
The key difference between Intermarket Trading Strategies and other books on
trading lies in its philosophy. I believe that knowing how the markets work is, in the
end, more important than relying on a “black box” mechanical system that produced
profitable trades in the past but not even the creator of the system can fully explain

xii

Introduction

why. The focus of this book is how intermarket analysis can be used to forecast future
equity and index price movements by introducing custom indicators and intermarketbased systems. A total of 29 conventional and five neural network trading systems
are provided to trade gold, the S&P ETF (SPY), S&P e-mini futures, DAX and FTSE
futures, gold and oil stocks, commodities, sector and international ETF, and finally
the yen and the euro.
Naturally, past results are no guarantee of future performance.
Even so, the results of out-of-sample back-testing are compelling enough to merit
attention. Some results are more compelling. The multiple regression gold system,
presented in Chapter 11, returned an amazing $1.2 million of profits on a $100 000
initial equity. The stock index trading systems also produced impressive profits. The
profitability of the Standard & Poor’s e-mini intraday system was neither standard
nor poor, producing a 300 % profit during the test duration. Investors who prefer to
trade only stocks will find intermarket systems for trading oil and gold stocks in
Chapter 15. My favorite is the oil stock system which made more than $1.6 million
on an initial equity of only $100 000.
The foreign exchange (or Forex) market, which until recently was dominated by
large international banks, is gaining popularity among active traders, because of its
superior liquidity and 24-hour trading. Readers who are interested in forex trading
will find, in Chapter 17, an intermarket system for trading the yen which made over
$70 000 on an initial $3000 account. The EUR/USD is the most popular currency
pair among forex traders and the chapter on forex wouldn’t be complete without a
system for trading the euro. The next section in Chapter 17 presents two systems:
a conventional and a hybrid system. The latter is an excellent example of how you
can enhance a classic system by adding intermarket conditions. The hybrid system
improved considerably on the profitability of the traditional trend-following system,
almost doubling the profit factor while reducing drawdown.
The system design is fully described from the initial concept to optimization and
actual implementation. All systems are back-tested using out-of-sample data and the
performance statistics are provided for each one.
The MetaStock code for all systems is provided in Appendix A and a detailed
procedure for recreating the artificial neural network systems in NeuroShell Trader
is included in Appendix B.
The benefits of diversification, and an example of static portfolio diversification by
optimizing the portfolio allocation based on the desired risk and return characteristics,
are discussed in the first chapter and a dynamic portfolio allocation method, based
on market timing and relative strength, is included in Chapter 16.
The book is divided into two parts. Part I serves as a background to Part II and
includes an overview of the basics of intermarket analysis, correlation analysis in
Chapter 2 and custom intermarket indicators in Chapter 9.
Part II uses many of the concepts presented in Part I to develop custom trading
systems to trade popular markets like US and European stock index futures, forex
and commodities.

Introduction

xiii

The chapters in this book are divided as follows.

r The book begins with a discussion of the basic principles of intermarket analysis
and the benefits of portfolio diversification by including uncorrelated assets such
as commodities and foreign currencies.
r Chapter 2 explains the concept of correlation and the basic assumptions used.
r Chapter 3 explains the linear regression method used for predicting one security
based on its correlation with related markets. An example using the S&P, the VIX
and the Euro Stoxx is also included. Nonparametric regression (involving nonlinear
relationships) is also briefly discussed.
r Chapter 4 is an overview of major international financial, commodity and equity
indices including the DAX, the CAC 40, the FTSE, the Euro Stoxx 50, the Nikkei
225, the Hang Seng, the dollar index, the oil index, the CRB index, the Goldman
Sachs Commodity Index, the XAU, the HUI, and the Volatility Index (VIX).
r Chapter 5 examines the correlation between the S&P 500 and major US and
international equity, commodity and other indices.
r Chapter 6 examines long-term, short-term and even intraday correlations between
major European indices and stock index futures and explains how they can be
applied to develop trading systems.
r Chapter 7 is about gold and its correlation with other commodities, indices and
foreign exchange rates with special emphasis on leading/lagging analysis.
r In Chapter 8 of this book I examine intraday correlations, especially useful for
short-term traders. A leading/lagging correlation analysis between the S&P e-mini,
the Dow e-mini, DAX and Euro Stoxx futures is also included.
r Chapter 9 presents various custom intermarket indicators and explains how each
one can be used within the framework of a trading system. These include eight
new custom intermarket indicators, published for the first time in this book. The
MetaStock code for all indicators is included in Appendix A.
r The personal computer has revolutionized the creation and testing of trading systems. The inexpensive software takes out much of the work needed for testing,
allowing the trader to test endless permutations of rules and parameters. In Chapter
10, I present some techniques for developing a trading system and evaluating the test
results. I suggest methods of avoiding curve fitting and the illusion of excellence
created by optimization. I also discuss stop-loss and other money management
techniques. Finally, a brief introduction to neural network systems will explain the
basic principles of this alternative approach for designing trading systems.
r Chapter 11 compares the performance of 15 intermarket systems for trading gold
based on the intermarket indicators in Chapter 9 and using gold’s correlations with
the dollar index, the XAU and silver.
r Chapter 12 describes a long-term market timing system for trading the S&P ETF
(SPY) using a market breadth indicator, and for traders who prefer the emotionally
charged world of short-term trading, a hybrid system for trading the S&P e-mini
using 5-minute intraday correlation with Euro Stoxx 50 futures.

xiv

Introduction

r Chapter 13 presents intermarket systems for trading DAX futures based on its
correlation with Euro Stoxx and S&P 500 futures.

r Artificial neural network systems are gaining popularity but are they the panacea
that software vendors claim them to be? A comparison between a conventional rule-based system and a neural network strategy for trading the FTSE in
Chapter 14 will shed some light on this innovative trading method, exposing the
advantages and disadvantages of using neural network-based systems in predicting
future price movements using intermarket relationships.
r Oil and gold have been so far (through June 2008) two of the best performing
commodities in 2007–2008. For the benefit of readers who prefer to trade only
stocks, Chapter 15 presents examples of intermarket trading systems for trading oil
and gold stocks, using their correlation with the corresponding sector indices.
r Chapter 16 presents a dynamic asset allocation strategy by trading across different
asset classes according to their relative strength.
r Forex trading is also gaining popularity and the final chapter (which is, by the
way, the longest chapter of the book) is all about forex. Chapter 17 is divided
into four parts. The first part discusses fundamental and technical factors affecting
the foreign exchange markets and intermarket correlations between currencies,
commodities, interest rates and equities, with a brief explanation of the carry trade.
The correlation analysis included in the first part is used to develop an intermarket
system to trade the yen and a hybrid system for trading the euro. The Australian
dollar has received considerable attention lately as it is the favorite currency of
“yen carry” traders. The last part of this chapter contains fundamental factors
affecting the Australian dollar and its correlation with major international indices,
commodities and other currencies.
The systems presented in this book are by no means exhaustive, and they are limited
by space and the author’s imagination and experience. They are presented as a
challenge to the serious trader to reevaluate intermarket techniques as a working tool
and to introduce a testing framework which amalgamates both intermarket and classic
technical analysis indicators.
This book does not require any mathematical skills beyond those taught in high
school algebra. Statistical and correlation analysis is used throughout the book but
all of the theoretical tools are introduced and explained within. All other concepts
(such as indicators, trading system evaluation, neural networks, etc.) are motivated,
defined, and explained as they appear in the book.
Although all systems (except neural networks) are written in the MetaStock formula
language it is not necessary to purchase MetaStock in order to use them, as they are
fully explained in English and the MetaStock functions used are explained in the
Glossary.
Not long ago, I ran into an acquaintance who asked me why I need to write a book
about trading systems if I can make more money by trading in a day than by the
royalties from the book in a year. I don’t think that it makes a lot of sense to write a

Introduction

xv

book for money and I don’t know any author who became rich from writing (unless
the book is a huge success). There are, of course, other valid reasons that motivate
people to write books, like impressing your friends or establishing yourself as an
expert in the subject or even visibility and media coverage. Although I have to admit
that all these have crossed my mind, my main reason was the motivation to research
the highly complex subject of intermarket relationships and write down my findings
in an orderly, methodical and timely manner (which I wouldn’t have done had I not
had the deadlines imposed by my contract with the publisher).
I hope that readers will find the information useful and exploit my intermarket
indicators and strategies in order to detect profitable trading opportunities.

Part I

1
Intermarket Analysis

It’s not that I am so smart; it’s just that I stay with the problems longer.
–Albert Einstein

The basic premise of intermarket analysis is that there is both a cause and effect to
the movement of money from one area to another. Consider, for example, the price
of gold and the dollar. Because gold is denominated in US dollars, any significant
fluctuation of the dollar will have an impact on the price of gold, which in turn will
affect the price of gold mining stocks.
The strength and direction of the relationship between two markets is measured by
the correlation coefficient which reflects the simultaneous change in value of a pair
of numeric series over time.
Highly positively correlated markets can be expected to move in similar ways
and highly negatively correlated markets are likely to move in opposite directions.
Knowing which markets are positively or negatively correlated with a given market
is very important for gaining an understanding of the future directional movement of
the market you propose to trade.
Advancements in telecommunications have contributed to the integration of international markets. Sophisticated traders are starting to incorporate intermarket analysis
in their trading decisions through a variety of means ranging from simple chart analysis to correlation analysis. Yet the intermarket relationships hidden in this data are
often quite complex and not readily apparent, while the scope of analysis is virtually
unlimited.
But what is intermarket analysis?
The financial markets comprise of more than 500 000 securities, derivatives, currencies, bonds, and other financial instruments – the size of a small city. All interact
with each other to some extent and a seemingly unimportant event can cause a chain
of reactions causing a landslide of large-scale changes to the financial markets.

4

Intermarket Trading Strategies

Consider the following example: Let’s suppose that the Bank of Japan decides to
buy dollars in order to push the yen down. As a result Japanese stock prices will go
up as a weak yen will help boost profits for exporters. A sharp rise of the Nikkei will
in turn have a positive effect on all other Asian markets. The next morning European
markets, in view of higher Asian markets and in the absence of other overnight
news, will open higher. This will in turn drive US index futures higher and boost US
markets at open. In addition lower yen prices will encourage the “yen carry trade”,
i.e. borrowing yen at lower or near zero interest rates and buying higher yielding
assets such as US bonds or even emerging market equities, which in turn will push
bonds and equities higher. On the other hand, a scenario for disaster will develop if
the opposite happens and the yen rises sharply against the dollar. This will cause a
sharp unwinding of the “yen carry trade”, triggering an avalanche of sharp declines
in all financial markets.
But what might cause the yen to rise? The following is a possible scenario: As
we head into the economic slowdown, the carry trade money that has flowed into
risky cyclical assets is likely to fall in value. As a result, speculators in these assets
will cut their losses, bail out and repay their yen debts. This is a scenario for disaster
because when the yen rebounds against the dollar, it often snaps back very fast and
carry trades can go from profit to loss with almost no warning.
A popular chaos theory axiom (known as the “butterfly effect” because of the
title of a paper given by the mathematician Edward Lorenz in 1972 to the American
Association for the Advancement of Science in Washington, D.C. entitled “Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly’s Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado in
Texas?”) stipulates that a small change in the initial condition of the system (the
flapping of the wing) causes a chain of events leading to large-scale phenomena. Had
the butterfly not flapped its wings, the trajectory of the system might have been vastly
different.
A financial series would appear to be chaotic in nature, but its statistics are not
because, as well as being orderly in the sense of being deterministic, chaotic systems
usually have well defined statistics.
The rapid progress of global communications has contributed to the integration of
all international financial markets as the world has gotten smaller due to the ability to
communicate almost instantaneously. Relationships that were dismissed as irrelevant
in the past cannot be ignored any more as the globalization of the markets contributes
to a convergence of formerly unrelated markets.
Take a look at the comparison chart in Fig. 1.1. The S&P 500 is depicted with a
bold thick line. The second one however is not even a stock index. It is the Japanese
yen exchange rate (USD/JPY).
The next composite chart in Fig. 1.2 is of three stock indices. The first two (depicted
with a bar chart and thick line) are of the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite respectively. The third chart (thin line) is the Athens General Index which, surprisingly,
correlates better with the S&P 500 than its compatriot, the Nasdaq Composite.
