
47. MONEY MANAGEMENT

257

ates a negative mathematical expectation for you. No system for money
management can beat a negative expectation game over a period of time.

A Positive Expectation

If you know how to count cards in blackjack, you can have an edge against a
casino (unless they detect you and throw you out. Casinos love drunk gamblers but hate card counters). An edge lets you win more often than you lose
over a period of time. Good money management can help you make more
money frbm your edge and minimize losses. Without an edge, you might as
well give money to charity. In trading, the edge comes from a system that
delivers greater profits than losses, slippage, and commissions. No money
management method can rescue a bad trading system.
You can win only if you trade with a positive mathematical expectationa sensible trading system. Trading on hunches leads to disasters. Many
traders act like drunks wandering through a casino, going from game to
game. Slippage and commissions destroy those who overtrade.
The best trading systems are crude and robust. They are made of a few
elements. The more complex the systems, the more elements that can break.
Traders love to optimize their systems using past data. The trouble is, your
broker won't let you trade the past. Markets change, and the ideal parameters
from the past may be no good today. Try to de-optimize your system
instead -check how it would have performed under bad conditions. A robust
system holds up well when markets change. It is likely to beat a heavily optimized system in real world trading.
Finally, when you develop a good system, don't mess with it. Design
another one if you like to tinker. As Robert Prechter put it: "Most traders
take a good system and destroy it by trying to make it into a perfect system."
Once you have your trading system, it is time to set the rules for money
management.
47. MONEY MANAGEMENT
Suppose you and I bet a penny on a coin flip: Tails, you win, heads, you lose.
Suppose you have $10 of risk capital and I have $1. Even though I have less
money, I have little to fear-it would take a string of 100 losses to wipe me
out. We can play for a long time, unless two brokers get between us and
drain our capital by commissions and slippage.

258

RISK MANAGEMENT

The odds will dramatically change if you and I raise our bet to a quarter. If
I have only $1, then a string of only four losses will destroy me. If you have
$10, you can afford to lose a quarter 40 times in a row. A series of four
losses is likely to come much sooner than forty. All other factors being
equal, the poorer of two traders is the first to go broke.
Most amateurs think that "other factors" are far from equal. They consider
themselves brighter than the rest of us. The trading industry works hard to
reinforce that delusion, telling traders that winners get the money lost by
losers. They try to hide the fact that trading is a minus-sum game (see
Section 3). Cocky amateurs take wild risks, producing commissions for brokers and profits for floor traders. When they blow themselves out of the market, new suckers come in because hope springs eternal.
Survival First
The first goal of money management is to ensure survival. You need to avoid
risks that can put you out of business. The second goal is to earn a steady
rate of return, and the third goal is to earn high returns- but survival comes
first.
"Do not risk thy whole wad" is the first rule of trading. Losers violate it
by betting too much on a single trade. They continue to trade the same or
even a bigger size during a losing streak. Most losers go bust trying to trade
their way out of a hole. Good money management can keep you out of the
hole in the first place.
The deeper you fall, the more slippery your hole. If you lose 10 percent,
you need to gain 11 percent to recoup that loss, but if you lose 20 percent,
you need to gain 25 percent to come back. If you lose 40 percent, you need
to make a whopping 67 percent, and if you lose 50 percent, you need to
make 100 percent simply to recover. While losses grow arithmetically, the
profits that are required to recoup them increase geometrically.
You have to know in advance how much you can lose - when and at what
level you will cut your loss. Professionals tend to run as soon as they smell
trouble and re-enter the market when they see fit. Amateurs hang on and
hope.
Get Rich Slowly
An amateur trying to get rich quick is like a monkey out on a thin branch. He
reaches for a ripe fruit but crashes when the branch breaks under his weight.

47. MONEY MANAGEMENT

259

Institutional traders as a group tend to be more successful than private
traders. They owe it to their bosses, who enforce discipline (See Section 14).
If a trader loses more than his limit on a single trade, he is fired for insubordination. If he loses his monthly limit, his trading privileges are suspended
for the rest of the month and he becomes a gofer, fetching other traders coffee. If he loses his monthly limit several times in a row, the company either
fires or transfers him. This system makes institutional traders avoid losses.
Private traders have to be their own enforcers.
An amateur who opens a $20,000 trading account and expects to run it
into a million in two years is like a teenager who runs away to Hollywood to
become a pop singer. He may succeed, but the exceptions only confirm the
rule. Amateurs try to get rich quick but destroy themselves by taking wild
risks. They may succeed for a while but hang themselves, given enough
rope.
Amateurs often ask me what percentage profit they can make annually
from trading. The answer depends on their skills or lack of such and market
conditions. Amateurs never ask a more important question: "How much will
I lose before I stop trading and re-evaluate myself, my system, and the markets?" If you focus on handling losses, profits will take care of themselves.
A person who makes 25 percent profit annually is a king of Wall Street.
Many top-flight money managers would give away their firstborn child to be
able to top this. A trader who can double his money in a year is a star-as
rare as a pop musician or a top athlete.
If you set modest goals for yourself and achieve them, you can go very
far. If you can make 30 percent annually, people will beg you to manage
their money. If you manage $10 million-not an outlandish amount in
today's markets-your management fee alone can run 6 percent of that, or
$600,000 a year. If you make a 30 percent profit, you will keep 15 percent of
it as an incentive fee- another $450,000. You will earn over a million dollars a year trading, without taking big risks. Keep these numbers in mind
when you plan your next trade. Trade to establish the best track record, with
steady gains and small drawdowns.
How Much to Risk

Most traders get killed by one of two bullets: ignorance or emotion.
Amateurs act on hunches and stumble into trades that they should never take
due to negative mathematical expectations. Those who survive the stage of
virginal ignorance go on to design better systems. When they become more

260

RISK MANAGEMENT

confident, they lift their heads out of the foxholes-and the second bullet
hits them! Confidence makes them greedy, they risk too much money on a
trade, and a short string of losses blows them out of the market.
If you bet a quarter of your account on each trade, your ruin is guaranteed.
You will be wiped out by a very short losing streak, which happens even
with excellent trading systems. Even if you bet a tenth of your account on a
trade, you will not survive much longer.
A professional cannot afford to lose more than a tiny percentage of his
equity on a single trade. An amateur has the same attitude toward trading as
an alcoholic has toward drinking. He sets out to have a good time, but winds
up destroying himself.
Extensive testing has shown that the maximum amount a trader may lose on
a single trade without damaging his long-term prospects is 2 percent of his
equity. This limit includes slippage and commissions. If you have a $20,000
account, you may not risk more than $400 on any trade. If you have a
$100,000 account, you may not risk more $2000 on a trade, but if you have
only $10,000 in your account, then you can risk no more than $200 on a trade.
Most amateurs shake their heads when they hear this. Many have small
accounts and the 2 percent rule throws a monkey wrench into the dreams of
quick profits. Most successful professionals, on the other hand, consider the
2 percent limit too high. They do not allow themselves to risk more than 1
percent or 1.5 percent of their equity on any single trade.
The 2 percent rule puts a solid floor under the amount of damage the market
can do to your account. Even a string of five or six losing trades will not cripple your prospects. In any case, if you are trading to create the best track
record, you will not want to show more than a 6 percent or 8 percent monthly
loss. When you hit that limit, stop trading for the rest of the month. Use this
cooling-off period to reexamine yourself, your methods, and the markets.
The 2 percent rule keeps you out of riskier trades. When your system
gives an entry signal, check to see where to place a logical stop. If that
would expose more than 2 percent of your account equity -pass up that
trade. It pays to wait for trades that allow very close stops (see Chapter 9).
Waiting for them reduces the excitement of trading but enhances profit
potential. You choose which of the two you really want.
The 2 percent rule helps you decide how many contracts to trade. For
example, if you have $20,000 in your account, you may risk up to $400 per
trade. If your system flags an attractive trade with a $275 risk, then you may
trade only one contract. If the risk is only $175, then you can afford to trade
two contracts.

47. MONEY MANAGEMENT

261

What about pyramiding - increasing the size of your trading positions as
a trade moves in your favor? The 2 percent rule helps here too. If you show
profit on a trend-following position, you may add to it, as long as your
existing position is at a break-even level or better and the risk on the additional position does not exceed 2 percent of your equity.

Martingale Systems

Once you set your maximum risk per trade, you have to decide whether to
risk the same amount on every trade. Most systems vary the amount of
money at risk from trade to trade. One of the oldest money management systems is the martingale, originally developed for gambling. It has you bet a
greater amount after a loss, in order to "come back." Needless to say, this
approach has a great emotional appeal to losers.
A martingale player in a casino keeps betting $1 as long as he wins, but if
he loses, he doubles up and bets $2. If he wins, he ends up with a $1 profit
(-$I + $2) and goes back to betting $1. If he loses, he doubles up again and
bets $4. If he wins, he gets a $1 profit (-$I, -$2, +$4), but if he loses, he
doubles up and bets $8. As long as he keeps doubling up, his very first win
will cover all his losses and return a profit equal to his original bet.
A martingale system sounds like a no-lose proposition, until you realize
that a long run of bad trades will wipe out every gambler, no matter how
rich. At the extreme, a gambler who starts betting $1 and has 46 losses in a
row, has to bet $70 trillion on his 47th bet-more than the net worth of the
entire world (about $50 trillion). He is sure to run out of money or hit the
house limit much sooner than that. A martingale system is futile if you have
a negative or even-money expectation. It is self-defeating if you have a winning system and a positive expectation.
Amateurs love martingale systems because of their emotional appeal.
There is a common superstition that you can get unlucky only up to a point
and that bad luck is bound to change. Losers often trade more heavily after a
drawdown. A loser fighting to come back often doubles his trading size after
a loss. This is a very poor method of money management.
If you want to vary your trading size, logic requires you to trade more
when your system is in gear with the market and making money. As your
account grows, the 2 percent rule allows you to trade larger amounts. You
should trade less when your system is out of sync with the market and losing
money.

262

RISK MANAGEMENT

Optimal f

Some traders who develop computerized trading systems believe in trading
what they call the optimal f- an "optimal fixed fraction" of the account. The
fraction of capital they risk on any trade depends on a formula that is based
on the performance of their trading system and their account size. It is a
complex method, but whether you use it or not, you can borrow several
sound ideas from it.
Ralph Vince has shown in his book, Portfolio Management Formulas,
that: (1) optimal f keeps changing; (2) if you trade more than optimalf, you
gain no benefit and are virtually certain to go broke; (3) if you trade less than
optimal f, your risk decreases arithmetically but your profits decrease geometrically.
Trading at the optimal f is emotionally hard because it can lead to 85 percent drawdowns. It should be attempted only with true risk capital. The key
point here is that if you trade more than the optimal fraction, you are certain
to destroy your account. The lesson is: When in doubt, risk less.
Computerized testing of money management rules has confirmed several
old-timers' rules and observations. The true measure of any system's financial risk is its biggest losing trade. A drawdown depends on the length of an
adverse run, which can never be predicted. Diversification can buffer the
drawdowns. You can diversify by trading different markets and using different systems. Closely related markets such as currencies offer no diversification. A small trader is forced to follow a simple rule: Put all your eggs into
one basket and watch it like a hawk.
According to Vince, computer testing has proven several common
money management rules: Never average down; never meet a margin call;
if you must lighten up, liquidate your worst position; the first mistake is
the cheapest.

Reinvesting Profits
Pay attention to what you feel when you handle profits. Many traders feel
tom between a craving for a bigger and faster buck and a fear of losing. A
professional trader calmly removes some money from his account, just as
any other professional draws an income from his work. An amateur who
fearfully grabs a profit and buys something with it before he can lose it
shows little confidence in his ability to make money.
Reinvesting can turn a winning system into a losing one, but no method of

48. EXITING TRADES

263

reinvesting profits can turn a losing system into a winning one. Leaving
profits in your account allows you to make money faster by trading more
contracts or being able to establish long-term positions using wider stops.
Removing some of your profits provides a cash flow. The government also
wants its share in taFes.
There is no hard and fast rule for splitting your profits between reinvestment and personal use. It depends on your personality and the size of your
trading account. If you start with a small account, such as $50,000, you will
not want to drain profits from it. When your account is well into six figures,
you may begin treating it as an income-producing business.
You will need to make important personal decisions. Do you need
$30,000 or $300,000 a year to live on? Are you willing to cut spending in
order to leave more in your account? The answers to these questions depend
on your personality. Make sure to use your intellect and not your emotions
when you make these decisions.

48. EXITING TRADES
Taking a loss can be emotionally hard, but taking a profit can be even harder.
You can take a small loss automatically if you have the discipline to set a
stop the moment you enter a trade. Taking a profit requires more thought.
When the market moves in your favor, you need to decide whether to stay
put, get out, or add to your position.
An amateur can tie his mind into a knot trying to decide what to do about
a profit. He multiplies the number of ticks by their dollar value and feels a
surge of greed: Let the trade run, make even more money. Then the market
ticks against him, and he is hit with a jolt of fear: Grab that profit now,
before it melts. A trader who acts on his emotions cannot make rational decisions.
One of the worst mistakes of traders is counting money while they have
an open position. Counting money ties your mind into a knot. It interferes
with your ability to trade rationally. If you catch yourself counting paper
profits and thinking what you can buy with them -get rid of those thoughts!
If you cannot get rid of them, get rid of your position.
If a beginner cashes out too early, he kicks himself for leaving money on
the table. He decides to hang on the next time, overstays a trade, and loses
money. If a beginner misses a profit because of a reversal, he grabs the first
profit on the next trade and may well miss a major move. The market tugs on
the amateur's emotions and he jerks in response.

RISK MANAGEMENT

A trader who responds to his feelings instead of external reality is certain to
lose. He may grab a profit here and there but will eventually bust out, even if
his system gives him good trades. Greed and fear destroy traders by clouding
their minds. The only way to succeed in trading is to use your intellect.
Quality Before Money

The goal of a successful trader is to make the best trades. Money is secondary.
If this surprises you, think how good professionals in any field operate. Good
teachers, doctors, lawyers, farmers, and others make money - but they do not
count it while they work. If they do, the quality of their work suffers.
If you ask your doctor how much money he earned today, he won't be able
to answer (and if he can, you do not want him for a doctor). Ask your lawyer
how much money he made today. He may have a general idea that he put in
some billable hours, but not exactly how many dollars he made. If he counts
money while he works, you do not want him for a lawyer. A real pro devotes
all his energy to practicing his craft the best he can - not to counting money.
Counting money in a trade flashes a red light-a warning that you are
about to lose because your emotions are kicking in and they will override
your intellect. That is why it is a good idea to get out of a trade if you cannot
get money off your mind.
Concentrate on quality-on finding trades that make sense and having a
money management plan that puts you in control. Focus on finding good
entry points and avoid gambles. Then the money will follow almost as an
afterthought. You may count it later, well after a trade is over.
A good trader must focus on finding and completing good trades. A professional always studies the markets, looks for opportunities, hones his
money management skills, and so on. If you ask him how much money he
made on the current trade, he will have only a general idea of being a little or
a lot ahead of the game, or a little behind (he can never be a lot behind
because of tight stops). Like other professionals, he focuses on practicing his
craft and polishing his skills. He does not count money in a trade. He knows
that he will make money, as long as he does what is right in the markets.
Indicator Signals

If you use indicators for finding trades, use them also to get you out of
trades. If your indicators are in gear with the market when it is time to buy or
go short, use them to decide when it is time to sell or to cover.

48. EXITING TRADES

A trader often becomes emotionally attached to a trade. Profits give people a high, but even a loss can tingle the nerves, like a scary but exciting ride
on a roller coaster. When those indicator signals that flagged a trade disappear, get out of the market fast, regardless of your feelings.
For example, you may go long because a 13-week EMA has ticked up on
the weekly charts while daily Stochastic fell into its buy zone. If you go
long, decide in advance whether you will sell when daily Stochastic rallies
and becomes overbought or when the 13-week EMA turns down. Write
down your plan and keep it where you can always see it.
You may go short because weekly MACD-Histogram ticked down and
daily Elder-ray gave a sell signal. Decide in advance whether you will cover
when daily Elder-ray gives a buy signal or when weekly MACD-Histogram
turns up. You need to decide in advance which signals you will take. There
will be many signals-and the best time to decide is before you enter a trade.
Profit Targets, Elliott, and Fibonacci

I

I
1

i

j

Some traders try to establish profit targets. They want to sell strength when
prices hit resistance or buy weakness when prices reach support. Elliott
Wave theory is the main method for trying to forecast reversal points.
R. N. Elliott wrote several articles about the stock market and a book,
Nature's Law. He believed that every movement in the stock market could
be broken into waves, smaller waves, and subwaves. Those waves
explained every turning point and occasionally allowed him to make correct
predictions.
Those analysts who sell advisory services based on Elliott's methods
always come up with so-called "alternate counts." They explain everything
in hindsight but are not reliable in dealing with the future.
Fibonacci numbers and their ratios, especially 1.618, 2.618, and 4.236
express many relationships in nature. As Trudi Garland writes in her lucid
book Fascinating Fibonaccis, these numbers express the ratios between the
diameters of neighboring spirals in a seashell and in a galaxy, the number of
seeds in the adjacent rows of a sunflower, and so on. Elliott was the first to
point out that these relationships also apply to the financial markets.
Tony Plummer describes in his book Forecasting Financial Markets how
he uses Fibonacci ratios to decide how far a breakout from a trading range is
likely to carry. He measures the height of a trading range, trades in the direction of a breakout, and then looks for reversal targets by multiplying the
height of the range by Fibonacci numbers. Experienced traders combine

266

RISK MANAGEMENT

profit targets with other technical studies. They look for indicator signals at
the projected turning points. If indicators diverge from a trend that is
approaching a target, it reinforces the signal to .get out. Trading on targets
alone can be a tremendous ego boost, but the markets are too complex to be
handled with a few simple numbers.
