
C urrency Char ts Take Shape
Unlike candlestick patterns, traditional Western chart patterns usually
take the form of shapes that develop over a relatively long series of
bars or candles. Some of these shapes have been analyzed and traded
by technical analysts almost since the advent of financial charting.
Commonly, when most people think of charts and technical analysis, they often think of perhaps the most popular pattern, headand-shoulders. Although the head-and-shoulders formation can be
a solid, reliable pattern, there are a whole host of other potentially
profitable patterns that many traders use on an extensive basis.
Chart patterns can be classified by their most common role,
whether as a continuation pattern or a reversal pattern. Of course,
a continuation pattern will not always act as a continuation pattern.
It may sometimes act as a reversal pattern. The same is true for patterns that are commonly considered reversal patterns. But for the
purposes of classification, these patterns can be divided according to
their most common behavior.
For the vast majority of chart patterns, the technical analyst or
trader looks either for breakouts to the upside or breakdowns to the
downside. Once these patterns are broken, it is usually considered

82

c03.indd 82

1/13/09 9:59:12 AM

C u r r e n c y C h a r t s Ta k e S h a p e

a trigger to trade in the direction of the break. Often, the break is
false, and price will quickly return into the pattern from whence it
broke. But that is where proper risk management comes in. It is easy
to know where to place a stop loss on a break of a pattern. Wherever
the break is deemed false or no longer valid (usually back on the side
before the break), is where the stop loss should be placed. This will be
explained further in the section of Chapter 6 on risk management.
The basic structure of the most common chart patterns in foreign exchange trading will be described here. Further information
on trading chart patterns can be found in Chapter 5.
To begin with, Exhibit 3.15 shows illustrations of the most common reversal patterns.
Double tops and bottoms are both considered classic reversal
formations. As its name implies, the double top occurs when price
hits the same or similar price high twice consecutively after a major
uptrend. The two peaks are separated by a trough. The signal to

EXHIBIT 3.15

Reversal Chart Patterns
Double
Top

Triple
Top

Head-andShoulders Top

Double
Bottom

Triple
Bottom

Head-andShoulders Bottom

83

c03.indd 83

1/13/09 9:59:12 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

sell short comes on a subsequent breakdown of the lowest point
in the trough (support). The double bottom occurs when price
hits the same or similar price low twice consecutively after a major
downtrend. The two troughs are separated by a peak. The signal to
buy comes on a subsequent breakout of the highest point in the
peak (resistance).
Triple tops and bottoms are also considered classic reversal formations. The triple top occurs when price hits the same or similar price high three times consecutively after a major uptrend. The
peaks are separated by troughs. The signal to sell short comes on a
subsequent breakdown of the lowest trough (support). The triple
bottom occurs when price hits the same or similar price low three
times consecutively after a major downtrend. The troughs are separated by peaks. The signal to buy comes on a subsequent breakout of
the highest peak (resistance).
The well-known head-and-shoulders reversal pattern is similar to the triple top/bottom patterns. The primary difference lies in
the middle of the pattern. For example, in a head-and-shoulders
top, the middle peak (the head) is higher than the other two peaks
(the shoulders). In an inverted head-and-shoulders bottom, on the
other hand, the middle trough (the head) is lower than the other
two troughs (the shoulders). The line connecting the troughs in a
head-and-shoulders top, or the peaks in a head-and-shoulders bottom, is called the neckline. Breaks of this neckline are considered
trading signals.
Following are some of the most common continuation patterns
found on currency charts. Exhibit 3.16 displays the ubiquitous flag
and pennant patterns.

84

c03.indd 84

1/13/09 9:59:13 AM

C u r r e n c y C h a r t s Ta k e S h a p e

EXHIBIT 3.16

Flags and Pennants
Flags

Pennants

A flag is usually a smaller, shorter-term continuation pattern
that is characterized by a sharp move followed by a rectangle consolidation, and then by a continuation of the move prior to the flag.
Trades are signaled at the breakout/breakdown of the flag rectangle.
Flags are very common on foreign exchange charts.
A pennant is very similar to a flag in that it is also generally a
smaller, shorter-term continuation pattern. But after the initial sharp
move, the pennant forms a small triangle consolidation. This should
then be followed by a continuation of the move prior to the pennant.
Trades are signaled at the breakout/breakdown of the pennant triangle. Like flags, pennants are also very common on currency charts.
Also generally considered continuation patterns, the primary triangle variations are displayed in Exhibit 3.17.
Triangles are larger price consolidation patterns that are characterized by progressively decreasing volatility as the pattern develops.

85

c03.indd 85

1/13/09 9:59:13 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.17

Three Types of Triangles
Symmetrical
Triangle

Ascending
Triangle

Descending
Triangle

These common formations are most often considered continuation patterns. Symmetrical triangles are characterized by converging
sides, where neither of these sides is flat, or horizontal. Trades are
initiated at the triangle break.
Ascending triangles are also common continuation patterns, but
they are most often considered bullish. As such, they usually form
during uptrends as bullish continuation formations. An ascending triangle is characterized by a rising bottom line with a horizontal top
line. A breakout above the top resistance line in an ascending triangle
is considered a potential signal to buy.
Descending triangles are continuation patterns that are most
often considered bearish. As such, they usually form during downtrends as bearish continuation formations. A descending triangle is
characterized by a falling top line with a horizontal bottom line.
A breakdown below the bottom support line in a descending triangle is considered a potential signal to sell short.

86

c03.indd 86

1/13/09 9:59:13 AM

C u r r e n c y C h a r t s Ta k e S h a p e

EXHIBIT 3.18

Wedges and Rectangles
Falling Wedge

Rising Wedge

Rectangle

Somewhat like symmetrical triangles, wedges are characterized
by two converging lines, as shown in Exhibit 3.18. Unlike symmetrical triangles, however, the two sides of a wedge will both slope
in the same direction. Therefore, a rising wedge will have two sides
that both slope up, while a falling wedge will have two sides that
both slope down. Falling wedges after uptrends are considered bullish continuation patterns, while rising wedges after downtrends are
considered bearish continuation patterns. Trading signals are triggered on the breakout or breakdown of the wedge.
Similar to a parallel trend channel, but flat, a rectangle is a horizontal trading range bounded by two horizontal lines, as shown in
Exhibit 3.18. Rectangles frequently serve as pauses in a trend, and
therefore are often considered continuation patterns. At least two
touches on both the top and bottom of a rectangle are necessary for
the formation. Trades are signaled on the breakout or breakdown of

87

c03.indd 87

1/13/09 9:59:14 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

the rectangle. Incidentally, if a rectangle is of sufficient height it can
also be traded as a range, long at support and short at resistance.
The chart patterns just described are certainly far from an
exhaustive study of technical trading patterns. However, they represent the most important and most common patterns found on foreign exchange charts. Therefore, they comprise a solid introduction
to the world of chart pattern analysis. More information on strategies involving these patterns will be discussed in Chapter 5.

I ndicators of Change
No discussion of technical analysis tools would be complete without
mentioning some of the many mathematically derived indicators that
seem to have proliferated through the years. New indicators appear
all the time, promising to be the next miracle add-on to our price
charts. Up to now, though, there have been very few, if any, miracles.
The main issue with many of these indicators is that, for the
most part, they are lagging reflections of price. In other words, indicators are great at describing what price has done in the past, but
since they mostly just follow price action, many indicators are hardpressed to provide any reliable clue as to what might happen next.
This was discussed earlier in this chapter in the section on moving
averages, which are also considered lagging indicators. For this reason, many indicators are relegated to serving as secondary confirmation tools. Of course, it is true that no technical tool could ever
really tell the future. But many of the indicators that novice traders love to clutter up their charts with are not much more than a
repackaged version of price itself.

88

c03.indd 88

1/13/09 9:59:14 AM

Indicators of Change

That being said, there are some very useful indicators available
that can be extremely valuable in augmenting price action analysis.
Some of these are described briefly below.
Average True Range (ATR) is an exceptionally useful indicator that usually resides either vertically above or below the bar/
candle price chart. ATR is an average measure of recent volatility.
It is calculated as a moving average of a given past period of price
ranges. When the ATR has a high reading, recent volatility has been
high. When a low reading is given, recent volatility has been low.
ATR is used by technical currency traders to determine the recent
level of trading activity and volatility for a given currency pair. ATR
can also be used for setting logical stop losses and price targets based
on volatility, among other uses.
The Average Directional Index (ADX) also resides either vertically above or below the bar/candle price chart. ADX measures
the strength of the current trend, not the direction of the trend.
Strong trends, whether up or down, have high ADX readings, while
nontrending, ranging markets have low ADX readings. ADX is an
important indicator that can help a foreign exchange trader determine whether to use trend-trading techniques or range-trading
techniques.
Bollinger Bands are overlaid directly on the price bars/candles.
They consist of a simple moving average (SMA) with two additional
lines, one that is a certain number of standard deviations above the
SMA and the other that is the same number of standard deviations
below the SMA. By default, Bollinger Bands are usually set at a
20-period SMA with 2 standard deviations above and below the
moving average. But these settings can be readily changed to suit

89

c03.indd 89

1/13/09 9:59:14 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.19

Bollinger Bands

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

the trading environment. The primary purpose of the Bollinger
Bands indicator is to measure a currency pair’s volatility around the
mean. The Bands are often used to give indications of impending
volatility increases (when the bands tighten). They can also be used
to provide indications of overbought or oversold market conditions.
See Exhibit 3.19.
The Parabolic Stop-And-Reverse (SAR) is an indicator that
excels at providing a sensible trailing stop and reverse methodology.
Trailing stops are useful elements of an overall stop loss strategy, and
will be discussed further in the section of Chapter 6 that covers risk
management. The Parabolic SAR dots follow price such that if a

90

c03.indd 90

1/13/09 9:59:14 AM

Indicators of Change

TIPS AND TECHNIQUES

The Bollinger Squeeze
There are almost as many different ways to interpret Bollinger
Bands as there are traders using them to make trading decisions. But according to John Bollinger, CFA, CMT, famed originator of the Bands that bear his name, “The Squeeze” is perhaps
the most popular topic related to this powerful indicator. Bollinger
is the founder and president of Bollinger Capital Management
and BollingerBands.com, and his work has long been renowned
among professional traders and investors alike.
His book, Bollinger on Bollinger Bands, describes The Squeeze
in considerable detail. He writes, “Bollinger Bands are driven by
volatility, and The Squeeze is a pure reflection of that volatility.
When volatility falls to historically low levels, The Squeeze is on.”
He proceeds to write, “Time and again, we see The Squeeze
in action. A consolidation begins. The resulting trading range narrows dramatically. The Bollinger Bands begin to tighten around
the price structure. The stage is set.”
The well-documented theory behind The Squeeze is that
periods of high volatility generally follow periods of low volatility.
When the Bollinger Bands narrow dramatically, volatility is drastically decreased. The subsequent expectation, then, is for price
to breakout violently in either direction. This can potentially be a
very tradable event.
But Bollinger goes on to caution, “Traders beware! There is a
trick to The Squeeze, an odd turning of the wheel that you need
to be aware of, the head fake. Often as the end of a Squeeze
nears, price will stage a short fake-out move, and then abruptly
turn and surge in the direction of the emerging trend.”
If proper caution is exercised to control the risk inherent in
the common “fake-out” moves, The Squeeze can be an effective
tool in any forex trader’s repertoire.

91

c03.indd 91

1/13/09 9:59:15 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

dot is below the price bar, the trade should be long with a dynamic
stop loss at the dot. Conversely, if the dot is above the price bar,
the trade should be short with a dynamic stop loss at the dot. Like
many other indicators, the Parabolic SAR can be prone to vicious
whipsaws where the trading signals result in a string of losses due
to a lack of trend. But the fact that this indicator stresses a logical
use of the trailing stop-loss concept makes it a valuable tool for the
technical trader.
Besides the indicators described above, there is another special class of indicators, called oscillators, that fulfills an important
role. Many of the oscillators, like Momentum and RSI, are very
similar in formula and function. So they will not all be discussed
here. Instead, only the most important and unique oscillators that
are most applicable to foreign exchange trading will be covered.
Oscillators excel at providing indications of overbought or oversold
status during ranging markets. When an oscillator reading is above
a certain overbought threshold during a trading range, it hints that
upward momentum may soon be exhausted, and that an impending
downward turn may occur. Conversely, when an oscillator reading
is below a certain oversold threshold during a trading range, it hints
that downward momentum may soon be exhausted, and that an
impending upward turn may occur.
As will be seen in Chapter 5, oscillators also excel at providing
divergence signals, among other functions. Divergence can provide
important clues as to the possible direction of future momentum.
The Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) is
among the most popular indicators/oscillators ever invented. Many
traders use MACD as their sole confirming oscillator. Some traders

92

c03.indd 92

1/13/09 9:59:15 AM

Indicators of Change

EXHIBIT 3.20

MACD

Source: FX Solutions -– FX AccuCharts

also take trading signals exclusively from MACD. This multifaceted
indicator acts as a sign of trend momentum by representing the relationship between two moving averages. MACD can be traded by taking signals from crossovers of the two lines, crosses above and below
the zero line, and price-oscillator divergence, among other uses. See
Exhibit 3.20.
Relative Strength Index (RSI) is another popular oscillator that
provides a measure of price momentum. RSI is a classic oscillator
that excels at giving overbought and oversold signals in ranging
markets. Its usefulness, like most other oscillators, tends to diminish considerably during trending markets. RSI may also be used for

93

c03.indd 93

1/13/09 9:59:15 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

divergence purposes. One of its primary usages is as a trade confirmation tool that identifies overbought/oversold markets. The mathematical formula for RSI compares the magnitude of a currency
pair’s recent gains to the magnitude of its recent losses.
The Stochastics oscillators come in several different flavors—fast,
slow, and full. Whichever variety is chosen, the purpose is similar to
other oscillators—identify overbought/oversold and provide divergence signals. The mathematical formula for Stochastics compares
the currency pair’s closing price to its price range over a set period
of time. Because Stochastics has two lines as opposed to RSI’s one
line, Stochastics can give off an additional signal that results when
the %K line crosses the %D line. Slow Stochastics is a smoothed version of Fast Stochastics.
Rate of Change (ROC) is a very simple and classic oscillator
that provides a basic momentum measure. The mathematical calculation for this oscillator measures the percent change from the price
a given number of periods ago to the current price. Besides showing
divergence and overbought/oversold, ROC can also provide signals
when the oscillator goes above and below the zero line.
The Commodity Channel Index (CCI) is an important but
misnamed oscillator. Just as comfortable in the equities and foreign exchange worlds as it is in the futures/commodities arena,
CCI has proven itself to be a popular oscillator for currency trading. Originally intended to identify cycles in the commodities markets, CCI has grown to become a highly valued tool in foreign
exchange trading. Although CCI adherents have invented many different methods of analyzing this oscillator, its popular usage remains
similar to the other oscillators—to identify divergences, as well as

94

c03.indd 94

1/13/09 9:59:16 AM

Po i n t i n g t h e Way w i t h P i v o t Po i n t s

to point out overbought/oversold areas in the attempts to forecast
price reversals at extremes.
The indicators and oscillators described in this section make
up just a fraction of the technical studies available on most charting
platforms. Some of these platforms offer hundreds of different studies. But the ones just mentioned comprise some of the most essential and useful indicators/oscillators available, and therefore merit the
most extensive consideration.

P ointing the Way with Pivot Points
The pivot point method of trading has made its way to the foreign
exchange markets from its use in futures and equities trading. Pivot
points are support and resistance levels derived mathematically from
the previous day’s key data points. To calculate the main pivot point,
for example, a trader would take the average of the previous day’s
high, low, and close. Then, four additional pivot points (named S1,
S2, R1, and R2, where S=Support and R=Resistance) are calculated
based on the central pivot point. Traders often add even more pivot
points beyond the basic four plus the central pivot, but these are considered the most common and essential levels. See Exhibit 3.21.
The idea behind pivot points is that they can act as key support and resistance levels, where price may turn as in a retracement
or correction. Many analysts believe that like some other technical tools, pivot points are a self-fulfilling prophecy. In other words,
they work only because enough traders believe in them and trade
off of them that there is bound to be some significant price activity at those levels. This self-fulfilling prophecy concept can also be

95

c03.indd 95

1/13/09 9:59:16 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.21

Pivot Points

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

extended to trendlines, horizontal support/resistance lines, Fibonacci
retracements, and other technical tools. The basics of trading with
pivot points will be touched upon in Chapter 5.

F ibonacci ’s Magic Numbers
There is a long and interesting story behind Fibonacci numbers
that is beyond the scope of this book. It should suffice to say that
Leonardo Fibonacci was a 13th century Italian mathematician who
calculated a sequence of numbers that ultimately led to the discovery of the golden ratio—1.618. This ratio, and its inverse of 0.618,

96

c03.indd 96

1/13/09 9:59:16 AM

Fibonacci's Magic Numbers

EXHIBIT 3.22

Fibonacci Retracements

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

are purported to occur throughout science, nature, and art. Even a
snail’s shell is said to follow the laws of the golden ratio.
Because of the seemingly universal significance of this ratio,
traders long ago began applying it to trading the financial markets.
Today, technical analysts have many tools that are derived from the
Golden Ratio and Fibonacci’s work. The most important and popular of these is the Fibonacci Retracement tool. See Exhibit 3.22.
Drawn on a chart from a low price extreme to a high one, or vice
versa, Fibonacci retracements help outline key support and resistance
levels on retracements from the primary price move. For example, it
should be expected that within an uptrend, price will retrace at some

97

c03.indd 97

1/13/09 9:59:16 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

point. When it does, Fibonacci theory suggests that price will likely
retrace a magnitude of 38.2%, 50%, or 61.8% of the original move.
These are the most significant levels according to Fibonacci trading
theory. Other important retracement levels include 23.6%, 76.4%, and
100%. Knowing where all of these levels occur on a given price chart
can be instrumental in finding out where traders may be paying particular attention. As such, Fibonacci levels can be considered, to some
extent, a self-fulfilling prophecy much like the pivot points.
The various Fibonacci tools, especially retracements, are extremely
popular with foreign exchange traders. More information on how
traders use Fibonacci principles to trade currencies will be touched
upon in Chapter 5.
