CHAPTER

1
Historical
Background
The Historical Development and
Modern Structure of Foreign
Exchange
While the history of foreign exchange is almost as long as civilization itself,
one need only go back as far as 1944 to unearth the foundation of the modern
structure of foreign exchange. Having witnessed the Great Depression and
two world wars, global leaders were naturally anxious to bring about
stability, and the creation of a new economic and financial system was an
important step toward that goal.
With that in mind, the Bretton Woods Accord was drafted and signed by all
44 members of the Allied Nations. (It was later acceded to by Japan,
Germany, and the rest of the defeated Axis Powers.) As the United States had
already begun to establish itself as the world’s preeminent economic power,
it was decided that the US dollar would become the backbone of the new
system of foreign exchange. The dollar was pegged to gold (at an initial price
of $35/ounce), and all other currencies were in turn pegged to the US dollar.
The world’s central banks were then tasked with buying and selling dollars
so as to limit their respective currencies from fluctuating by more than 1% in
either direction.

2

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
In order to foster cooperation and stability, the Bretton Woods Accord also
mandated the creation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
precursor to the World Bank. The IMF was charged directly with carrying
out a radical new financial system. Basically, members of the IMF were
required to make subscription payments (in the form of gold and domestic
currency) in proportion to their economic size. In return, they were granted
voting rights, also in proportion to the size of their economies. As exchange
rates naturally fluctuate in accordance with changing patterns in trade and
economic growth, the IMF was endowed with the power to make loans to
central banks, for the purpose of maintaining exchange rate stability. The
World Bank, meanwhile, was charged with making loans to countries that
were struggling economically and using its capital base to promote
reconstruction and development in the wake of the devastation caused by the
Second World War.

Bretton Woods II
Alas, the Bretton Woods system proved to be untenable. Due to an economic
rebalancing (namely, the rapid post-war recovery of Germany and Japan), it
became increasingly difficult to maintain the exchange rate pegs to the US
dollar. This was further complicated by differing rates of inflation, and the
swinging of the US trade balance from surplus to deficit. In 1968, the IMF
tried to head off the impending crisis by creating so-called Special Drawing
Rights (SDRs), a supranational currency that would be denominated in gold
and a basket of constituent currencies. Member countries were automatically
allocated SDRs in proportion to their subscriptions to the IMF, and could use
them to stabilize their currencies in lieu of buying and selling US dollars.
Only a few years later, however, it was already apparent that this system had
failed to address the massive imbalances, at the heart of which was the
overvaluation of the US dollar relative to the price of gold. Then-President
Richard Nixon responded by raising the price of gold (devaluing the US
dollar) and imposing import controls designed to prevent further capital
flight. Most importantly, he limited its convertibility, so that US dollars
could no longer be exchanged directly for gold. This was a major historical
development, as there was now nothing more than faith in the US
government and a written declaration on the currency bills that guaranteed
the worth of the US dollar.

Forex for Beginners
As President Nixon did little to rein in spending on the Vietnam War and
domestic social programs, however, the glut of dollars continued to expand
inexorably. It soon became impossible to maintain a currency peg at any
level. In 1973, the original Bretton Woods system was officially terminated,
and was replaced by the so-called Bretton Woods II system. In this new
system, currencies fluctuate freely against one another in accordance with
market forces. Within a few years, all major currencies were nominally
floating (not explicitly pegged to the US dollar). This marked the beginning
of the fiat currency era, as well as a bold experiment that some commentators argue has not yet run its course!
That’s not to say that informal currency pegging has died out completely.
The Bank of England continued fixing the British pound to the deutsche
mark until 1992, when speculators, led by hedge fund investor George Soros,
famously “broke the bank” and forced it to dismantle the peg. Meanwhile,
oil-exporting countries have persisted in pegging their currencies to the US
dollar to this day, since the price of oil is also denominated in US dollars.
Countries throughout the developing world—namely China—also fix their
currencies to the dollar and/or euro. And speaking of the euro, it is both the
best-known and most recent example of currency pegging.
Overall, however, the fiat currency system remains the order of the day,
despite the fact that, generally speaking, it hasn’t really engendered stability.
On the contrary, the last four decades have seen their share of collapse. More
than 100 countries—mostly in Africa and Latin America—have defaulted on
their sovereign debt obligations.1 The most famous cases involved Argentina,
Brazil, Mexico, and Russia, all of which were accompanied by (separate)
currency crises. There was stagflation in the 1970s, brought about by rising
oil prices and an economic recession, and a proportional devaluation of the
US dollar. The late 1990s saw the Southeast Asian financial crisis and the
consequent collapse of half a dozen regional economies, their financial
markets, and their currencies. The financial crisis that lasted roughly from
2008 to 2011, meanwhile, witnessed similar instability and some of the
largest forex fluctuations ever recorded. Iceland defaulted on its debt, and the
Icelandic krona collapsed. And in almost every case, the IMF has been there
1 Eduardo Borensztein and Ugo Panizza, “The Costs of Sovereign Default,” (IMF

working paper, International Monetary Fund, October 2008),
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft
/wp/2008/wp08238.pdf.

3

4

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
to mop up the mess with (often controversial) counsel and loans, with the
effect that most currency crises have been short-lived.
In the aftermath of every crisis comes the inevitable debate over whether the
former economic system should be revived, and the financial crisis of
2008–2011 has been no exception to that rule. Economic conservatives argue
that the US dollar will be ruined by the high level of US debt, and they
proffer the reinstatement of the gold peg as the only real solution. Fiat
currencies have given unlimited power to government and no check on their
ability to print unlimited amounts of money. Critics of the euro, meanwhile,
insist that the currency union never made sense and that fiscal and economic
discrepancies will soon render it extinct.
In addition, the record spikes in volatility that accompanied the financial
crisis of 2008 to 2011 have triggered the predictable calls for a cap on
speculation. Policymakers have invoked the so-called Tobin Tax, which
would levy a nominal fee on all forex trades, and use the proceeds to help
central banks fend off speculative attacks on their currencies.
The IMF has most recently begun to encourage the use of capital controls as
a tool to prevent wild oscillations in exchange rates. SDRs have also been
expanded (to more than $300 billion) and redistributed (in accordance with
Figure 1-1), but their use remains subject to practical complications. Besides,
given that they are still denominated in other currencies, the role of SDRs is
as much political as it is financial. It should come as no surprise that its
biggest proponents are those countries that in general have strained relations
with the United States.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 1-1. Allocation of IMF Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)

In short, the so-called Bretton Woods II system will probably remain in
effect for the continued future. There may be further currency consolidation
(within Asia and/or Africa), but no country is likely to unilaterally reinstate
the gold standard. Barring any unforeseen developments, currencies will
continue to fluctuate against each other in accordance with market forces.

5

6

Chapter 1 | Historical Background

Market Structure
In its modern form, the forex market closely resembles many of the other
financial markets, with a few critical exceptions. Unlike the markets for other
securities, forex trading is geographically decentralized. According to the
Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the United Kingdom, United
States, and Japan are the three largest trading centers, followed by
Switzerland, Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia, France, Denmark and
Germany. Together, these ten countries account for more than 90% of forex
volume. Ironically, the rise in electronic trading (which would seem to render
geography irrelevant) has spurred the creation of tight trading clusters. This
has caused volume to become ever more concentrated in a handful of cities,
namely London and New York City (Figure 1-2).

Figure 1-2. Geographical distribution of forex trading

While countries should enjoy a natural monopoly (or a comparative
advantage) in the exchange of their own currencies, trades are typically
routed to the nearest liquid trading center in order to optimize the speed of
execution. In other words, while it takes less than a second for an order to be
transmitted electronically from San Francisco to New York, it takes even less

Forex for Beginners
time for an order to be transmitted from 49th Street to 42nd Street in New
York. For certain traders, shaving one millisecond off of their execution time
can mean the difference between profit and loss.

Over-the-Counter Market
The second distinction between the forex market and other financial markets
is that there is no centralized exchange through which all currencies are
traded. (There is an exception to this rule, in the form of certain forex
derivatives, which will be examined in greater detail in Chapter 2.) Instead,
currencies are exchanged over-the-counter (OTC), which is to say that
transactions are executed directly between two parties. These two parties, for
example, might be an individual and a bank, or two individuals, or two
banks. When one party wants to place a trade, it must contact a broker or a
dealer. The former serves its customers by matching up buyers and sellers,
while the latter will fill orders by taking the opposite side of a trade. (This
distinction is not mutually exclusive, as some firms will switch roles as it
suits them.)
Since currencies are always bought in pairs (one currency against one other
currency) they must always be sold in pairs. In other words, the buyer and
seller must necessarily be interested in taking opposing positions. For
example, if a seller is interested in closing out a long position in the US
dollar relative to the euro, the buyer must be interested in opening a long
position in the euro against the US dollar. As with any type of financial
securities trade, it is the job of the broker to sort through all of these nuances.
The broker must amalgamate quotes from multiple sources and combine the
best bid (the price at which currency can be sold) with the best ask (the price
at which currency can be bought), and present the resulting spread to
customers (Table 1-1).

7

8

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
Table 1-1. Broker Amalgamation of Bid/Ask Spreads

Counterparty

Bid Price

Bid Amount

Offer Price Offer Amount

JP Morgan

1.3502

$5.0 million

1.3505

$10.0 million

APK Hedge Fund

1.3499

$3.0 million

1.3506

$20.0 million

Joe Trader

1.3501

$1.2 million

1.3504

$7.0 million

Bank of America

1.3502

$20.0 million

1.3505

$3.8 million

Having received the separate quotes in Table 1-1, the broker would present
the 1.3502 ($25 million) – 1.3504 ($7 million) to the customer, which
represents a combination of the best bid and ask prices. (These days, this job
is mostly done automatically by computers, but the principle is the same as if
it were being done by hand.) Ultimately, if the seller is willing to accept a
price at or below the buyer’s offer, the trade will clear. The broker will earn a
profit by charging a transaction fee (expressed as a percentage of the
transaction value).
If the seller demands a price that is too high and/or the buyer’s offer is too
low, the trade cannot be executed. Given the size of the market and the
continuous volume of transactions, this is not usually an issue. The main
exceptions are for unusually large orders and during moments of uncertainty,
such as major news developments. During these times, the market will
temporarily shrink, and spreads will widen. Those that insist on placing a
trade anyway may have to accept a less favorable execution price.
In practice, a forex dealer performs the same role for his clients by helping
them execute trades. Unlike a broker, however, the forex dealer will actually
serve as the counterparty for clients’ trades and aim to profit from favorable
exchange rate movements and also by capturing the spread. Let’s consider
the example above, to further elucidate this distinction. With a spread of
1.3502–1.3504, the broker will merely connect its clients with either the bid
or the ask party, depending on whether they wish to buy or sell. The dealer,
in contrast, will actually provide its own bid/ask spread and will fill the trade
itself. It may aim to buy at 1.3502 and instantly sell at 1.3504, or it may wish
to hold the position until it can earn a more substantial gain. Either way, the
dealer must assume some exchange rate risk.

Forex for Beginners
The business model of a broker is then quite different from a dealer. Despite
the conflicts of interest that the dealer model would seem to engender,
however, it is not automatically clear which one is better for clients.

Tiered System
The forex market is divided into different tiers, access to which depends on
size. The top tier is known as the interbank market (or interdealer market),
where trading takes place directly between broker-dealers and other largescale liquidity providers. While interbank trading accounts for less than 20%
or so of overall forex volume (Figure 1-3), it nonetheless represents the
backbone of the market. Access is limited to the world’s largest banks,
liquidity is nothing short of complete, and spreads are ludicrously small (less
than one PIP for major currencies).

Figure 1-3. Breakdown of forex market tiers

These days, interdealer trading takes place almost entirely (90% plus)
through electronic portals, such as Electronic Communication Networks
(ECNs) that include Thomson Reuters Dealing 3000, ICAP EBS, and, to a
lesser extent, Bloomberg Terminal and Citigroup LAVA.2 Qualifying banks
and broker-dealers pay subscription fees to the platform providers, and in
exchange, are granted access to certain price data. The best prices are
naturally extended to those with the best credit relationships. The ECNs do
not themselves serve as brokers, but merely facilitate trading by participants.
2 Axel Pierron, Electronic Platforms in Foreign Exchange Trading (Paris: Celent, LLC,

2007).

9

10

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
Toward this end, the ECNs offer trading overlays so that participants can
move seamlessly from requesting quotes to executing trades.
Interbank trades are settled by the Continuous Linked Settlement Bank
(CLS). Through a complex system of credit lines and payment protocols, this
bank is able to limit one of the most basic risks of forex: counterparty risk.
This risk is present in any financial transaction and basically represents the
possibility that one party to a financial transaction (in this case, a currency
exchange) will not honor its obligation to the other. CLS processes trades for
17 major currencies and on behalf of 69 financial institutions, comprising
more than half of all global forex activity. Since CLS settles trades daily and
ensures that everyone gets paid, participants can effectively conduct a
limitless number of forex trades. Without CLS, forex liquidity/volume would
be significantly smaller.
On behalf of their clients, brokers manually and electronically facilitate yet
another level of trading. You can see from Figure 1-3 that telephone
transactions (also known as voice broker) still account for a large portion of
overall volume. For illiquid instruments and currency pairs, nonstandard
contract sizes, unusual dates, and other circumstances, there is evidently still
an important advantage to being able to speak with a broker. Phone execution
also carries the added benefit of anonymity, which is important to some fund
managers.
The majority of broker executions (especially on the spot market) are
conducted electronically. Since 2005, brokers have begun to grant indirect
access to the interbank market to favored clients. So-called prime brokerage
account holders are able to place trades on the interbank market via their
brokers. Trades are settled in the name of the broker-dealer, not in the name
of the client that places the trade.
As seen in Figure 1-3, the interdealer market has suffered slightly, due to a
rise in competition from platforms that facilitate trading directly between
dealers and clients. In the United States, so-called customer direct trading
represents a whopping 40% of overall volume.
Most of this trading takes place on proprietary trading systems that have been
developed by broker-dealers. Due to the explosion in volume over the last
decade, a handful of the top broker-dealers account for more than $100
billion in daily volume. (See Figure 1-5.) As a result, it’s no longer necessary
for large banks to rely completely on the interbank market. Instead, they have
started to process trades internally, by directly matching their own

Forex for Beginners
customers’ buy and sell orders. Evidence suggests that only the largest and
most complex orders (representing perhaps 20% of the total) are now
funneled into the interbank market.
Multi-dealer trading systems currently represent the smallest corner of the
forex market. This category is poised to capture a growing chunk of volume
over the upcoming decade, however, due to its growing attraction to hedge
funds, commodity trading advisers (CTAs), and other high-frequency traders.
The market is dominated by FX Connect (State Street), FX All, Currenex
(State Street), and HotSpot FX (Knight Capital), with about a dozen others
accounting for less than 30% of multi-dealer activity.
Multi-dealer platforms are attractive to clients not only because of the
liquidity, range of instruments, and currency pairs they offer, but also
because of the sophistication of their software and the breadth of services
that they perform. Many platforms are basically one-stop shops for
institutional currency traders, offering automatic trading reconciliation,
multi-asset trading, trading statistics, streaming quotes, and even credit
guarantees. They earn money by assessing nominal fees ($10–20 per million
traded) on every transaction.
Retail represents the bottom tier of foreign exchange. The majority of retail
forex volume is processed by a handful of retail aggregators. These
aggregators work the same way as interbank broker-dealers. Sometimes they
provide quotes from various brokers and “liquidity providers” and merely
execute trades on behalf of their customers. Brokers that operate this way
will profit by presenting their customers with a slightly wider spread (i.e.,
higher price for the buyer and a lower price for the seller) than with which
their supplying interbank brokers originally presented them.
Other retail aggregators execute trades internally by either matching up
buyers with sellers or by taking the opposite side of the trade themselves.
This type of aggregator is known as a dealing desk. As you can probably
imagine, this latter approach is somewhat controversial. Given that the
majority of retail traders lose money, it is profitable for the broker. As
explained in Chapter 8, however, neither system can claim outright
superiority.
Of course there are also small transactions that are conducted at community
banks, foreign exchange kiosks, money transfer companies, and other
locations. Due to high transaction costs (i.e., spreads) and other constraints,

11

12

Chapter 1 | Historical Background
these institutions facilitate non-speculative currency con-versions, overseas
remittances, etc. They account for only a small portion of overall volume.
It should finally be pointed out that these tiers don’t exist in separate
vacuums. While trading amounts generally fall and spreads widen the lower
one goes on the totem pole, the market at the retail level should nonetheless
closely resemble the market at the wholesale level. Possibilities for arbitrage
(taking advantage of price discrepancies on different markets to generate
risk-free profits) should ensure that prices are consistent across all levels of
the market.

Participants
One would think that the majority of foreign exchange would take place for
necessary economic purposes, such as to facilitate international trade. Even
the most rudimentary analysis, however, shows that this is definitely not the
case. For example, the British pound and the Japanese yen are exchanged at a
rate that is 50 times greater than would be required for purposes of trade. For
the US dollar and New Zealand dollar, the ratio of forex turnover to trade
exceeds 100! You can see from the left-hand panel of Figure 1-4 that the
relationship between forex volume and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is
similarly out of proportion, especially for Singapore and Hong Kong. The
right-hand panel of Figure 1-4 shows that even non-financial participants
exchange currencies at a rate that is far greater than necessary for normal
business operations.

Figure 1-4. Ratio of forex market turnover to selected economic indicators

Forex for Beginners

Corporations
To be sure, there is still plenty of foreign exchange that is conducted for nonspeculative economic purposes. Any company with overseas suppliers and/or
that sells in overseas markets will need to exchange currency on a regular
basis. In fact, many multinational companies have entire departments focused
entirely on managing their forex operations and hedging the risk that comes
from fluctuating exchange rates. By way of example, consider that Apple
Inc. must pay its Chinese suppliers in Chinese yuan, but that its accounts are
denominated in US dollars. If the US dollar depreciates by 20% against the
Chinese yuan, it would have the same effect as if Chinese wages had risen by
20%. There are several strategies that Apple Inc. has at its disposal to
minimize the impact of such currency fluctuations on its operating profits,
which I will explore in Chapter 7.
At the end of every fiscal year, multinational companies will typically
repatriate a significant portion of its earnings in order to pay taxes and
dividends. For a period of a few weeks, these flows are often significant
enough to influence exchange rates. This is especially true for Japanese
multinationals, which are primarily export-oriented and must convert billions
worth of foreign currency back into yen.
When you consider that non-financial customers account for more than $500
billion (about 13%) in daily forex turnover, it is immediately apparent that
multinational companies are doing more than simply exchanging currency
for risk management purposes. Instead, many corporations engage in forex
trading for speculative purposes. Some are prodded into doing so by their
financial advisers while others engage in speculative forex trading under
their own accord. In fact, it’s not uncommon for a multinational company’s
forex activities to cause it to swing from profit to loss, or vice versa. At the
very least, most global companies will recognize the impact of exchange
rates on their bottom lines when they release their quarterly earnings.
During the height of the 2008 credit crisis—when exchange rates were
fluctuating wildly—Hong Kong–based CITIC Group shocked the markets
when it announced a $2 billion loss from “unauthorized” forex trades. A
spate of similar announcements from other companies followed in 2009 and
2010. As a result, some companies have curtailed all forex activities that are
