Technical
Analysis
Explained

The Successful Investor’s Guide
to Spotting Investment Trends
and Turning Points

Fourth Edition

Martin J. Pring

McGraw-Hill

New York Chicago San Francisco

Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan
New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore
Sydney Toronto



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Pring, Martin J.
Technical analysis explained / the successful investor's guide to spotting
investment trends and turning points / by Martin Pring. —4th ed.
pcm.
ISBN 0-07-138193-7
1, Investment analysis. J. Tide

HG4529 .P75 2002
332.63'22—dc21 2001044981

McGraw-Hill $2

A Division of The McGraw-Hill Companies

Copyright ©2002 by McGraw-Hill. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States
of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no
part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any
means, or stored in a data base or retrieval system, without the prior written per-
mission of the publisher.

67890 DOC/DOC 0876
ISBN: 0-07-138193-7

The sponsoring editor for this book was Stephen Isaacs and the production super-
visor was Clare Stanley. It was set in New Baskerville by MacAllister Publishing
Services, LLC.

Printed and bound by R. R. Donnelley & Sons Company.

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in

regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that neither

the author nor the publisher is engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other

professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the ser-
vices of a competent professional person should be sought.

—From a Declaration of Principles jointly adopted

by a Committee of the American Bar

Association and a Committee of Publishers

McGraw-Hill books are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums
and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more infor-
mation, please write to the Director of Special Sales, Professional Publishing,
McGraw-Hill, Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2298. Or contact your local
bookstore.

This book is printed on recycled, acid-free paper containing a minimum of
50% recycled de-inked fiber.

To my son, Thomas William Pring



Contents

Preface
Acknowledgments

Introduction

Part I. Trend-Determining Techniques
1 The Market Cycle Model

a2,

- 3.

- 4.

5.

Financial Markets and the Business Cycle
Dow Theory
Typical Parameters for IntermediateTrends
Price Patterns
Smaller Price Patterns
One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns
Trendlines
Moving Averages
Momentum Principles

Individual Momentum Indicators I

13
15
26
36
50
63
98
111
136
154
179
211



vi Contents Contents ix

_/12. Individual Momentum Indicators II 237 30. Technical Analysis of Global Stock Markets 564
13. Candle Charts 257 31. Technical Analysis of Individual Stocks 574
14. Point and Figure Charting 277 Epilogue ; 593
15. Miscellaneous Techniques for Determining Appendix The Elliott Wave 595
Trends 287 600
Glossary
16. The Concept of Relative Strength 304
ad Bibliography 604
17. Putting the Indicators Together: The DJ 609
Transports 1990-2001 322 Index
Part II. Market Structure 329 ee
_ 18. Price: The Major Averages 331 B
_~ 19. Price: Group Rotation 352 : :
_- 20. Time: Longer-Term Cycles 364 i
21. Practical Identification of Cycles 391 e
i
_7 22. Volume: General Principles 397 be
_ 23. Volume Oscillators 409 i
~ 24. Breadth 435 3
Part Ill. Other Aspects of Market Behavior 461 i
25. Why Interest Rates Affect the Stock Market 463
_7 26. Sentiment Indicators 485
27. Applying Technical Analysis to the Theory
of Contrary Opinion 511
28. Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock
Market Peaks and Troughs 526
29. Automated Trading Systems 539 - t



= Preface

There is no reason why anyone cannot make a substantial amount of money
in the financial markets, but there are many reasons why many people will
not. As with most ‘endeavors in life, the key to success is knowledge and
action. This book has been written in an attempt to shed some light on the
internal workings of the markets and to help expand the knowledge compo-
nent, leaving the action to the patience, discipline, and objectivity of the indi-
vidual investor.

The mid- to late 1980s saw the expansion of investment and trading
opportunities to a global e,in terms of both the cash and the futures
markets. In the 1990s, isinovations in the communications industry enabled
anyone to plot data on an intraday basis for relatively little cost. Today,
numerous charting sites have sprung up on the Internet, so virtually any-
one now has the ability to practice technical analysis. As a consequence of
the technological revolution, time horizons have been greatly shortened. I
am not sure that this is a good thing because short-term trends experience
more random noise than longer-term ones. This means that the technical
indicators are not as effective. The fourth edition of Technical Analysis
Explained has been expanded and totally revised to keep abreast of many of
these changes, and to include some technical innovations and evolvement
in my own thinking since the publication of the third edition.

Every chapter has been thoroughly reworked and expanded. In the inter-
est of efficiency, some have been dropped and others substituted.
Considerable attention continues to be focused on the U.S. equity market,
but many of the marketplace examples feature international stock indexes,
currencies, commodities, and precious metals. Special chapters also feature
technical analysis of the credit markets and global equities. In most cases,
the marketplace examples have been updated, but some older ones from



xii Preface

previous editions have been left in deliberately to give the book some his-
torical perspective. These historical examples also underscore the point that
nothing has really changed in the last 100 years. The same true and tried
principles are as relevant today as they always were. I have no doubt what-
soever that this will continue to be so in the future. ;

Thus, technical analysis could be applied in New York in 1850, in Tokyo
in 1950, and in Moscow in 2150. This is true because Price action in finan-
cial markets is a reflection of human nature, and human nature remains
more or less constant. Technical principles can also be applied to any freely
traded entity in any time frame. A trend reversal signal on a 5-minute bar
chart is based on the same indicators as one on a monthly chart; only the
significance is different. Shorter time frames reflect shorter trends and are
therefore less significant.

Several new chapters, have been added in this edition. One of the areas
I become more impresséd with the more I study it is the concept of one-
and two-bar price reversals. They are also Felevant for intraday and swing
traders. Consequently, a brand new chapter on this subject has been intro-
duced in this edition. In view of their growing popularity, candlesticks, pre-
viously relegated to an Appendix, now receive full treatment. A third
chapter has been added to the momentum section so that material on the
Directional Movement System, the Chande Momentum Oscillator, the
Relative Momentum Index, and the parabolic (not a true momentum indi-
cator, but valuable nonetheless) could be included. In addition, the expan-
sion of the momentum section has left room for some of my own new ideas
concerning momentum interpretation, such as extreme swings, mega-
overboughts and mega-oversolds, and so on. The volume section also
includes an additional chapter so that indicators such as the Demand Index
and Chaikin Money Flow could be covered. Greater emphasis is also placed
on volume momentum. The concept of relative strength is a very important
and underappreciated arm of technical analysis. It too has been upgraded
to full chapter status. Finally, a new chapter on applying technical analysis
to contrary opinion theory expands our coverage of the psychological
aspects of trading and investing. _

Since the 1970s, the time horizon of virtually all market participants has °
shrunk considerably. As a result, technical analysis has become very popular
for implementing short-term timing strategies. This use may lead to great dis-
appointment: In my experience, there is a rough correlation between the
reliability of the technical indicators and the time span being monitored. This
is why most of the discussion here has been oriented toward intermediate
and long-term trends. Even short-term traders with a 1- to 3-week time hori-
zon need to have some understanding of the direction and maturity of the
main or primary trend. This is because mistakes are usually made by taking

xiii
Preface

on positions that go against the direction of the main igaal a whipsaw is
i elop, it will us arise from a contratren .
OTe nuocental, ccohaieal szaly should be regarded as the art of assess
ing the technical position of a particular security with the aid of seve : sce
entifically researched indicators. Although many of the me | anistic
techniques described in this book offer reliable indications of changing i‘
ket conditions, all suffer from the common characteristic that they cans an
often do, fail to operate satisfactorily. This attribute presents no probi mm ‘°
the consciously disciplined investor or trader, since a good working x nowr
edge of the principles underlying major price movements in financi: ar
kets and a balanced view of the overall technical position offer a superi
within which to operate. ;
ine is after all, no substitute for independent thought. The action of
the technical indicators illustrates the underlying characteristics of any mar
ket, and it is up to the analyst to put the pieces of the jigsaw puzzle together
rking hypothesis.
nina cake tymo means easy, as initial success can lead to overconfidence
and arrogance. Charles H. Dow, the father of technical analysis, once wrote
words to the effect that “Pride of opinion caused the downfall of more men
on Wall Street than all the other opinions put together.’ This is tne
because markets are essentially a reflection of people in action. Now ly,
such activity develops on a reasonably predictable path. Since people can
—and do—change their minds, price trends in the market can deviate une
pectedly from their anticipated course. To avoid serious trouble, inves ons
and especially traders, must adjust their attitudes as changes in the tec!
ition emerge. .
sedition to pecuniary rewards, a study of the market can also reveas
much about human nature, both from observing other people in action ani
from the aspect of self-development. As investors react to the constant ae
gle through which the market will undoubtedly put them, they will also am
a little about their own makeup. Washington Irving might well have een
referring to this challenge of the markets when he wrote, Little min: s ar
taxed and subdued by misfortune but great minds rise above it.

Martin J. Pring



Acknowledgments

This book has evolved over the last 20 years and has grown from a text of
under 250 pages in the first edition to over 600 in the current one.

The material for the fourth edition of this book has been gathered from
a substantial number of sources, and I am deeply indebted to the many orga-
nizations that have given their permission to reproduce charts and figures
without which this book would not have been possible. Special thnks go to
Tim Hayes and Ned Davis at Ned Davis research for providing many of the
charts on sentiment and flow of funds indicators.

Appreciation also goes to Danny Pring who came up with the title for the
first edition of this book. It’s a great title and has followed it ever since.

Thanks also to my colleagues at Pring Research including Jimmie Sigsway
whose efficiency and dedication allowed my writing to progress in a serene
atmosphere uninterrupted by the construction going on around us. Anyone
who has experienced the rebuilding of a home/office complex will know
what I mean. She is also a grat mother in law!

Above all thanks go to my wife Lisa, who tirelessly reconstructed most of
the charts and figures from my pathetic PowerPoint illustrations while
simultaneously running a home, taking care of our son Thomas, maintain-
ing our web site (pring.com) and managing a major house renovation.

Introduction

‘To investors willing to buy and hold common stocks for the long term, the
stock market has offered excellent rewards over the years in terms of both
dividend growth and capital appreciation. The market is even more chal-
lenging, fulfilling, and rewarding to resourceful investors willing to learn
the art of market timing through a study of technical analysis.

The advantages of this approach over the buy-and-hold approach wers-,
particularly marked between 1966 and 1982. The market made no headway
at all, as measured by the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), in the 16
years between 1966 and 1982. Yet there were some substantial price fluctu-
ations. Although the DJIA failed to record a net advance between 1966 and
1982, the period included five major advances totaling over 1500 Dow
points. The potential rewards of market timing were therefore significant.

A long-term investor fortunate enough to sell at the five tops in 1966,
1968, 1973, 1979, and 1981 and to reinvest the monéy at the troughs of 1966,
1970, 1974, 1980, and 1982 would have seen the total investment (exclud-
ing transactions costs and capital gains tax) grow from a theoretical $1000
(that is, $1 for every Dow point) in 1966 to over $10,000 by October 1983.
In contrast, an investor following a buy-and-hold approach would have real-
ized a mere $250 gain over the same period. Even during the spectacular
rise that began in August 1982, technical analysis would have proved use-
ful, since that period witnessed a considerable variation in performance

tween different indust ‘oups. .
a bull market, such as the one that occurred in the 1980s and 1990s, is a
once-in-a-generation affair. In fact, it was a record in 200 years of recorded
U.S. stock market history. This implies that the opening decade of the
twenty-first century will be a more difficult and challenging period, and that
market timing will prove to be of crucial importance.



Technical Analysis Explained

In practice, of course, it is impossible to buy and sell consistently at exact
turning points, but the enormous potential of this approach still leaves
plenty of room for error, even when commission costs and taxes are included
in the calculation. The rewards for identifying major market junctures and
taking the appropriate action can be substantial,

Originally, technical analysis was applied principally in the equity market,
but its popularity has gradually expanded to embrace commodities, debt
instruments, currencies, and other international markets, In the days of the
old market, participants had a fairly long time horizon, stretching over
months or years. There have always been short-term traders and scalpers,
but the technological revolution in communications has shortened the time
horizon of just about everyone involved in markets. When holding periods
are lengthy, it is possible to indulge in the luxury of fundamental analysis,
but when time is short, timing is everything. In such an environment, tech-
nical analysis really comes into its own.

To be successful, the technical approach involves taking a position con-
trary to the expectations of the crowd. This requires the patience, objectiv-
ity, and discipline to acquire a financial asset at a time of depression and
gloom, and liquidate it in an environment of euphoria and excessive opti-
mism. The level of pessimism or optimism will depend on the turning point.
Short-term peaks and troughs are associated with more moderate extremes
in sentiment than longer-term ones. The aim of this book is to explain the
technical characteristics to be expected at all of these market turning
points, particularly major ones, and to help to assess them objectively.

Technical Analysis Defined

During the course of the book when itis time to emphasize a specific but
important point, it will be highlighted in the following way:

The technical approach to investment is essentially a reflection of the idea
that prices move in trends that are determined by the changing attitudes of
investors toward a variety of economic, monetary, political, and Psycholog-

Introduction

ical forces. The art of technical analysis, for it is an art, is to eb igen
ranensel ot selon caxtpstagn and.rika ce thoteanendiamedl the male ofthe 4
dence shows or proves that the trend has reversed. The evidence in Sores
represented by the numerous scientifically derived indicators descril
prt nature remains more or less constant and tends to react to a
ilar situations in consistent ways. By studying the nature of ab nee
turning points, it is possible to develop some characteristics tha| fret, i
to identify market tops and bottoms. Therefore, technical analysis fang etrt
the assumption that people will continue to make the same wierd, ponder
in the past. Human relationships are extremely complex an uit Ps =
in identical combinations. The markets, which are a reflection 0} hang’ ted
action, never duplicate their performance exactly, but the pty tant ra
ilar characteristics is sufficient to enable technicians to i si Jj aes
points. Since no single indicator has signaled, or indeed we ? nad etd
top or bottom, technical analysts have developed an arsenal of too!
isolate these points.

Three Branches of
Technical Analysis

i ii : sentiment,
ical analysis can be broken down into three essential areas: sen!

area nae and market structure indicators. Data and rina aa a
: i ket. For other financial -
three areas are available for the U.S. stock mar: saan
kets, the statistics are more or less confined to the market eg presk uae
tors. The major exceptions are futures markets based in the Uni g thet
for which short-term sentiment data are available. The following 2 ent

on sentiment and flow-of-funds indicators relate to the U.S. stock mar!

Sentiment Indicators

Sentiment or expectational indicators monitor the actions * rites ven
ket participants, such as ae ran ee te pai < ae
jalists. Just as the pendulum ofa cl y ‘

peg A so the et a indexes (which monitor Las pr oat
of investors) move from one extreme at a bear market bottom a mE
at a bull market top. The assumption on which these indicators bya
is that different groups of investors are consistent in their action: seme
market turning points. For example, insiders (that is, key employ’



4 Technical Analysis Explained

major stockholders of a company) and New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
members as a group have a tendency to be correct at market turning points;
in aggregate, their transactions are on the buy side toward market bottoms
and on the sell side toward tops.

Conversely, advisory services as a group are often wrong at market turn-
ing points, since they consistently become bullish at market tops and bear-
ish at market troughs. Indexes derived from such data show that certain
readings have historically corresponded to market tops, while others have
been associated with market bottoms. Since the consensus or majority opin-
ion is normally wrong at market turning points, these indicators of market
psychology are a useful basis from which to form a contrary opinion.

Flow-of-Funds Indicators

The area of technical analysis that involves what are loosely termed flow-of-
funds indicators analyzes the financial position of various investor groups in
an attempt to measure their potential capacity for buying or selling stocks.
Since there has to be a purchase for each sale, the ex post, or actual dollar
balance between supply and demand for stock, must always be equal. The
price at which a stock transaction takes place has to be the same for the buyer
and the seller, so naturally the amount of money flowing out of the market
must equal that put in. The flow-of-funds approach is therefore concerned
with the before-the-fact balance between supply and demand, known as the
ex ante relationship. If at a given price there is a preponderance of buyers over
sellers on an ex ante basis, it follows that the actual (ex post) price will have
to rise to bring buyers and sellers into balance.

Flow-of-funds analysis is concerned, for example, with trends in mutual
fund cash positions and those of other major institutions, such as pension
funds, insurance companies, foreign investors, bank trust accounts, and cus-
tomers’ free balances, which are normally a source of cash on the buy side.
On the supply side, flow-of-funds analysis is concerned with new equity offer-
ings, secondary offerings, and margin debt.

This money flow analysis also suffers from disadvantages. Although the
data measure the availability of money for the stock market (for example,
mutual fund cash position or pension fund cash flow), they give no indica-
tion of the incltfidtion of market participants to use this money for the pur-
chase of stocks, or of their elasticity or willingness to sell at a given price on
the sell side. The data for the major institutions and foreign investors are
not sufficiently detailed to be of much use, and in addition they are reported
well after the fact. In spite of these drawbacks, flow-of-funds statistics may
be used as background material.

Introduction 5

A superior approach to flow-of-funds analysis is derived from an exami-
nation of liquidity trends in the banking system, which measures financial
pressure not only on the stock market, but on the economy as well.

Market Structure Indicators

This area of technical analysis is the main concern of this book, embracing
market structure or the character of the market indicators. These indicators mon-
itor the trend of various price indexes, market breadt , cycles, volume, and
so on in order to evaluate the health of the’ prevailing trend.

Indicators that monitor the trend of a price include moving averages,
peak-and-trough analysis, price patterns, and trendlines. Such techniques
can also be applied to the sentiment and flow-of-funds indicators discussed
previously. This is because these indicators also move in trends. When the
trend of psychology, as reflected in these series, reverses, prices are also likely
to change direction.

Most of the time, price and internal measures, such as market breadth,
momentum, and volume, rise and fall together, but toward the end of mar-
ket movements, the paths of many of these indicators diverge from the
price. Such divergences offer signs of technical deterioration during
advances, and technical strength following declines. Through judicious
observation of these signs of latent strength and weakness, technically ori-
ented investors are alerted to the possibility of a reversal in the trend of
the market itself. —
