DAVE LANDRY

ON SWING TRADING



DAVE LANDRY

ON SWING TRADING

oosaese9888c88 8 @ @ @ a@eaeaeaoseesgcwesesseaee eae ae@eaea

David Landry

94. GORDON PUBLISHING GROUP

Los Angeles, California



Copyright © 2001, TradingMarkets.com

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
publisher and the authors.

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in re-
gard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the authors
and the publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional
service.

Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or for the internal or
personal use of specific clients, is granted by M. Gordon Publishing Group, Inc., pro-
vided that the U.S. $7.00 per page fee is paid directly to M. Gordon Publishing Group,
Inc., 1-213-955-5777.

ISBN 1-893756-09-2

Printed in the United States of America

Cover design by Conrad Kalil. Cover photo by Daniel Lincoln/Liaison. The book was
typeset in Palatino by Judy Brown.



To Marcy, for believing in me
even when I didn’t believe in myself.





CONTENTS

ooeogesgegdgeeaesosegedgedseeeseseaeeaegeaqgegqaoceseeeseeeesge#e#seseeteseseeagsgdgaa

PREFACE xi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS xiii
INTRODUCTION 1
SECTION ONE THE BASICS OF SWING TRADING 5
Chapter 1 DRAWDOWN: THE TRADER’S WORST ENEMY 7
Chapter 2 LANDRY'S RULES AND MONEY MANAGEMENT

FOR THE SWING TRADER uu
Chapter 3 TREND QUALIFIERS 17
Chapter 4 STOCK SELECTION 29
Chapter 5 PULLBACKS 33

SECTION TWO MORE SWING TRADING PATTERNS 59

Chapter 6 FAKEOUTS AND FALSE MOVES 61
Trend Knockouts 62
Double Top Knockout (DT-KO) 68
Trend Pivot (False Rally) Pullbacks 75

Vii


viii Contents
Chapter 7 BOW TIES 83
Chapter 8 MICRO PATTERNS 93

High-Level Micro Double Bottom 93

High-Level Micro Cup and Handle 100
SECTION THREE VOLATILITY 109
Chapter 9 FINDING EXPLOSIVE MOVES:

AN ADVANCED LESSON IN SWING TRADING 11

SECTION FOUR MARKET TIMING 123
Chapter 10 MARKET TIMING FOR SWING TRADING 125

Discretionary Analysis 125

Oscillator Swing System 129

TRIN Reversals 133

CVR Il—Modified 138
SECTION FIVE OPTIONS 159
Chapter 11 A FEW WORDS ABOUT USING

OPTIONS WITH SWING TRADES 161

SECTION SIX PSYCHOLOGY 165
Chapter 12 TRADER’S PSYCHOLOGY 167
Chapter 13 LESSONS LEARNED 173
SECTION SEVEN PUTTING THE PIECES TOGETHER 183
Chapter 14 NIGHTLY PREPARATION 185
Chapter 15 MORE EXAMPLES 191

Money-Management Examples 191

Trend Qualifiers and Setup Examples 195
Chapter 16 MORE THOUGHTS 203
Chapter 17 READY, SET, WAIT! 207
Chapter 18 CLOSING THOUGHTS 209



Corttents ix

APPENDIX 211
Formulas 211
Glossary 212
Shorting Stocks: The Art of Playing Both Sides of The Market 220
Capturing Trends with the ADX 224





PREFACE

oaaegeg9g9dgeseeaaaeeegdaskssoeesee#segeesgea

T have a confession. I am a trading-method “junkie.” I buy, or at least used
to buy, every book on trading published. When a book would arrive, I’d
take the phone off the hook, pull down the shades and was not to be dis-
turbed. Id tear into it like an addict long overdue for a fix. When I’d read
the introduction about how great the book was going to be, I’d feel my
pulse quicken as ] thought of how much money I'd make applying the con-
cepts.

Then, slowly but surely, I’d feel myself let down as none of the promise
materialized. Authors had methods that were extremely complex and dif-
ficult to understand. Further, they were purposely vague. And worse,
many, at the end of the book, would assure me that if I spent another
thousand or so on a trading course, then I'd really get the concepts.

When Larry Connors, CEO of TradingMarkets.com and M. Gordon Pub-
lishing, approached me to do a book, I told him “Great! I’ve got these
theories.” After a moment of uncomfortable silence, Larry suggested,
“Why don’t you write about exactly what you do in a clear, concise man-
ner? After all, this is what you do on the Website and what people have
come to expect from you.”

At this point, it hit me. I was on the verge of writing a book long on the-
ory and short on substance. A book not unlike the trading books |
loathed.

xi


xii Preface

I began to think, what type of book would I want to buy? With that
thought in my head, I began writing about my exact techniques I use day
in and day out in my trading and market analysis. These techniques are
not rocket science. If you’re looking for a book with complex magic for-
mulas, then you'll surely be disappointed. However, if you're interested
in a simple, straightforward approach to swing trading, then this book is
for you.



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

o9aoegeg9eeseaqaeaseses8esgaqesegegeseggeaeeaea%eaqeaektgeeseteste

In markets, many often come to the same conclusion through observation
and experience. Over the years, I’ve come up with many “discoveries,” only
to later find out that others have come to the same conclusion years prior. I
have strived to give credit where credit is due to those that have influenced
me. For those of you who have come to similar conclusions and are not rec-
ognized, I can assure you, it’s simply an oversight and I apologize.

The following people have had a material impact not only on this book
but also on me, as well as my life. Words alone cannot thank them
enough.

Me being where I am was set off by a chain of events six years ago. A
chain of events started by Joe Calandro who convinced me that my re-
search was worthy.

To Larry Connors, for teaching me how to think “conceptually correct”
when it comes to the markets. Also, for pushing me to excel and forcing
me to recognize untapped talent, and for providing me with numerous
opportunities.

To Jeff Cooper, for teaching me how to read charts and for showing me
you can make a living trading stocks on a short-term basis. To those of
you familiar with Jeff’s works, you'll notice his influence throughout this
manual.

To my futures broker, Rob Lingle, for giving me the same respect given
to large traders back when I was just getting started.

xili


xiv Acknowledgments

To Ken Brown for teaching me to approach trading as a business and for making me a
principal in his firm.

To my parents Anna Marie and Sentive Joseph (S.J.) Landry, for putting up with me
and all my endeavors over the years.

To my step-daughter Suzie for making me “daddy.” And to my daughter Isabelle for
always greeting me with a big smile and open arms even on days when I violate my
risk-loss parameters. Both of you bring so much joy to my life.

The following people were instrumental in creating this book. Without them, it would
never have happened. First and foremost, to the staff of M. Gordon Publishing espe-
cially Danilo Torres and Andy Splichal for their work in getting this book published.
Thanks also to my editor Judy Brown of Brown Enterprises and proofreaders Jim
Johnson, Duke Heberlein, Jason Meyer and Marianne Winfield.

To John Del Gaudio for giving me the perspective of an aspiring, novice trader and for
not letting me gloss over anything.



INTRODUCTION

ooee8ee%e8eeefeeesgseaeeseeeeseuseeaececeeeeeeenstaeae

Natural ebbs and flows of markets occur over time. Markets often thrust,
rest and thrust again. Many times these thrusts can be substantial but, un-
fortunately, are short lived. In fact, based on research conducted by hedge
fund manager Mark Boucher, 70% of a market’s moves occur in 20% of the
time. The rest of the time, markets consolidate by trading back-and-forth to
“digest” their gains. The intermediate-term trader is willing to sit through
these periods for weeks to months. On the other hand, the nimble swing
trader carefully picks his spots and is able to capture the crux of a market’s
move without the excessive risks of longer-term market exposure.

At the other end of the spectrum from the intermediate-term trader is the
daytrader. Daytraders avoid carrying positions overnight for fear of large
adverse market moves. However, as professional trader Jeff Cooper
states, “surprises often happen in the direction of the trend.” I’ll take this
one step further and say that surprises happen in the direction of the
trend over several days. And, by holding positions for two to seven days,
substantial market moves can often be captured. The exact reason that
daytraders do not take positions home—for fear of overnight sur-
prises—is the exact reason that I do swing trade. Referring to Figure I.1
of Intel (INTC), notice that the stock had rolled over and had began to
downtrend. Also notice that it set up and triggered an entry as a Bow Tie
(explained in detail in Chapter 7) the same day they announced (after the
close) that they would have an earnings shortfall. The stock implodes
overnight and trades lower over the next seven days.



a
2 Introduction

FIGURE 1.1

pe oetsanemnny oe

This is not to say that all positions will lead to huge “surprises” over-
night. Like all styles of trading, the results of swing trading are skewed.
That is, the majority of the profits come from the minority of the trades.
You win some, you lose some and through a consistent approach and ex-
ercising strict money management, you position yourself to capture ex-
traordinary market moves.

This manual is intended to be a complete treatise on momentum-based
swing trading. It is based on my passion for the markets and over 10
years of research and trading. Although I have strived to keep the meth-
ods as simple as possible, if you are new to trading, you might want to
study the glossary found in the Appendix before getting started. Looking
ahead, in Section One, I cover the basics of swing trading including
drawdown, rules and money management, straightforward methods for
identifying trends and pullbacks. After years of searching for the “Holy
Grail” of trading, I have returned to these time-proven basics. In fact,
90% of my trading and market analysis is based upon the concepts cov-



Introduction 3

ered here. In Section Two, I discuss more specific setups for swing trad-
ing. These include Fakeouts and False Moves which allow the swing
trader to take advantage of traders who have been knocked out or are
trapped on the wrong side of the market; Bow Ties, which seek to cap-
ture a transition in the trend without the pitfalls associated with top and
bottom picking; and Micro Patterns, which are smaller, yet quite often ef-
fective, versions of classical technical analysis patterns. In Section Three,
Volatility, Il show how volatility can be combined with basic and ad-
vanced concepts discussed in the manual to capture large moves in
stocks. In Section Four, Market Timing, I show how to combine the pat-
terns, setups and concepts discussed in the manual with the overall mar-
ket. I’ll also sow three swing-trading systems developed for the index
futures. By implementing these techniques, you will stack the odds in
your favor by trading on the correct side of the market. In Section Five,
Options, I will show how the swing trader can used options to help con-
trol risks and maximize profits. In Section Six, Psychology, I will discuss
how to recognize and avoid the psychological pitfalls associated with
trading. I will also discuss lessons learned through my own experience
and those of others. Finally, in Section Seven, I will tie everything to-
gether by discussing nightly preparation, as well as providing numerous
examples and some additional thoughts on swing trading. In the Appen-
dix, I provide all the formulas mentioned throughout the manual along
with a primer on shorting stocks for those new to trading.





SECTION ONE

THE BASICS OF
SWING TRADING

o 6s @© @ @ 8 @©@ @ @ 9 8 © e@ & @ © ew ow ew a ew eo es ew ew oeaeaa





CHAPTER 1

DRAWDOWN: THE
TRADER’S WORST ENEMY

You cannot get ahead while you are getting even.

— Dick Armey

All the setups and concepts in this manual, or any trading manual for that
matter, are completely worthless without following general rules and proper
money management. This can best be demonstrated through the study of
drawdown.

Drawdown is simply the amount of money you lose trading, expressed
as a percentage of your total trading equity. If all your trades were profit-
able, you would never experience a drawdown. Drawdown does not
measure overall performance, only the money lost while achieving that
performance. Its calculation begins only with a losing trade and contin-
ues as long as the account hits new equity lows.

Maximum Drawdown or Peak-to-Trough Drawdown is the largest per-
centage drop in your account between equity peaks. In other words, it’s
how much money you lose until you get back to breakeven. If you began
with $10,000 and lost $4,000 before getting back to breakeven, your maxi-
mum drawdown would be 40%. Keep in mind that no matter how much



a
8 Chapter 1

you are up in your account at any given time—100%, 200%, 300%—a
100% drawdown will wipe out your trading account.

Recovering from a drawdown can be extremely difficult and illustrates
why money management is so important. Those new to trading believe
that if they lose 10%, they will be back to breakeven on the first 10%
gain. Unfortunately, this is not true. In order to make back a 10% loss,
you must make at least 11.11% on your remaining equity. Even worse is
that as the drawdowns deepen, the recovery percentage begins to grow
geometrically. For example, a 50% loss requires a 100% return just to get
back to break even. This is illustrated in Table 1.1 and Figure 1.1 below. I
strongly urge you to make a copy of these figures and paste them near
your trading desk.

Professional traders and money mangers are well aware of how difficult
it is to recover from drawdowns. Those who succeed long term have the
utmost respect for risk. They get on top and stay on top, not by being
gunslingers and taking huge risks, but by controlling risk through proper
money management. Sure, we all like to read about famous traders who
parlay small sums into fortunes, but what these stories fail to mention is
that many such traders, through lack of respect for risk, are eventually

wiped out.
TABLE 1.1
% of Gain
% Loss of Required to
Capital Recoup Loss
10% 11.11%
20% 25.00%
30% 42.85%
40% 66.66%
50% 100%
60% 150%
70% 233%
80% 400%
90%. 900%
100% broke

Notice that as losses (drawdown) increase, the percent gain necessary to
recover to breakeven increases at a much faster rate.



Drawdown: The Trader's Worst Enemy

9

FIGURE 1.1

000

% .
800 -

Tt

° | 600 ;

e | 400 —s

o | 200 =

¥ oo *"e + + +

e 0 SSE Ee :

r 10 20 30 40 50 60 Fo 80 90

Percent loss (drawdown) vs. percent to recover. Notice that the percent to recover (top line)
grows at a geometric rate as the percent loss increases. This illustrates the difficulty of

recovering from a loss and why money management is so important.





CHAPTER 2 |

LANDRY’S RULES AND
MONEY MANAGEMENT
FOR THE SWING TRADER

oogeseadgweskeseaeaseseaqeseaedgeec6cee#seaoeaeaae

1. Treat Trading as a Business—Most people wouldn't dream of starting
a business without everything necessary. Yet, many, while trying to
become a successful trader, cut corners when it comes to equipment.
Make sure you create an infrastructure which supports your business
on an ongoing and emergency basis. This includes buying the best
computers, data and charts you can afford.

2. Do Your Homework—In trading you are competing against some of
brightest minds in the world. Therefore, you must be willing to put in
the necessary hours to be prepared.

3. Manage Yourself—In trading you are responsible for all of your deci-
sions. Make sure you are making them with a clear mind. Don’t trade
if you are sick, distracted, during major life events or if you are simply
not prepared.

11


a
12 Chapter 2

4. The Trend Is Your Friend—Market moves often last much longer and
go much further than most are willing to admit. Trying to pick tops
and bottoms is a loser’s game.

5. Limit Losses—As soon as a position is initiated, you should have a
protective stop right below the recent support (for longs), or above re-
cent resistance (for shorts). For purposes of the setups outlined in the
manual, this will usually be below the lowest bar of the setup (for
longs) or the highest bar of the setup (for shorts). If this is greater than
5% of the stock’s value, risk no more than 5%.

Swing trading often produces many small gains with only an occasional
home run. Therefore, protective stops must be used on all trades. Getting
careless on just one trade can erase many winners.

Longs Shorts
Support
Protective
Stop Protective
Stop

Resistance

6. No Tickie, No Tradie—Swing trading involves identifying short-term
support and resistance and where a market will likely re-assert itself. It
is not about fading the market by picking tops and bottoms. There-
fore, wait for follow through before attempting to enter a trade.

For instance, suppose a market is in rally mode and begins to sell off,
chances are the next move will be a resumption of the original uptrend.
However, until that uptrend begins to resume, positions should not be
initiated. For longs, this means waiting for the market to turn back up,
and for shorts, it means waiting for the market to turn back down.



|
Landry's Rules and Money Management for the Swing Trader 13

Wrong Correct

Lear
Entry
\feres Support

7. Take Partial Profits Quickly—On most swing trades, the profits will
be small and have the potential to quickly erode. Therefore, as soon as
your profits (a) are equal to or greater than your initial risk (b), you should
lock in half of your profits and move your protective stop on your remaining
shares to breakeven (c) (near your original entry).

Ic)
Entry y
\ A Pron ca
—F Initial Risk (b)

——
Protective
Stop

Locking in half of your profits and moving your stop to breakeven when
your profits are greater than or equal to your initial risk, will help to gen-
erate income for your account. This income will help to pay for the inevi-



eee
14 Chapter 2

table small losses associated with swing trading. Further, barring
overnight gaps, this gives you, at worst, a breakeven trade and a chance
at a home run on the remaining position. Larry Connors, in Connors On
Advanced Trading, has dubbed this simple, yet effective, form of money
management “2-for-1 Money Management.” We will walk through sev-
eral examples of this concept under Chapter 15, “More Examples.”

8. Take Windfall Profits—As a swing trader, windfall profits are often
few and far between. Therefore, you should lock in all or a significant
piece of your profits when parabolic moves occur. After all, large
moves occur as players dog pile onto a market as it becomes obvious
to the masses. You've got to ask yourself, once it’s obvious and the
last players are entering the market, who’s left to buy?

As an example, notice below in Figure 2.1 that Agilent Technologies (A)
had a tremendous one-day gain (a), but all of those gains were eroded
over the next few days (b).

FIGURE 2.1

Agilent Technologies-Daily 03/15/2000 C=114.250
a + 190
tl
. oF Legg
+90
6 13

ith SuperCharts by Omega Research © 1997



Landry's Rules and Money Management for the Swing Trader

Never, never, never allow the above to happen to you. Not only is this
financially debilitating but its also psychologically debilitating.

9.

10.

11.

12,

13.

Trade in Liquid and Active Markets—As swing traders, we are look-
ing for an immediate short-term move. We don’t have the luxury of
waiting around until a large price-move takes place. Therefore, the
markets we trade in must be liquid and active so we can move in and
out with ease, and, hopefully, capture short-term fluctuations. Trading
in thin and dull markets can be costly and will likely chew you up, as
most short-term trading profits are small. We'll expand upon this con-
cept in Chapter 4, Stock Selection and Section Three, Volatility.

Stack the Odds in Your Favor—In trading, the more pieces of the
puzzle that fit together, the better. This means determining an overall
market bias (if any), trading the strongest stocks in the strongest sec-
tors (or weakest stocks in the weakest sectors for shorts) and combin-
ing bigger picture technical patterns and studying the volatility of the
stock. We'll expand upon these concepts throughout this manual.

Keep Position Size Within Reason—Swing trading is a game of prob-
abilities. You win some, you lose some, and hopefully, through a con-
sistent approach, you make money overall. Swing trading is not about
trying to hit “home runs” by taking excessive risk on any one position.
In fact, you should never take a position large enough to have a mate-
rial impact on your trading account should—or more likely, when—a
price shock occurs. In general, you should not risk more than 2% of
your account value on any given trade.

Never Add to a Losing Position!—If you are wrong, then admit it
and move on. Averaging down, that is, adding to losing positions is a
loser’s game.

Enter the Entire Position at Once—In swing trading we are in the
market for a short period of time and looking for a swift move. Unlike
the longer-term player who has the luxury of building positions over
time and at an average price while waiting for the market to move,
the swing trader is looking for an immediate move. In most cases, you
should be looking to lock in profits and tighten stops as the market
moves in your favor—not add to positions.

If you must pyramid, then do it quickly as the position moves in your
favor, and make sure it looks like an actual pyramid. In other words,
only add to profitable positions and establish your largest position

15



16 Chapter 2

first. A 3-2-1 is good ratio for establishing positions. For instance, if
your position size is 500 shares, then enter 300, then 200, then 100,
provided of course, the market is moving in your favor while adding
to the position.

14. Remain Consistent—Successful traders find a formula and stick to it.
Swing trading is no different. You must find an approach that works
for you and apply it in a consistent methodical manner. In addition to
being consistent in your approach, you must also be consistent in your
money-management techniques. This involves keeping position size
within reason, using initial protective stops, taking profits and trailing
stops.
