
Identify power spikes through their divergence from intermediate moving averages of volume
(VMAs). A single day signals a spike event when volume equals or exceeds three times the 50-day
VMA. If significant activity stretches across a series of trading days, ratchet down the individual
daily requirement. In these cases, volume must equal or exceed two times the 50-day VMA for two
days in a row. Adjust these levels according to personal interest. One highly effective modification
tightens up requirements so that only the most dramatic market action makes the cut. For this
narrow output, move up to five times the VMA for a single bar and three times for multiday events.
Apply the right spike strategy to each setup. First identify whether the opportunity relies on a
breakout, breakdown, reversal, or swing. Then apply classic Pattern Cycle tactics. Breakouts and
breakdowns rely on pullback entry or tight arbitrary stop loss if the stock moves vertically. Shift
down to the next-lower time frame for reversals and enter by relying on that pattern for support. Use
a 1-2 pierce strategy for swing spikes. Let it pierce the axis and test it once. On the next test, enter
in the direction of price swinging back through the center pivot.
The power spike may draw so much energy that it short circuits subsequent price movement. The
active trend quickly flatlines after these spikes as crowd interest dissipates. This phenomenon will
often induce a series of inside days and narrow range bars. Stand aside when these conditions
appear because they generate few good trading opportunities. Look for this exhaustion move after
extreme volume prints five to six times the 50-day VMA.
Signals that follow a long uptrend or downtrend generally flag a significant reversal. These find
confirmation through relative strength indicators that turn sharply from overbought or oversold
territory. Spike volume provides breakout cross-verification when price surges through significant
support or resistance. Pivot spikes exhibit more subtle properties. These events often arise in the
middle of well-defined trading ranges. They predict markets that will swing (pivot) back and forth
across affected prices until time absorbs instability.
Watch out for preplanned stock activity that negates a spike’s technical value. High volume days
may not arise from an emotional crowd. The underlying company could be issuing a secondary
stock offering of many million shares. Or a significant investment by a single holder could execute
on that date. And always adjust for stock splits as soon as they happen so that the eyes have
legitimate data to crunch.

APPLICATIONS
Since high volume can signify many different events, power spikes present a wide variety of
possible setups and patterns. Place most of the trading effort on potential tops, bottoms, and
breakouts. Then combine power spikes with other classic patterns and charting landscape features
to identify promising opportunities. Keep in mind that pivoting spikes generate complicated
strategies that most market players should avoid.
FIGURE 12.3
A March Level 3 power spike induces 8 months of pivot price action. High-volume events can signal a major
redistribution from one set of investment hands to another. This process may take months to unwind after the
initial shock. This forces price to swivel back and forth across the boundary that induces the change. Look for this
type of action after a fundamental shift such as a stock’s addition to the S&P 500 Index.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

BREAKDOWN SPIKE
Breaks of major support should trigger high volume. This signifies that the event shocks the crowd
and incurs enough damage to keep price below that violation level for some time. The most
damaging breaks come when price action raises false hope and then crushes the hopeful.

Description
•
•
•

The stock sets up an obvious support level that persists for months.
The level breaks down in a high-volume event.
The price decline then continues at a milder angle than before the event.

Power spikes rarely signal the first breakdown within a downtrend. They set up with such great
force because volume remains low on prior selloffs. The wounded survivors draw a common price
where pain will become too great to carry their positions. Action strikes this level and forces
everyone through the exit door at the same time. This raises an exhaustion issue for the subsequent
trend. How can that market head lower if everyone has already sold? The answer comes from basic
physics: it just continues to fall from its own weight.

FIGURE 12.4

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Setup Tactics (FIGURE 12.4)
•
•
•
•
•
•

Marimba marks an August low near 20 (1).
The next 6 months draw a slowly rising trendline (6).
A decline (7) starts in March and carries the stock down 40 points on low volume.
The rising trendline breaks (2).
Price tests the August low (3), holds, and bounces into a pullback (4) of the broken
trendline.
The low penetrates an inverse 3rd watch (5) and triggers a power spike.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 12.5)
Price pulls back to the broken horizontal support (4) and signals an ideal short sale entry (1).
Price action on the mid-April low before the breakdown shows a hidden gap between 21 and 22
(5). Place a stop loss at the top of this gap near 22.
Additional short entries appear at (6), (7), and (8).

Consider exit as price approaches each test of a prior low or prints an expansion bar.
Price returns to test the spike at the 50% retracement of the major decline (2), (4). Bollinger
Bands move to horizontal (3) and telegraph the reversal.
FIGURE 12.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
The setup presents many small opportunities with limited reward and risk. Lower volatility follows
the power spike event. This reduces whipsaws but also limits profits. Short-term holds could book
2–3-point rewards with risk of 1 point or less. A single short sale right after the signal would yield a
50% profit in just over 3 weeks, with only one test of a trailing stop loss.
PULLBACK SPIKE

High-volume breakouts should generate further price gains after the initial power spike absorbs the
crowd. The most dynamic events occur when the rally jumps out of a long base. Look for classic
elements to support spike prediction. Fibonacci and S/R should both align to identify low-risk entry
before the follow-through event begins.
Description
•
•
•
•

Price movement establishes a long and stable base.
A wide-range bar gaps above the base on very high volume and triggers a power spike.
The bar closes above the midpoint of its high-low range.
The next bar does not exceed the high of the spike bar.

Focus analysis on the first two bars that follow the event. The setup negates if price drives higher
immediately. Look for a pullback that retains some volatility while volume declines. A harami often
appears on the first bar after the event. Drop down to the next-lower time frame and measure the
hole-in-the-wall resistance produced by that candle pattern.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 12.6)
•
•
•
•

Meade Instruments breaks out of a long base with a power spike (1) that prints a 23-pointwide range bar.
The next bar marks an inside day that completes a tight symmetrical triangle on the 60minute chart (5).
Meade gaps down out of the triangle (4) the next morning and declines to a 62% retracement
(2) of the entire rally.
The Fib grid (3) shows an extension reward target 38% above the high of the spike bar.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 12.7)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Enter a high-risk position as price jumps back above the 62% retracement (7). Place a stop
loss under the low near 35.
Plan an exit as price approaches a test of the gap (4) from below.
Enter a lower-risk position as price fills the gap and jumps to the other side of the triangle
apex.
Plan an exit as price expands into a test of the spike high (1) (5).
Momentum above the spike high builds quickly and offers few safe entries. It also comes
without the expected double top failure.
Price reaches Fibonacci extension target (2) and reverses.
Two pullbacks to the spike high (3) and whole number 60 offer good entry. The first prints a
hammer reversal (6) on the 60-minute chart.

FIGURE 12.6

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
The setup presents limited risk for a 23-point power spike. Features on the 60-minute chart establish
well-defined S/R and target high-odds execution. The trade through the triangle apex offers a 2–3point risk and 10–15-point reward. The stock then goes right through the old high without drawing
a 3rd watch pattern. The vertical movement makes safe entry difficult to locate.
CLIMAX SPIKE
This setup should look familiar by now. It focuses on a major reversal at the end of an extended
rally. Price shoots out the top Bollinger Band in a power spike and reverses violently back within its
boundaries. The event prints a notable candlestick pattern, such as a long-legged doji or dark cloud
cover. The swing trader then enters short sales that use supporting features of the charting
landscape to minimize risk.
Description
Stochastics or RSI indicator climbs to overbought levels and stays there.
An extended rally precedes the signal.

A sharp increase in short-term momentum precedes the signal.
Price pushes out of the top Bollinger Band close to 100% of its range.
The stock triggers a power spike when it reverses violently on high volume.
Price action on the reversal displays wide range.
FIGURE 12.7

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The preceding trend often prints a rising parallel price channel just before the climax event. The
bars that lead into the signal feature an upside channel break. This flags a momentum surge, which
draws in heavy participation for the subsequent reversal. Remember that the signal does not
produce opportunity by itself. Setups arise from price interaction with key landscape features after
the shock event.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 12.8)
•

Ramtron International draws a 6-week rising parallel price channel (2).

•
•
•

A two-bar power spike (1) begins as price shoots through the top Bollinger Band in a 14point bar.
Dark cloud cover reverses momentum and pulls price back under the top Bollinger Band.
The daily chart and 60-minute chart both record similar Bollinger Band violations.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 12.9)
A hidden exhaustion gap (7) marks strong resistance on the first pullback (4).
This pullback rally between 30 and 32 (4) identifies a good short sale but the position must
execute in a very active market.
Place a Fib grid over the decline to focus short sale entry points. The rally into the gap stops
right at the 62% retracement and offers a perfect entry into gap resistance (1). The position
whipsaws for 1 day but never tests the entry point.
Consider an exit as soon as price breaks below the whipsaw and toward a test of the
intermediate low at 25.
Price completes an Adam and Eve top (5) that breaks down at (2). Sell the break and place a
stop loss above 25.
A down trendline (6) sets up from the declining tops.
Price bounces sharply off 20 (3) at the 20-day Bollinger Band center.
A rally breaks the down trendline (6), pulls back to resistance at 25 (2), and offers another lowrisk short sale.
The major trendline (8) and center Bollinger Band break on the next selloff.
The violation triggers an 8-point, 3-day decline. Sell the trendline break or bar expansion below
20.
FIGURE 12.8

FIGURE 12.9

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
Take the time to study volatile conditions after a spike event to identify the pattern’s unique
message. Short entry at the second double top high offers tremendous profit potential for a longerterm position. The setup also presents many short-term opportunities as the decline gathers
momentum. Notice how volatility slowly drops through the course of the bear market. Later entries
face fewer short squeezes and turn south right at broken support.

13 CHAPTER
BEAR HUG

CHARACTERISTICS
Short sales require greater precision than long entries. Swing traders who just flip over successful
long-side strategies often get burned. Different mechanics push rallies and selloffs. It takes demand

and strong volume to lift stocks, but they can fall for long periods on low volume under the right
circumstances. Violent market selloffs can end quickly and with little warning. And stocks that
should fall when they break support just sit there or rally as broad bullishness infects the most
hopeless issues.
Market professionals know exactly where uninformed participants will try to short stocks. They lie
in wait and trigger short squeezes to take advantage of the buying pressure that these orders build
into the market. Short sale strategy must deal with short covering rallies. Try to stay flat into a
squeeze and sell the top of the rally just as other participants give up. As with many swing
strategies, this uncomfortable trade requires patience and a skilled eye.

TRADE MECHANICS
The markets carry an underlying bullish bias. Many participants simply buy momentum and
practice few other tactics. These speculators never learn the true trading art, in which profits come
from both sides of the market. Take the time to practice this important skill. Start with small short
positions even if long-side tactics require larger lots. Avoid common momentum mistakes such as
chasing entry in major selloffs. Be defensive and watch the ticker closely. Squeezes begin at the
same levels at which participants expect fast declines. When price suddenly finds support for no
reason, get out first and ask questions later.
Align short sales to low-risk market conditions. Avoid selling during the first and last hours until
experience recognizes the many dangers of these active periods.
High-float, lower-volatility stocks make great trading vehicles with limited risk. Learn to hit many
singles before swinging for the short sale home run. Favor sideways-to-flat up markets over falling
ones. These dull conditions keep the crowd away while still generating excellent profit potential.
Bear hug uses two different setups to identify short sale opportunities. Each relies on a different
profile that favors further price decline. The first searches for bear market stocks that complete
countertrend rallies into resistance. The second follows the coiled spring setup, but candidates must
exhibit low relative strength. In both cases the hug finds many weak stocks on the verge of further
breakdown.
Downtrend stocks can only fall for so long. A relief rally can erupt at any time to squeeze out shorts
and build hope until resistance invites new selling. Or these beaten-up issues may base for long
periods and make several unsuccessful attempts to return to bull status. The first bear hug pattern
seeks these types of market conditions rather than trying to find uptrends about to break. Short
interest tends to be lower in this environment, and setups produce more dependable signals with
fewer surprises.
FIGURE 13.1
Verio offers excellent short sales above and below the 200-day moving average. Markets undergo an important
change in character when they cross this important psychological barrier. Buyers rule above the average and
sellers rule below. But bear markets tend to exhibit much lower participation and volatility than bull markets. This
can limit or enhance short-term trading conditions.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Look for failed efforts on the verge of rolling over into new downtrends. These bear rallies often
rise into intermediate resistance such as the 50-day EMA. They can retrace 62% of the prior
breakdown or bounce sharply off a horizontal ceiling. The pattern should display strong resistance
and several obvious reversals. These testing levels point to new bear impulses about to emerge.
Careful timing builds profits after finding good candidates. Selling short into an oversold market
can have undesirable results. Look for a RSI plot that rises to an overbought level and then turns
down. Or find a Stochastics plot that drops off the top into a series of lower lows. In either case, the
setup must suggest that the last bulls have used up the available demand for that stock.
Read the pattern closely before taking a position. The bear rally should print a clear topping
formation such as a double top or descending triangle. When the chart looks bearish but doesn’t fit
all the definitions, drop down and study the short-term bars. They should confirm or refute the
rollover and identify potential entry points. But don’t be in a hurry. Breakdowns take time to build
momentum. Avoid positions that may evolve into sideways markets by waiting as long as possible
for the pattern to give up its secrets.
The second scan follows the narrow range logic of the coiled spring. Because the generic NR7 lacks
directional bias for price expansion (i.e., it has an equal chance of going either way), visual filters
attempt to tilt the odds in the bear’s favor. In this setup, price constricts into a very tight range after

a selloff and volatility declines. This dissipates bull power through a different mechanism than a
relief rally. Gravity eventually takes hold and the stock rolls over.
Enter a short sale after the NR7 or place a sell stop to catch the breakdown as it triggers. Price will
quickly expand in a series of stepping moves when the trade works. Keep a tight stop loss on the
other side of congestion to recognize a bad position. This trade has an excellent reward:risk profile
when other factors support a decline. Even without confirming indicators, swing traders will know
quickly when a position fails and can cut their losses economically.
FIGURE 13.2
Excellent short sales appear early in a decline after a stock breaks the 50-day moving average. This intermediate
measurement offers strong resistance on a pullback when other landscape features cross-verify that price level. Note
how Viant breaks below the 50-day EMA and fills an old gap before bouncing up to test the average. A buzzsaw of
other resistance in the low 40s supports an immediate short sale position.

RealTick® © 1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Measure reward for both hug strategies by finding the next major low. Bear rallies can rise off an
unstable floor or a sharp climax reversal. Old support may fail as soon as price approaches or hold
firm in a significant bottom formation. So look for adequate reward between entry and this low to
justify the position. One strategy retains a piece of the trade as price reaches a low test in
anticipation of a break. But if tactics limit holding period, exit completely on expansion toward this
support.

The best short sale profits come from the quick drop. This requires excellent timing or a welldefined pattern. Mesa tops (see Figure 15.3) offer a little-known short sale with unique reward
characteristics. This setup presents a specialized double top failure. Its power lies in the price
mechanics that trigger on the breakdown. Mesas fall at exactly the same angle as they rise. Their
decline often prints only a single bounce before reaching the 100% retracement.
Recognize the pattern by its squared top or sharp twin peaks after a parabolic climax. Look for the
initial decline from the second high to draw a mirror image of the preceding rally. This signals that
the selloff will likely continue at the same intensity after violation of double top support. The most
profitable short sales come after price breaks the 62% retracement of the last uptrend.

BEAR STRATEGIES
Choose short sale entry that manages risk. Always try to sell at resistance where a small move
against the position will confirm that the trade has failed. These well-defined execution points
require a strong stomach. They print just as a rally suggests that a new uptrend has begun. Less
aggressive traders can sit back and wait for a price rollover rather than trying to catch a rocket ship.
Alternatively, watch for whipsaw violations of key resistance with price that falls quickly back
below the barrier. These will form shooting stars or doji candles that signal a top within the lower
time frame.
Learn to see less obvious resistance that allows safer entry due to the crowd’s absence. Execution at
these quieter levels greatly reduces short squeeze risk. While the crowd concentrates on horizontal
ceilings or moving averages, focus attention on secondary barriers. Declining parallel price
channels or Bollinger Band extremes offer high-reward short sales with fewer whipsaws. Or apply
Fib grids but overlay several trend lengths to reveal small turning points that few others will notice.
Short squeeze completion generates excellent conditions for new short sales. The covering rally
cleans out buying pressure and restores balance. Upside momentum ebbs and the environment that
generated selling in the first place suddenly returns. Market players sense this and quickly reverse
the short-term trend. Swing traders can anticipate the end of a squeeze better than their competition.
Apply a Fib grid over the selloff that the rising market retraces. The rally should not exceed 62% of
the prior fall unless strong buyers enter the action. Squeezes rarely break above major resistance, so
the technicals should not trigger their participation. More likely, only weak longs with very bad
timing place their bets as they watch the market rise.
Avoid selling into strongly negative momentum. Risk escalates dramatically chasing a decline just
as it does during a sharp rally. Wait for a bounce or short squeeze before considering a new
execution. Ironically, flat-to-minor up markets offer better shorting conditions with less risk and
fewer squeezes. Never place a market order into a rapid decline. The squeeze can occur at any time
and without warning. The order will catch the upticks of a sudden rally and force the trade into a
major loss before an exit appears.
Down gaps make excellent short entry vehicles. Watch for the first rally after the break and
consider execution if price pierces the space. A down gap initiates strong selling pressure from
shareholders trapped in positions when the shock event occurs. The first bounce gives them a
chance to limit damage and get out. If the gap also breaks a topping pattern, look for dojis or
hammers that mark the lower boundary of that congestion. Their shadows tell the swing trader
where selling should reverse the market. But always keep an eye out for a gap echo reversal. Exit
trades immediately if price jumps back across the barrier in a new up gap.
