launch definable trends. These shakeouts occur because most
traders play popular strategies that have been deconstructed by
market professionals. In a sense, the buy and sell signals found in
TA books are turned against the naive folks using them.

Yo-Yos
There are three types of traders in this world: winners, losers, and yo-yos. It
doesn’t take much effort to comprehend the virtues of winning or the liabilities of losing, but what exactly constitutes a yo-yo trader? Quite simply, these
folks know how to make and lose a ton of money, sometimes all in the same
day. Sadly, yo-yos make up such a large segment of the trading population
that they may represent the silent majority of the financial markets.
This common affliction is simple enough to understand. Many
traders develop enough skills to put on profitable positions with relative
ease, but they also play all the stinkers, paying the price with substantial
losses. In this bipolar purgatory, there’s enough positive reinforcement to
keep them in the game for years but not enough profit to make a real dent
in their bottom lines.
Yo-yo traders comprise two very different profiles. The first type
grinds through mediocre results on a daily basis, hoping that lightning

108

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

will eventually strike. The second type shows profitable results over long
periods, only to crash and burn in an orgy of bad trades over equally long
periods. All traders display both types of yo-yo performance from time to
time during the course of their careers. The trick is to recognize the onset
of yo-yo performance as early as possible and to engage in prophylactic
practices that will reduce the inevitable damage.
Two major flaws lead to yo-yo trading performance. First, the
afflicted individuals lack effective risk control techniques. This causes
them to act inappropriately, or not at all, when positions move against
them. Unfortunately, operant conditioning kicks in at the worst possible
time because they’ve gotten bailed out often enough to believe the
market will come back in their favor if they just wait it out. Of course,
the math fails to add up, and bad karma takes over with rising losses and
dwindling profits.
The second flaw reveals a far steeper challenge to long-term survival.
Their equity growth actually tracks the market and looks like an index chart.
In other words, these yo-yo traders make money when the broad market
is rising and then lose it when it rolls over and starts to sell off. This is a
tough proposition because the secret to long-term success is holding onto
your winnings through all kinds of markets. This major defect exposes a
bull market mentality that reaps destruction during pullbacks, corrections,
and every downdraft in a typical week. Unfortunately, it’s also how most
traders play the markets because it follows an unconscious mindset that
confers legitimacy solely to uptrends while assuming that all other environments are aberrations or freaks of nature. This mental mistake reveals
the primary reason so much money was lost after the March 2000 and July
2007 tops.
Even seasoned traders are vulnerable to this flawed mentality.
The narcotic of rising markets causes them to limit their efforts to the
momentum chase rather than building strategies based on pattern cycles
and an overriding respect for risk. Then, when the market fails to offer
perfect conditions for their narrow tactics, they forget the only sensible
path is to stand aside and wait. Sadly, most traders lack discipline in
adverse markets and try to force the tape to their will, often with very bad
results. Or their restless minds fill in the missing pieces and see patterns
or opportunities that don’t exist. This combination of wishful thinking
and aggressive overtrading triggers sobering losses until the trader finally
wakes up to reality or washes out of the market.

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

109

The yo-yo mentality may end careers in other ways as well. The daily
demands of this game are so intense that borderline participants just get
lazy and develop a self-destructive style. Fatigue then sets in while the
mind struggles to organize shifting markets, forcing many shades of gray
to resolve into black and white. This unconscious pattern fitting exercise
causes positions to become all or nothing affairs, with wish fulfillment distorting incoming signals.
Traders afflicted by yo-yo disease need to face the sobering facts.
They came into this game wanting to take money out of the markets, but
the endless cycle of winning and losing means they’re stuck on a treadmill
going nowhere. And, without a major change in attitude and technique,
these folks are doomed to failure. Realistically, the transformation from
a yo-yo into a winning trader is far more difficult than the simple transition from a loser into an occasional winner. In truth, it’s a major reprogramming exercise because these folks have received just enough positive
reinforcement from bad decision making that their unconscious minds
believe they’re firmly planted on the road to success. The good news is
that these individuals can undergo a true awakening but not before they
realize the hopelessness of their situation. In many cases, the conversion
needs to come from an external source, like a spouse fed up with market
war stories that never pay the bills.
Here are four things you can do right now, on your own, to get off
the yo-yo treadmill:
1.	Ration trades. Most yo-yos lose the bulk of their money trying to
get even after a bad day or getting too aggressive after a good day.
Set a flat figure for the number of trades you’ll execute in a single
session, and then stick with it.
2.	Cut size. Greed and fear play a huge part in yo-yo behavior.
Smaller trade size will help you to stand your ground in good
trades and feel less miserable when stop losses get hit.
3.	Play a shorter watch list. Prepare a list of five or ten stocks to
trade in the next week or month, and don’t take positions in
anything else. Don’t trade at all if those stocks don’t set up good
opportunities.
4.	Get it and get out. Set a dollar threshold for daily gains or losses,
with the gain size at least twice the loss size. Get out of the market
for the rest of the day as soon as either threshold gets hit.

PART THREE

110

Rediscovering Profitability

Long-Term Profitability
Markets don’t go up all the time, which is a big problem for traders with
a long-side bias. These folks get so used to buying breakouts that they
forget how tough it is to hold onto profits when the major indices start to
roll over. In addition, most of us find it hard to stop taking the plays that
worked for a long time after they stop working. I guess it’s human nature
to repeat the behaviors that bring us rewards, even after the rewards have
dried up. Just ask Pavlov’s dog about that mystery meal he was drooling
over when the dinner bell rang.
The first requirement for holding onto profits through corrections is
to change the trading strategy as soon as you realize it’s no longer working.
Consider that you’ll miss only one or two good profits if your paranoia
turns out to be wrong. In other words, if the market does a head fake and
suddenly recovers, you’ll miss out on the first upswing and then resume
your preferred breakout strategy. More likely, your original caution pays
off, as expected, and the market grinds lower for a few weeks or months.
This is the period in which your adaptive trading style pays great dividends. You’ll not only preserve the nest egg you made on the upswing,
but you can now add to your profits through targeted plays that work in
corrective environments.
Realistically, turning a trading strategy on a dime takes considerable
discipline. No doubt you’ll get jumpy whenever there’s an uptick or a
piece of good news that lifts the markets, even for a few minutes or hours.
In fact, the fear of missing out is a chronic disease contracted by nearly all
market players. So, if you absolutely can’t avoid the temptation, go ahead
and trade these countertrend bounces with small shares and a tight stop
loss. In this way you can take advantage of the uptick but still respect the
likelihood that you’re walking into a trap.
The five Ss will save long-biased traders a lot of grief during
pullbacks. They’re so versatile you can apply them to both short-term
downswings and long-term downturns. At a minimum, they’ll keep your
trading account intact and ready to go on the next rally:
1.	Selection. Lower your beta during pullbacks, and look for less
volatile stocks to trade. This means laying off small caps and chat
room plays while you check out slow movers that grind through
average daily ranges of less than two points. It’s also a good
time to look over defensive plays in utilities and consumer
durables. In addition, watch for rotation from hot sectors into

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

111

cooler ones as investors take profits and look for other places to
park their capital.
2.	Scalping. Shorten your holding period and stop looking for
multiple price waves in your favor. Make it easy on yourself. Just
assume every position you’re holding is at risk, and the correction
won’t end until all your stops get hit. The best way to play during
these volatile periods is to take profits early and buy back later at
lower levels. It’s also a good time to sell immediately after you get
your buying spike. For example, you jump into a triangle pattern
just before it breaks out. Sell into the top of the first swing after the
breakout rather than holding on in anticipation of trend day.
3.	Size. Lower your size during a downturn. Traders love big plays
when markets grind through strong uptrends, but risk increases
dramatically during corrective phases. Smaller size lets you
survive the stomach-churning action typical in an environment
where weak hands get shaken out of good positions. It also lets
you test the waters with limited risk as the market nears an intermediate low. Here’s how it works. Pick up a few shares and play
the bounce, in hopes it’ll turn into a larger scale recovery. If you’re
wrong, take the small loss and look for a better entry. Rinse and
repeat as needed because sooner or later you’ll get it right and
make back a nice chunk of the lost capital.
4.	Sidelines. Bad decisions in dangerous markets will undermine
months of hard-earned profits. Consider that each dollar you save
during a correction is a dollar you’ve earned for your trading
account. Invariably, corrections generate selloffs interspersed
with long periods of boredom while the market tries to recover.
It’s best to stand aside during these periods because opportunitycost is unfavorable. Also, keep in mind that V-bottoms are a dangerous fantasy that serious traders can’t afford to indulge in. In
other words, when the market goes straight down, don’t expect it
to recover without a long period of back and fill.
5.	Shorting. It may come as a surprise that short selling is the last
strategy needed to survive a correction. In the real world, most
long-biased traders can’t change hats during a pullback because
their buy side mindset trips up the mentality needed to sell short
profitably. As a result, they get overly nervous when they sell the
market and wind up panicking on the first squeeze. In addition,
short sales are difficult to time when selloffs occur in bull markets
because there’s a tremendous amount of buying power floating

PART THREE

112

Rediscovering Profitability

around. It’s a different animal during bear markets, when short
sale profits can be as smooth as silk, especially in the latter stages,
like in 2002 and early 2009.

The Real Bottom Line
Tactical, emotional, and perceptual issues all come into play when we
try to pinpoint our bottom lines. This is especially true when we’ve set
up multiple accounts to play the financial markets. Each cash horde may
serve a different purpose, especially when retirement funds make up a
good part of our assets. And, to complicate matters, we’ve been trained
over the years to regard profitability in those funds from a different angle
than the speculative capital placed into trading accounts. This is where
the big lie usually begins. It goes something like this. You make a little
money in your 30K trading account but lose a big chunk of your IRA or
Keogh because of bad positions or a bad market. Despite those losses,
you see yourself as a profitable trader because of the misconception
that retirement funds will pay you back at some mysterious date in
the future.
Of course there’s only one way to address this delusional mind
cramp. You need to combine all your assets and positions onto a single data
sheet and compute your total return from that single point of reference.
You’ll find this is tremendously difficult to do if you’ve been ignoring
your long-term positions in an unconscious effort to fool yourself into
thinking you’re a market gunslinger. This is especially true after you pass
your fifty-fifth birthday. Most retirement funds can be tapped without
penalty when you reach age 59½, so that pool of money no longer represents a distant nest egg that doesn’t need to perform on a daily or
monthly basis. Rather, it might represent the lifeblood of your golden
years. I can’t overstate the importance of combining all accounts when
looking at profits on a weekly, monthly, and yearly basis. Traders are highly
emotional animals, subject to all kinds of self-sabotage, and the profit/
loss bottom line is the only truth serum for the business we’ve chosen for
ourselves. Everything else is just entertainment and a huge time sink.
On the flip side, avoid overkill when it comes to your combined profitability analysis. It’s just crazy to insist that every day or week draw a
perfect profit, but looking at monthly and yearly numbers makes total
sense. This longer-range filtering lets us suffer through a string of bad
days but also gives us time to crawl out of a minefield of deep holes.

CHAPTER 5

The Nature of Winning

113

As we all know, a few of them in recent years have been especially dark
and damp. How detailed does your profit/loss analysis need to be? Personally, I’ve gone from overkill to the KISS method in the last decade. Initially I was keeping pages of detailed statistics that covered every aspect
of my trading results. But these days I just track the equity curve in each
account while noting all interest, fees, and dividends that might skew
the numbers.
Playing with percentages is another way that traders lie about profits.
Simply stated, percentages don’t matter in small accounts, but they’re
extremely important in big accounts and retirement funds. In other words,
it means little if you double your money on a $10,000 account, but just
try that magic act when flipping a half million bucks or more. And don’t
average percentage gains across multiple accounts. This is a delusional
practice where you take all the percentages and divide by the total number
of accounts. Instead, you need to add the assets in all accounts and divide
by the total profit or loss. You might not like what you see, but at least it’s
an honest number. Newer traders really shouldn’t focus on percentage
gains or losses at all. Dollars and cents tell the tale more reliably when it
comes to learning your way around the financial markets. Your only job
in your first years of trading is to increase the bottom line over time, with
few detours. It doesn’t even matter if the gains increase by just a few bucks
each month as long as the equity curve is moving in the right direction.
Traders have very short memories. They’ll blow out their accounts
in a barrage of bad positions but then assume they’ve turned profitable
as soon as they have a good week or month. This myopia is very popular
when markets turn higher after long corrections. Losing traders assume
that red ink incurred during those periods is an aberration that doesn’t
reflect “real” performance, so they purge the bad times from their conscious minds and data sheets. Of course, all traders go through regular
drawdown cycles, and it makes no sense to restrict data analysis to the last
period of relative good or bad performance, or markets.
Long-term profitability begins with the realization that there are no
big or small plays at work in the financial markets. In other words, we
need to manage each position in a consistent manner and take our trades
according to a predevised plan. After all, this is an odds game in which
success comes from small edges exercised over long periods of time. That’s
why you can’t cut corners when examining your profitability. Accept the
fact this is a huge undertaking in which most applicants are destined to
fail over time. In that sobering reality, you’ll understand why a reliable
feedback system that accurately measures progress over time is your most
potent weapon in the battle for the bottom line.

This page intentionally left blank

6

C

H

A

P

TE

R

Survivalist Trading
Strategies

I

t’s natural to believe in the market’s upward bias, even though it’s a
path to chronic underperformance. In the real world, all financial
instruments move in both directions over time, and you won’t survive as
a one-trick pony, giving back your gains on every downturn, whipsaw,
or head fake. Clearly, most of us are conditioned to chase upside momentum and to let our positions run after big rallies. This herd mentality
undermines our ability to hold onto gains when more challenging conditions take control of the ticker tape. In response, we need to apply survivalist strategies to ensure that hard-earned profits stay in our pockets,
where they belong.
The first challenge in a survivalist strategy is a psychological one.
Traders find it almost impossible to stop taking the positions that yielded
profits for two, three, or four months, even when they stop working in
a mutating market environment. This is Pavlov’s dog syndrome, where
we salivate right on schedule every time the dinner bell rings. It comes
down to this simple truth: our small trading edges are moving targets that
115

PART THREE

116

Rediscovering Profitability

disappear when the crowd piles into a popular strategy. It’s the primary
reason bull traps are sprung with great frequency after long rallies, while
squeezes crush short sellers in the middle of persistent selloffs.
Standing aside is a major component in every survivalist trading
strategy. In other words, reduce trade frequency when the market turns,
and then cut it to the bone if your few positions don’t respond with
immediate profits. Alternatively, you’re on the right track if fewer trades
equal more profits. In addition, the time you spend as an observer rather
than a participant provides a more objective view of price action and
market direction. Once you’ve changed gears in response to waning inefficiency, look for trades that will respond to the next wave of trend or range
activity. A survivalist approach really pays off when the market turns
because you can take all the bucks saved by sitting on your hands and
put them back to work. For example, you’re chasing breakouts in a strong
market when the major indices roll over. Your daily performance starts to
deteriorate as sellers come out of the woodwork and bang down prices.
Recognizing the market shift, you head back to the sidelines and wait for
the indices to drop into support at the 20-day SMA or 50-day EMA. As
the falling market hits these levels, your nightly scans explode with pages
of bull setups in which strong stocks have pulled back to support and
triggered dip trip buy signals.
Keep an eye out for short- and long-term rotations. Make a list of 35
to 40 sector indices or their related exchange-traded funds and put them
onto a single watch list. Sorting these instruments by daily and weekly
percentage gain/loss lets you track rotational events in real time. Note
which market groups tend to move in tandem, like retail and homebuilding, and which usually track against the major indices, like precious
metals. Market players move money out of hot sectors all the time, looking for better places to park their capital. You’ve found a considerable
trading edge if you can decipher where all this cash is headed faster than
your competition.

Five Common Rotations
1.	Beaten down sectors with the worst looking charts attract capital
when strong markets roll over.
2.	Hot tech money heads into defensive groups, like health care,
foods, and drugs, when rallies overheat.

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

117

3.	Traders abandon commodity stocks and toss the cash into blue
chips when economic growth slows or stalls.
4.	Cyclicals attract buyers in the early stage of economic growth and
lose them when the expansion phase gets under way.
5.	A strong dollar favors small cap rallies, while a weak dollar favors
commodity rallies.

Swing Analysis
It’s tough to make money if you don’t know where the swing began, how
far it might carry, and when it’s finally over and giving way to a new
swing in the opposite direction. Every aspect of your trade, including
holding period and reward:risk profile, is dependent on the size of the
swing. Swings occur in all time frames, so it’s equally important you know
which one you’re actually trading. Measuring the current swing starts
with a good set of eyeballs, a.k.a. the most overlooked technical tools in
your trading arsenal.
Swings tend toward proportionality. For example, an 18- to 20-day
price swing in one direction will often be followed by an 18- to 20-day price
swing in the opposite direction. To complicate matters, these proportions
can be subdivided into fractions, with one side swinging 5 against 10, 8
against 16, and so forth. Past swings will set up fractal mathematics with
current swings. For example, when you see a series of 15-bar swings in
the last year, odds are high the instrument you’re examining will swing
in 15-bar intervals this year. You can predict swing size by comparing the
angle of attack, i.e., slope of the trend, against the slopes of prior swings, in
either direction. Contrary to common sense, more vertical swings persist
for shorter time periods than more gradual swings. This goes back to basic
physics, in which a star that burns the brightest tends to burn out sooner
than a star emitting a cool red light. This price-time continuum becomes
extremely important in profit targeting and exit timing, aligning closely
with the old adage to “buy in mild times and sell in wild times.”
The vertical price bar in all time frames and instruments is a major
signal for traders to stop what they’re doing and pay close attention
because the trend is accelerating, often toward a goal at which the swing,
in that time frame, will end abruptly and give way to a counterswing. This
dynamic often occurs in the last 20% to 25% of a retracement back to an
