Japan
When looking at Japanese data, keep in mind that the Japanese economy is still heavily
export oriented. In addition to following all the usual reports, pay special attention to
industrial production and manufacturing data because of their large role in the economy.
Outside the standard reports to watch, keep an eye on the following:
Tankan index: The Tankan survey is a quarterly survey of business outlooks produced by
the Bank of Japan (BOJ). The survey produces four readings — current conditions and
future outlook from both large manufacturers and large non-manufacturers. The large allindustry capital expenditures survey is an important gauge of capital spending and is often
the focus of the entire Tankan survey.
Trade balance: Japan’s monthly trade balance is nearly always in surplus. The size of
that surplus carries indications for the health of the export sector as well as potential
political repercussions against excessive JPY weakness when the trade surplus is seen to
be too large.
All-industry and tertiary industry (services) indices: Monthly sentiment gauges of
industrial and service-sector firms.

United Kingdom
In addition to the usual major government-issued data reports, be alert for the following reports
that can frequently trigger sharp reactions in GBP:
Bank of England (BOE) Minutes: Released two weeks after each Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) meeting, they show the voting results for the most recent decision.
Market expectations and GBP are frequently upended when the policy discussion or vote
shows a split leaning in the direction of an interest rate change.
BOE Quarterly Inflation Report: Though it only comes out quarterly, the BOE’s
forecasts for growth and inflation over the next two years can have a significant impact on
the interest rate outlook and GBP.

Purchasing Manager Indexes (PMIs): A data firm called Markit produces monthly PMIs
for the manufacturing, construction, and service sectors.
GfK consumer confidence and Nationwide consumer confidence: Two separate,
monthly, consumer-sentiment gauges put out by GfK, a UK/European marketing agency,
and the Nationwide Building Society, a UK mortgage lender.
CBI distributive trades survey and industrial trends survey: Two monthly reports put
out by the Confederation of British Industry, a private trade group. The distributive trades
survey is a measure of retail and wholesale sales, and the industrial trends survey is a
survey of manufacturers’ current and future outlook.
British Retail Consortium (BRC) retail sales monitor and shop price index: Two
monthly reports put out by the British Retail Consortium, a private trade organization. The
retail sales monitor is another measure of retail sales, and the shop price index measures
inflation at the retail level.

Canada
Canadian data mirrors U.S. data in many respects, but here are a few other important Canadian
indicators to watch:
International securities transactions: Roughly the equivalent of the U.S. Treasury’s TIC
report (see “Trade and current account balances,” earlier in this chapter), showing net
investment flows into and out of Canada on a monthly basis. High inflows typically
support the CAD, and outflows tend to hurt it.
Ivey Purchasing Manager index: A key monthly gauge of Canadian business outlooks
issued by the Richard Ivey School of Business. The report covers purchases, employment,
inventories, deliveries, and prices.

Australia
Australian data reports exert a strong influence on Aussie, similar in many respects to how UK
data affects the pound. In particular, keep an eye on
RBA rate decisions and RBA Minutes: The RBA’s statement following a rate decision,
and the subsequent release of the minutes two weeks later, can drive interest rate
expectations and AUD big time.
Westpac consumer confidence and National Australia Bank (NAB) business
confidence: Two separate monthly sentiment gauges put out by two of Australia’s leading
banks.

New Zealand
New Zealand data is similarly provocative for the Kiwi. In addition to the main data reports and
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) statements, keep an eye on the following Kiwi-specific
data:
NZ Card Spending: This monthly report covers purchases using credit, debit, and store
cards, and gives another view of retail sales.
ANZ Consumer Confidence: This monthly survey of consumer sentiment is conducted by
ANZ Bank.

China
In early 2011, China surpassed Japan as the world’s second largest national economy after the
United States. Chinese growth over the last decade has been nothing short of astronomical and
played a major role in supporting the global recovery after the GFC. Data out of China has taken
on increased prominence as a result, with global markets frequently reeling on weaker China data
or surging on stronger reports.

European Central Bank press briefings
Unlike most central banks that simply issue a statement announcing an interest rate decision and an
economic outlook, the European Central Bank (ECB) conducts a press briefing after each meeting
of the Governing Council. The ECB president reads a statement that surveys the economic
landscape and provides a future outlook. The most important element of the ECB statement is the
inflation outlook because the ECB has only a single mandate — to maintain price stability, such as
fight inflation. The ECB president then takes questions from the press and frequently addresses
market expectations on ECB policy. His comments in the Q&A session can significantly alter
market perceptions, potentially triggering sharp moves in the euro. The ECB may have held rates
steady and indicated inflation risks are contained, for example, but if the ECB president suggests
that inflation risks have shifted higher, markets may take it as a signal the ECB is prepared to
tighten rates soon and the euro could strengthen.

The Chinese growth outlook affects global markets through a number of different channels.
Stronger Chinese growth is good for global trade and tends to positively influence stock markets
around the world. Chinese demand for commodities is also influenced by its growth trajectory,
with consequent implications for individual commodity markets (China also recently surpassed the
U.S. as the largest oil consumer) and commodity producing countries such as Australia and South

Africa. As a result, financial markets around the world are increasingly driven by Chinese growth
prospects.
In terms of economic reports, Chinese data that reflects growth are the most significant, and I
would highlight the trade surplus, industrial production, manufacturing PMIs, and quarterly GDP
as the keys. Chinese consumers are also increasingly seen to be key to developed nations’
economic outlooks and signs of rising imports and gains in retail sales are viewed as supportive
of global growth.

The Chinese still manage their currency and it’s not accessible to individual traders. But
Chinese data can have an impact far beyond its borders due to its newfound prominence in
the global economy.

Chapter 8

Getting to Know the Major Currency Pairs
In This Chapter
Looking at the trading fundamentals of the major currency pairs
Calculating the costs of trading
Understanding price movements
Modifying trading strategies to fit the currency pair
A little over half of all daily trading volume takes place in just four currency pairs, known as the
majors: EUR/USD, USD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF. These currency pairs are the most
watched barometers of the overall forex market. When you hear about the dollar rising or falling,
it’s usually referring to the dollar against these other currencies.
Even though these four pairs are routinely grouped together as the major currency pairs, each
currency pair represents an individual economic and political relationship. In this chapter, I look
at the fundamental drivers of each currency pair to see what moves them. I also look at the
market’s quoting conventions and what they mean for margin-based trading.
Although it’s important to understand why a currency rate moves, I think it’s also essential to have
an understanding of how different pairs’ rates move. Most currency trading is very short-term in
nature, typically from a few minutes to a few days. This makes understanding a currency pair’s
price action (how a currency pair’s price moves in the very short term) a key component of any
trading strategy.
When you’re reading this chapter, keep in mind that my observations are not hard and fast rules.
As far as I know, there are no hard and fast rules in any market, anywhere, any time. Think of them
as rules of thumb that apply more often than not. When it comes to applying my insights to real-life
trading, you’ll have to evaluate the overall circumstances each time to see if my insights make
sense. The idea is that with a baseline of currency pair behavior, you’ll be in a better position to
anticipate, interpret, and react to market developments.
The flip side of this coin is that there is information content when my insights don’t hold water. If
the market usually reacts to certain events in a regular fashion, but it’s not this time, it’s a clue that
something else is at work (usually bigger). And that can be even more valuable trading
information.

The Big Dollar: EUR/USD
EUR/USD is by far the most actively traded currency pair in the global forex market. Everyone
and his brother, sister, and cousin trades EUR/USD. This will come as no surprise to anyone who
has traded in the forex market, because if you have, more likely than not you traded EUR/USD at
some point.
The same goes for the big banks. Every major trading desk has at least one, and probably several,
EUR/USD traders. This is in contrast to less liquid currency pairs such as GBP/USD or
AUD/USD, for which trading desks may not have a dedicated trader. All those EUR/USD traders
add up to vast amounts of market interest, which increases overall trading liquidity.

Trading fundamentals of EUR/USD
EUR/USD is the currency pair that pits the U.S. dollar against the single currency of the Eurozone,
the euro. The Eurozone refers to a grouping of countries in the European Union (EU) that in 1999
retired their own national currencies and adopted a unified single currency. Currently, 17 of the 27
E.U. member states have the euro as their official currency. Combined, the Eurozone constitutes a
regional economic bloc roughly equal to the United States in both population and GDP.
The move to a single currency was the culmination of financial unification efforts by the founding
members of the European Union. In adopting the single currency, the nations agreed to abide by
fiscal policy constraints that limited the ratio of national budget deficits to gross domestic product
(GDP), among other requirements. The nations also delegated monetary policy (setting interest
rates) to the newly founded European Central Bank (ECB). The ECB has only one policy mandate
— to maintain price stability; for example, prevent inflation.
For most of the first decade of its existence, the euro functioned well and became the second
largest reserve currency after the USD. The limits on deficits, however, were never really
enforced, and many countries ran deficits much higher than monetary union rules permitted. Only
after the Great Financial Crisis of 2008–2009 (GFC), when recessions caused tax revenues to
plunge and deficits to explode, did the extent of debt levels become apparent.
Most of the highly indebted countries lie on Europe’s periphery, like Ireland and Greece, which
were both forced to seek bailouts from the EU/IMF in 2010. As the euro begins it second decade,
Eurozone nations, led by core members Germany and France, are seeking to establish a permanent
crisis resolution mechanism to prevent highly indebted nations from defaulting and give them time
to get their financial houses in order. The euro weakened as the debt drama played out, but the
currency union held together despite fears of a break-up. High debt and deficit levels, and the
impact to growth from economic austerity measures to reduce them, are likely to color the fortunes
of the euro for years to come.

Trading EUR/USD by the numbers
Standard market convention is to quote EUR/USD in terms of the number of USD per EUR. For
example, a EUR/USD rate of 1.3000 means that it takes $1.30 to buy €1.

EUR/USD trades inversely to the overall value of the USD, which means when EUR/USD
goes up, the euro is getting stronger and the dollar weaker. When EUR/USD goes down, the
euro is getting weaker and the dollar stronger. If you believed the U.S. dollar was going to
move higher, you’d be looking to sell EUR/USD. If you thought the dollar was going to
weaken, you’d be looking to buy EUR/USD.
EUR/USD has the euro as the base currency and the U.S. dollar as the secondary or counter
currency. That means
EUR/USD is traded in amounts denominated in euros. In online currency trading
platforms, standard lot sizes are €100,000, and minilot sizes are €10,000.
The pip value, or minimum price fluctuation, is denominated in USD.
Profit and loss accrues in USD. For one standard lot position size, each pip is worth
$10; for one minilot position size, each pip is worth $1.
Margin calculations in online trading platforms are typically based in USD. At a
EUR/USD rate of 1.3000, to trade a single minilot position worth €10,000, it’ll take $260
in available margin (based on 50:1 leverage). That calculation will change over time, of
course, based on the level of the EUR/USD exchange rate. A higher EUR/USD rate will
require more USD in available margin collateral, and a lower EUR/USD rate will need
less USD in margin.

Swimming in deep liquidity
Liquidity in EUR/USD is unmatched by other major currency pairs. This is most evident in the
narrower trading spreads regularly available in EUR/USD. Normal market spreads are typically
around 1.5 to 2.5 pips versus 3 to 4 pips in other major currency pairs. Tight spreads make
EUR/USD a great choice for high-frequency trading.
In terms of concrete numbers, EUR/USD accounted for 28 percent of global daily trading volume,
according to the 2010 Bank for International Settlements (BIS) survey of the foreign exchange
markets. That’s more than twice the volume of the next most liquid currency pair (USD/JPY).
Liquidity in EUR/USD is based on a variety of fundamental sources, such as
Global trade and asset allocation: The Eurozone constitutes the second largest economic
bloc after the United States. Not only does this create tremendous commercial trade flows,

but it also makes Eurozone financial markets, and the euro, the destination for massive
amounts of international investment flows.
Central bank credibility: The ECB has established itself in the eyes of global investors
as an effective institution in fighting inflation and maintaining currency stability.
Enhanced status as a reserve currency: Central banks around the world hold foreign
currency reserves to support their own currencies and improve market stability. After the
USD, the euro is the second largest reserve currency, accounting for about a third of
global FX reserves.
The euro also serves as the primary foil to the U.S. dollar when it comes to speculating on the
overall direction of the U.S. dollar in response to U.S. news or economic data. If weak U.S.
economic data is reported, traders are typically going to sell the dollar, which begs the question,
“Against what?” The euro is the first choice for many, simply because it’s there. It also helps that
it’s the most liquid alternative, allowing for easy entry and exit.

This is not to say that EUR/USD only reacts to U.S. economic data or news. On the
contrary, Eurozone news and data can move EUR/USD as much as U.S. data moves the pair.
But the overall tendency still favors U.S. data and news as the driving force of short-term
price movements.
This situation is partly a function of geography and daily trading rhythms, because European data
is released about four to eight hours before U.S. economic reports are typically issued. On any
given day, traders will respond to European news and data and adjust prices accordingly for
several hours until U.S. data is released.

Watching the data reports
Country-specific economic reports, such as Dutch retail sales or Italian industrial production, are
increasingly disregarded by the forex market in favor of Eurozone aggregate economic data.
However, German and French national economic reports can still register with markets as they
represent the two largest Eurozone economies. I review the major economic reports and
fundamental events in greater depth in Chapter 7, but here’s a list of the major European data
reports and events to keep an eye on.
European Central Bank (ECB) interest rate decisions and press conferences.
Speeches by ECB officials and individual European finance ministers.
EU-harmonized Consumer Price Index (CPI), as well as national CPI and Producer Price
Index (PPI) reports.
EU Commission economic sector confidence indicators.

Consumer and investor sentiment surveys separately issued by three private economic
research firms known by their acronyms: Ifo, ZEW and GfK.
Industrial production.

Trading behavior of EUR/USD
The deep liquidity and tight trading spreads in EUR/USD make the pair ideal for both shorter-term
and longer-term traders. The price action behavior in EUR/USD regularly exhibits a number of
traits that traders should be aware of.

Trading tick by tick
In normal market conditions, EUR/USD tends to trade tick by tick, as opposed to other currency
pairs, which routinely display sharper short-term price movements of several pips. In trading
terms, if EUR/USD is trading at 1.2910/12, there are going to be traders looking to sell at 13, 14,
and 15 and higher, while buyers are waiting to buy at 9, 8, 7 and lower.
In contrast, other less-liquid currency pairs, like GBP/USD and USD/CHF, typically fluctuate in a
far jumpier fashion, which is reflected by the wider price spread in those pairs.

Fewer price jumps and smaller price gaps
The depth of liquidity in EUR/USD also reduces the number of price jumps or price gaps in shortterm trading. A price jump refers to a quick movement in prices over a relatively small distance
(roughly 10 to 20 pips) in the course of normal trading. A price gap means prices have
instantaneously adjusted over a larger price distance, typically in response to a news event or data
release.

Don’t get me wrong, price jumps/gaps do occur in EUR/USD, as anyone who has traded
around data reports or other news events can attest. But price jumps/gaps in EUR/USD tend
to be generated primarily by news/data releases and breaks of significant technical levels,
events which can usually be identified in advance.
This is in contrast to other major currency pairs where short-term price gaps can develop from a
one-off market flow, such as a portfolio manager selling a large amount of GBP/USD or a
USD/CHF stop-loss order being triggered. When price gaps do occur in EUR/USD, they tend to be
smaller relative to gaps in other pairs.

Backing and filling

When prices move rapidly in one direction, they tend to reach a short-term stopping point when
opposite interest enters the market. For instance, let’s say EUR/USD just traded higher from
1.2910/13 to 1.2922/25 in relatively orderly fashion, tick by tick over two minutes, meaning no
price gaps. When the price move higher pauses, short-term traders who were long for the quick
12-pip move higher will look to exit and sell.
As selling interest begins to enter the market and prices stop rising, other not-so-fast longs will
also start hitting bids (selling), pushing prices lower. From the other side, traders who missed the
quick run up, or who were not as long as they wanted to be, will enter their buying interest in the
market. Other buyers, sensing selling interest, may wait and place their buying interest at slightly
lower levels. This back-and-forth consolidation after a short-term price movement is referred to
as backing and filling. The price backs up and fills the short-term movement, though it can happen
in both up and down price movements.

When it comes to EUR/USD price action, backing and filling is quite common and tends to
be more substantial than in most currency pairs, meaning a greater amount of the directional
move is retraced. Look at Figure 8-1 to get a visual idea of what backing and filling looks
like. When EUR/USD is not backing and filling the way you would expect, it means the
directional move is stronger and with greater interest behind it.

Figure 8-1:
A one-minute
EUR/USD
chart showing
periods of
backing and
filling (circled
areas) during
a price
advance and a
price decline.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Prolonged tests of technical levels

When it comes to trading around technical support and resistance levels, EUR/USD can try the
patience of even the most disciplined traders. I say this because EUR/USD can spend tens of
minutes (an eternity in forex markets) or even several hours undergoing tests of technical levels.
(See Chapter 11 for a primer on technical analysis.)
This goes back to the tremendous amount of interest and liquidity that defines the EUR/USD
market. All those viewpoints come together in the form of market interest (bids and offers) when
technical levels come into play. The result is a tremendous amount of market interest that has to be
absorbed at technical levels, which can take time.

Looking at GBP/USD and USD/CHF as leading indicators
Given the tremendous two-way interest in EUR/USD, it can be very difficult to gauge
whether a test of a technical level is going to lead to breakout or a rejection. To get an idea of
whether a test of a technical level in EUR/USD is going to lead to a break, professional
EUR/USD traders always keep an eye on GBP/USD and USD/CHF, as they tend to be
leading indicators for the bigger EUR/USD and dollar moves in general.
If GBP/USD and USD/CHF are aggressively testing (trading at or through the technical level with
very little pullback) similar technical levels to EUR/USD (for example, daily highs or equivalent
trend-line resistance), then EUR/USD is likely to test that same level. If GBP/USD and USD/CHF
break through their technical levels, the chances of EUR/USD following suit increases. By the
same token, if GBP/USD and USD/CHF are not aggressively testing the key technical level,
EUR/USD is likely to see its similar technical level hold.
GBP/USD and USD/CHF lead times can be anywhere from a few seconds or minutes to several
hours and even days. Just make sure you’re looking at the equivalent technical levels in each pair.
