
heartbeat, it would be impossible to tell the difference between a few
seconds or a few days. To measure time, you need a point to start from and
a point to get to; these points can be measured off in distance or time, but
you need three-dimensional space to get your points.
We think in an environment that is more like a stream where our
consciousness can roam freely between the past, present, and future without
regard to time or space. Furthermore, the actual sequences of moments that
exist in the physical environment have no effect on the energy our memories
are stored in. Sequences of time only have an effect on the mental
environment relative to the impact the environment is having on our senses
in energy terms. You can easily demonstrate this to yourself by trying to
reconstruct from your memory the last 24 hours, moment for moment.
Difficult, isn't it. Now try to do it for a week ago today. The only things we
remember are the significant events, the experiences that had the most
impact on our senses, the ones with the most energy connected with them.
That's because experiences are not recorded in our memories as moments
of time; they are stored as charges of energy. And as such they have no
relationship to the passing of physical clock time.
Remember, energy doesn't exist as atoms and molecules and therefore
relative to our perception of the passing of time, it is not subjected to this
nonstop spinning of everything that is physical. Energy can remain static or
be active. For example, someone or something could remind you of an
experience that happened 20 years ago, an experience that you haven't
thought of since it happened. When you tap into the energy of those
memories, you will reexperience the sights, sounds, tastes, smells, and most
important, the emotions of that time, as if nothing had changed. In your
mind nothing has changed. The energy remained dormant for 20 years. It
becomes active either when we choose to think or reflect about what is
inside of us or when we are inadvertently reminded of what is inside of us.
Significantly positive (pleasurable: happy, joyful, etc.) or negative (painful:
terrorizing, angry, hateful) experiences are easily recalled because of the
amount or intensity of the energy involved with the event. These types of
experiences will pop into our conscious recollection, at will. But, try to
remember every time in your life that you brushed your teeth, took a drink
of water, opened your refrigerator door, or put your shoes and socks on
and it's not so easy. These events are difficult to recall because there is
very little energy connected with each of these types of experiences.
Our memories are like pockets of energy that we may organize
chronologically by date and time, as in the stream-of-light example.
However, all the uneventful moments between the eventful moments seem
to disappear without a trace or get compressed as if they never happened,
even though we know that they did. We must have put on our shoes and
socks a month ago today because we probably would remember walking
around without them; that might be significant enough to remember.
What we read, as an example, is usually quickly forgotten because there is
85

very little impact the environment is having on our senses. Printed words on
a page have very little visual impact in relationship to activities of a more
experiential nature. For example, actually participating in a biology
experiment will have a much greater impact from an energy perspective
than will reading about one. The energy required to remember something
that we read has to be generated from within in the form of concentration.
So, the way in which we experience clock time is in relationship to what
we are feeling (either physical or emotional impact) in any given moment.
If, for example, you were experiencing terror, each second of clock time
could easily seem like an hour or day. Each moment of a terrorizing
experience seems to last forever because the environment is assaulting our
senses. The impact is so painful that we can't wait for the experience to
end to be out of that situation. We would therefore focus our attention on
how long the event is lasting, while we were waiting for it to end, thus
slowing down our sense of time.
Pleasurable experiences seem to fly by (we have no concept of time
passing) because we are in a state of joy and happiness, and nothing takes us
out of these moments to feel something less than the joy. We come out of
that state of mind when the experience starts to diminish in its degree of
happiness causing us to focus more on the unpleasantness of what we are
experiencing (some degree less than joy, even if it is boredom) compared to
the happiness we were feeling. When our focus shifts from joy (no concept
of time passing) to "I can't wait for this to end," our sense of time slows
down in proportion to the unpleasantness of the experience.
In the physical environment, experiences take place in moments of time
that pass one after another, in linear fashion. What we experience in
moments of time (through our physical senses) is transformed into
electrical energy and stored as a memory relative to the degree of impact of
the experience. Memories don't have any restrictions imposed on them by
time because energy isn't physical. Time is one directional, whereas in our
mental environment we are free to think about our memories at will or by
just wanting to. We can experience them as a mental image, mental
sounds, mental tastes, and so on. Each of our memories makes up a part of
our identity, and because they exist as an energy form, they have the
potential to act as a force on our behavior. Regardless of whether we are
conscious of these specific forces or not they cause us to move through the
environment in certain ways corresponding to what we have already
experienced to create more experiences and more memories.
Essentially, what I am stating is that our existence straddles two very
different dimensions simultaneously. We live in and perceive threedimensional space, and, as a result, our physical senses are subject to the
limitations of time, where one moment passes after another in straight
linear fashion, whereas we think in a dimension where time and space as it
is perceived in the physical environment doesn't exist. Now, there are some
very important psychological implications within the concept that time
86

and space don't exist in the mental environment, implications that have to
do with our ability to experience happiness, fulfill our needs, and achieve
our goals, which are all basically synonymous. However, before we address
these implications, you will need to understand how experiences are stored
in varying degrees of positively or negatively charged energy, what I call the
"quality of energy" our memories are stored in.

87

CHAPTER 10

How Memories,
Associations, and Beliefs
Manage Environmental
Information

From the moment we are born into this world, our existence acts as a force
on the physical environment. We take up space that cannot be occupied by
anyone or anything else. And, in turn, the physical environment acts as a
force on our physical senses, creating a cause-and-effect relationship
between ourselves and the environment. It is important for you to note now
and for the rest of the book that I am defining the physical environment in
the broadest sense possible, as everything outside of ourselves, including
other people. Now, at the most basic level, we create experience for
ourselves by the mere fact that we exist. To exist implies that our senses are
alive and that we are interacting (acting as a force) with the environment,
altering its makeup and consistency as we move through it. For example,
our movement and behavior set off an endless series of chain reactions that
alter the landscape in some way, shape, or form. And even when we aren't
actively changing or manipulating the environment in some way, we are
still taking up space and thus subjecting ourselves to atmospheric forces, as
well as causing changes in the makeup of the atmosphere from our
breathing.
MEMORIES ARE STORED AS
CHARGED ENERGY
The experiences that result from this constant interaction with the
environment will be transformed into electrical impulses of energy. As
88

electrical impulses of energy, the experiences will carry an electrical charge.
The charge will be either positive or negative, depending on the kind of
impact the environment had on our senses. For example, a crying baby is
acting as a force on the environment. More specifically, the baby is creating
a sound that is acting as a force on the eardrums of everyone in his
vicinity. How the environment responds to this force will create experience
for the child and determine the electrical charge or quality of energy that is
recorded in the baby's memory.
"Quality of energy" is the relative degree of positively or negatively
charged energy in which the experience is recorded. For example, if the
environment responds to the child with a soothing caress, expressing love
and a sense that his needs will be taken care of, then the experience will be
recorded in the child's memory with some degree of positively charged
emotional energy. The degree of positiveness will depend on the intensity
of the experience, that is, the degree of impact the environment had on the
child's senses. Pleasant, happy, joyful, and loving experiences will result in
the storage of positively charged energy. If, however, the environment
responds harshly, in such a way as to have a violent impact on the child's
senses, by screaming (assaulting his eardrums) or slapping him to produce
physical pain, then the experience will be recorded in the child's memory
with negatively charged emotional energy to the same degree as the
intensity of the experience.
There are two basic components that make up the quality of energy in
which our memories are stored. The first is the polarity of the charge, which
could be positive, neutral, or negative. The second component is the
intensity of the charge ranging from extreme positive, which would be an
experience of maximum intensity creating a feeling of elation, to extreme
negative, which would be an experience of unbridled terror. Quality of
energy is an important concept for you to understand because it affects the
type of beliefs we form about the nature of the environment, which in turn
affects how we perceive information and interact with the environment.

The Characteristics of Positively Charged Energy
Positive energy is expansive. It promotes mental growth or learning by
creating a sense of confidence, which in turn results in an openness to explore
and discover the unknown. I am defining the unknown as anything that
exists as a possibility in the physical environment that does not yet reside in
some form in one's mental environment. Positive energy perpetuates our
natural, childlike sense of curiosity and wonderment toward the
environment that we are all born with.
By following the interests of our natural sense of curiosity, we interact
with the environment to create experience and learn something previously
unknown to ourselves, thus generating a sense of excitement about life, as
well as increasing our ability to operate in the environment more effectively
89

because we are continuing to learn more about the way things exist. There is
a direct relationship between how much we have allowed ourselves to
learn about the nature of the environment and the degree of negatively
charged energy in our mental environment. I am stating it this way with the
emphasis on the negative because learning will take place quite naturally if
there isn't anything in the inner environment to stop it. In other words, an
absence of fear (negatively charged energy) is a critical factor in
determining whether or not we will make ourselves available to learn
anything new and continue to grow mentally.
For example, playfully throw a child up in the air and catch him and he
will beg you to do it over and over again. This is his way of interacting with
the environment to perpetuate the feelings of a positively charged
experience. Positive energy is expansive, compelling us to interact with the
environment to create more experience for ourselves. The more we
experience the more we learn about the nature of the environment. The
more we learn about the nature of the environment, the better able we are
to interact with it more effectively to fulfill our needs and achieve our goals.
Positively charged memories give us that sense of confidence that allows
to step out to try something new resulting in mental growth.
The Characteristics of Negatively Charged Energy
Now, throw the same child up in the air for the first time, as in the earlier
example, but instead of catching him, accidentally drop him, and not only
will he not ask you to do again, he will cower in terror at the very suggestion.
The difference in his behavior, of course, is the result of the differences
between the two experiences. In the first example, the experience was
pleasurable, resulting in the storage of positively charged energy. In the
second example, the experience was painful, resulting in the storage of
negatively charged energy.
Regardless of whether we were acting as a force on the environment
(behavior motivated by our sense of curiosity) and got an unexpected or
unintended painful reaction, or the environment, uninitiated by ourselves
(other than the fact that we exist), acted as a force on us in a way that
resulted in pain, the experience will result in the formation of a negatively
charged memory. Painful memories will generate fear, causing us to
perceive the environment as threatening in its ability to cause more pain in
some future moment. The way we will perceive it as threatening will
correspond to our memories of the experiences that resulted in pain in
similar circumstances or conditions (the things we fear in the environment
are those things we have learned to recognize as threatening).
In contrast to the feelings of confidence and well-being that result from
positively charged experiences, fear acts as a limiting or inhibiting force on
both our behavior and our perception of environmental information. I am
sure that everyone reading this book at some point has experienced the
effects that fear can have on one's behavior. It can cause us to run from an
90

obviously dangerous situation or completely immobilize us to the point
where our body will not respond to any conscious command. Fear
drastically limits our choices. It causes us to interact with the environment
in ways that are limited to the structure of our memories, regardless of
what the environment may be offering in the way of a new experience, or it
causes us to avoid an experience completely. Interacting with the
environment results in experience, and experience results in learning. If we
experience the environmental present based on our individual past, or
completely avoid experience altogether, we aren't learning what is being
offered or available to be learned about the nature of the environment.
The net result of a painful experience is that it creates a negatively charged
memory, which in turn creates and perpetuates a cycle of fear. Cycles of
fear then create cycles of discontent and dissatisfaction because we avoid
experience. When we avoid experience, we cut ourselves off from the joy
we feel when we are learning. Just as positive cycles are expansive, negative
cycles are degenerative. Our painful memories keep us from learning how
to interact with the environment in effective and satisfying ways that would
result in happier and more fulfilling lives because we aren't learning what
we need to know to experience something different.
Fear limits both our range of behavior and our perception of
environmental information. The ways in which it limits our behavior are
obvious. However, there are many ways in which fear acts on our
perception that aren't so obvious; in fact some of the ways can be very
subtle and difficult to recognize, until one learns what to look for. As
traders, it is essential that you be able to observe the market's behavior
from an objective perspective. To observe objectively you will need to
learn how to recognize a variety of subtle fears that will destroy your
ability to be objective without really knowing it. This is a subject I will
cover in much greater depth a little further on. However, before I can do
so you need to understand the nature of associations and how perception
creates an energy loop between the inside mental environment and the
outside physical environment.
ASSOCIATIONS
Associations seem to be a natural characteristic of the way in which we
think. That is, our brains are wired in such a way as to link similar forms
of environmental information together automatically. We do this in
basically two ways. First, there is a natural propensity to label people and
objects based on some prominent characteristic and then categorize them
into associative groups. After we categorize the groups by sex, hair color,
skin color, profession, economic status, educational background, and so
on, we then associate whatever experience or knowledge we have about the
group with everyone and everything that has those same characteristics. For
example, if we have a painful experience with a person who has a skin
91

color different from that of our own, we will automatically associate everyone with that skin color with the qualities of that one experience.
The second way we associate is by linking extraneous sensory
information with some event. We will automatically associate what we are
smelling, tasting, hearing, or seeing along with the quality of energy of the
primary experience. For example, a child getting spanked will associate all the
other environmental information that his senses are inadvertently picking up
with the pain he is feeling from the spanking. What he hears, smells, tastes, and
sees will all be connected with the intensity of the force being applied to his body.
So if there was some song playing on the radio or a distinctive odor in the air at
the same time that he was experiencing pain, he will associate the song or the
odor with the pain.
Now, both these environmental distinctions (a certain song and a certain smell)
will be connected with negative energy in his mental environment. When the
child was getting his spanking he may not have even noticed either the song or
the smell because his attention was obviously focused in other directions.
However, in the future whenever he hears that song or smells that particular odor,
they will automatically cause him to experience the negative energy connected
with the spanking. Even if it is years later, and he is enjoying himself with the last
thing on his mind being the memory of that spanking, if he hears that particular
song or smells that particular odor, it will carry him back to that time as if it
were the present moment, changing his experience from happiness to anger,
sadness, or guilt.
Of course, this same principle also works for positive experiences. A perfect
example is many couples have "a song" that they associate with some intense
sexual or loving experience. When they hear "their song," it will mentally put
them into the feelings of the experience the song is associated with. In fact, the
song can eventually come to symbolize the quality of the entire relationship where
all the memories and emotions connected to those memories will run though
their consciousness upon hearing the song.
Associations are an automatic function of the way in which information gets
organized in our mental systems. Most of these associations are inadvertent,
meaning we have positively or negatively charged energy connected to various
elements of the environment, and we aren't consciously aware of it. We can see,
hear, taste, or smell certain things that, in turn, cause us to feel emotions and not
know why because we don't consciously remember connecting the extraneous
sensory information with the primary event.

THE ENERGY LOOP BETWEEN THE
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ENVIRONMENTS
None of us has access to "all" the environmental information that exists in
any given moment. Our senses aren't constructed to allow us to pick up
(see, hear, touch, taste, or smell) everything at once. If we can't be aware of
it all, then we must have some mechanism by which we pick and choose
92

what we do become aware of and give our attention and consideration to.
What we learn creates an energy loop between the inner and outer
environment. We can call this energy loop perception. "Perception" is
recognizing—with our eyes, ears, nose, taste, and touch—in the physical
environment what we have already learned about it. Mental energy works
in conjunction with our physical senses to separate, categorize, and
organize environmental information based on the distinctions we have
learned to make. We recognize what we have learned in the environment
because it is already inside of us. There has to be a mental framework to
accept the information; otherwise, it gets rejected, labeled as meaningless,
or not perceived at all, unless of course we are willing to construct a
framework for it—being open to learn.

Distinctions
Distinctions make separations in environmental information where no
previous separation existed. A child won't make a distinction between a
spoon and pencil until someone teaches him the difference. Otherwise, he
will instinctively put both in his mouth, until the information stored in his
mental environment acts as a force on his perception to distinguish between
the two. Environmental objects give off information about themselves, but
the information that is perceived already exists inside of each individual,
unless it is a first-time experience. The spoon and the information about what
it is create an energy loop between the inside and the outside, where before
the distinction was learned the spoon and he pencil would fall into the same
category as something to put into the mouth. Anything we don't know, but
exists in the environment as a possibility, is a distinction that we haven't
learned to make yet. If we haven't learned to make the distinction, we won't
perceive the various types of information the environment is giving off about
itself.
For example, if I were to open up my computer, what I would perceive
would be very different from that of a skilled computer repair technician.
All the various parts giving off information about themselves would mean
almost nothing to me because there is no meaning inside of me. All the
parts my eyes would be seeing would fall into that one large category
because I haven't learned to make any distinctions between the various
parts, whereas the technician would perceive the parts in a very different
way because he understands the functioning of the parts and the
relationship that they have with one another. That understanding is the
mental framework that structures the particular way in which he perceives
the parts. The parts would be giving off information about themselves that I
couldn't perceive because I don't have the mental structure to perceive it.
Learning how to read the markets to recognize an opportunity is another
93
