
I

xix

P1: JYS
FM
JWBT015-Murphy

December 2, 2008

9:9

xx

Printer: TBD

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

19:55

Printer: TBD

SECTION ONE

Introduction

raders and investors have been using a visual approach to investing
for over a century. Up until the past decade, the use of visual analysis
as a serious method of trading and investing was pretty much limited
to professionals and full-time traders. Most successful traders would never
think of making a trade without first consulting the pictures on their charts.
Even the Federal Reserve Board now uses price charts.

T

WHAT HAS CHANGED?
For the average investor, however, the world of visual trading had been
largely closed. The intimidating jargon and complicated formulas were beyond the reach and, indeed, the interest of the nonprofessional investor.
A couple of important factors have changed that in the past decade. The
most important is the availability of inexpensive computers and Internet
charting services. The investing public now has an impressive array of technological and visual tools that weren’t available to the professional community 30 years ago.
The second development has been the dramatic expansion of the mutual fund industry to the point where more mutual funds exist than stocks
now traded on the New York Stock Exchange. This phenomenal growth
has produced both benefits and challenges for the average investor. The
challenge lies in the fact that the job of choosing among mutual funds has
been greatly complicated. In a very real sense, the mutual fund growth has

1

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

2

19:55

Printer: TBD

THE VISUAL INVESTOR

made the task of the individual investor more difficult. The original purpose of mutual funds was to simplify investing. If someone didn’t have
the time or expertise to pick stocks, that task could be turned over to a
mutual fund manager. Besides professional management, instant diversification was provided. An investor could buy one fund and be in the market. Now, however, mutual funds are so segmented that the investor has
a bewildering set of choices to make. In the past decade, the arrival of
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) has replaced many mutual fund choices.

FUND CATEGORIES
Domestic stock funds are categorized by goal and style—aggressive
growth, growth, growth and income, and equity income. Funds are
also divided by the size or capitalization of the stocks included in their
portfolios. Large-cap stock funds limit their portfolios to those stocks
included in the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index. Midsize funds focus
on stocks included in the S&P 400 Mid-Cap Index or the Wilshire Mid-Cap
750. Small-cap funds choose their portfolios from the Russell 2000 or the
S&P 600 Small-Cap Index. Stock funds can be further identified by their
specialization in various stock market sectors, such as Technology, Basic
Industry, Health Care, Financial Services, Energy, Precious Metals, and
Utilities. Stock sectors can be further subdivided into industries with even
more specified funds. The Technology sector, for example, would include
funds that emphasize computers, defense and aerospace, communications, electronics, software, semiconductors, and telecommunications.
Fidelity Investments offers as many as 40 sector funds for the individual to
choose from.

GLOBAL FUNDS
Another dimension has been the growing popularity of global investing. Investors can now trade in individual foreign countries or geographic regions
by selecting the appropriate stock fund. As a result, investors are forced to
keep abreast of market developments not just in the United States, but all
over the world. While overseas investing carries more risk than domestic
funds, the rewards are well worth it. From 2003 through the end of 2007,
foreign stocks rose more than twice as much as U.S. stocks.
During these same four years, emerging markets gained four times as
much as the U.S. market. Overseas investing provides diversification from
the U.S. market, which is why financial advisors recommend leaving as
much as a third of one’s portfolio abroad to improve returns and lessen
risk.

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

19:55

Introduction

Printer: TBD

3

INVESTORS NEED TO BE BETTER
INFORMED
For many investors, fund investing has replaced individual stock selection. However, with the degree of segmentation that has taken place in the
stock fund industry, investors have little choice but to become better informed and more actively involved in the fund selection process. Investors
must be aware of what different sectors of the American market are doing
as well as how global markets are faring. The number of choices available
to the investor is a mixed blessing.
So, too, are the technological advances of the past decade. The problem is knowing how to select and use the resources available. The technology has outpaced the public’s ability to use the new data in the most
efficient way. Which brings us to the purpose of this book—to help the
average investor quickly acclimate to visual trading; and then show how
these relatively simple principles can be applied to the problem of sector
investing primarily through exchange-traded funds.

BENEFITS OF VISUAL INVESTING
The bright side of the increased specialization among funds is that the investor has never before been provided with so many vehicles to choose
from. Individuals who favor a certain market sector or industry, but don’t
want to choose which stocks to buy, can now buy the whole group. Sector
funds also provide additional ways to diversify one’s core stock holdings
and to pursue more aggressive growth opportunities with a portion of one’s
assets. That’s where visual analysis comes in.
The tools explained in this text can be applied to any market or fund
anywhere in the world. With the aid of a computer and easy access to price
data, the task of monitoring and analyzing funds has been made immeasurably easier. The power of the PC can also be harnessed for such things as
monitoring portfolios, back-testing rules for buying and selling decisions,
scanning charts for attractive opportunities, and ranking funds by relative
performance. While the challenges of learning how to apply new technology to fund and sector investing are there, so are the rewards. If you’re
in the market, you’ve already accepted the challenge. This book will show
you how to reap the rewards.

STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
The book is divided into four sections. Section One explains what visual analysis is and how it can be blended with more traditional forms of

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

4

November 12, 2008

19:55

Printer: TBD

THE VISUAL INVESTOR

investment analysis. The critically important subject of market trend is explained, along with some visual tools to help identify the trend. You may
be surprised to discover how much value lies in some of the simplest tools
that are covered in the first section. Throughout the book, a special emphasis is placed on ETFs. Exchange-traded funds have greatly simplified
the asset allocation and sector rotation process.
Section Two covers some of the more popular market indicators in
use today. We stress the concepts behind the various indicators and how
they are interpreted. We limit our coverage to only the most useful tools.
For those wishing to explore the world of indicators more fully, reference
sources are given at the end of the book.
Section Three introduces the idea of market linkages. This is especially important in order to appreciate why stock market investors should
also monitor movements in commodity prices, bond prices, and the dollar. Intermarket analysis is also helpful in understanding asset allocation
and the process of sector rotation within the stock market. Along the way,
you’ll gain some insight into policy-making decisions of the Federal Reserve. You’ll be able to watch many of the same things the Fed watches.
Section Four focuses on sector analysis. Relative strength analysis is
shown to play an important role in the selection process. We also show you
how to analyze the global markets.
I’ll pull things together in the Conclusion with the admonition to keep
things simple, along with some final thoughts. The Appendices will offer
advice on getting started and where to find valuable resources to help you
do so. The Appendices will also introduce some increasingly popular charting styles you might want to incorporate into your visual analysis.

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

19:55

Printer: TBD

CHAPTER 1

What Is Visual
Investing?

hey say a picture is worth a thousand words. Maybe they should have
said a thousand dollars. After all, we’re talking here about using pictures to make money. And that’s really what this book is about. It’s
that simple. A stock either goes up or down. If it goes up, and you own it,
that’s good. If it goes down, and you own it, that’s bad. You can talk all
you want about what a stock should be doing or why it isn’t doing what it
should be doing. You can talk about inflation, interest rates, earnings, and
investor expectations. Ultimately, however, it comes down to the picture.
Is the stock going up or down? Knowing the reasons behind a stock’s movement is interesting, but not critical. If your stock goes up on a given day,
they won’t take the money away from you if you don’t know why it went
up. And if you can explain why it went down, they won’t give you back your
lost money. All that really matters is a picture, a simple line on a chart. The
trick to visual investing is learning to tell the difference between what is
going up and what is going down. The goal of this book is to help you tell
that difference.

T

WHY MARKET ANALYSIS?
As the various chapters unfold, you will be provided with some relatively
simple visual tools to aid you in market analysis and timing. Notice our
use of the term market analysis. Whatever you choose to call it, the bulk
of this book deals with visual analysis of the financial markets by utilizing
5

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

6

19:55

Printer: TBD

THE VISUAL INVESTOR

price and volume charts. Analysis of fundamental data, such as earnings
expectations and the state of the economy, helps determine what a stock
should be doing. Market analysis tells us what the stock actually is doing. The two approaches are very different. The use of earnings estimates
comes under the general heading of fundamental analysis. The use of market analysis comes under the heading of chart, or visual, analysis. Most
investors are more familiar with the fundamental approach because that
is what they are taught in school and read about in the media. There’s no
question that the fundamentals are what ultimately move a stock or group
of stocks. It’s just a question of how one goes about studying those fundamentals and their effect on the stock.

THE TREND IS TO BLEND
The fact of the matter is that most successful traders and money managers
use some blend of the visual and the financial. The more recent trend is
toward a blending of the chart and fundamental disciplines. The use of
intermarket analysis, the study of market linkages (discussed in Section
Three), blurs the line between those two disciplines even further. The intention here is simply to explain how the two approaches differ and increase the reader’s understanding of why the charting (or visual) approach
should be a part of any investment or trading decision.

WHAT’S IN A NAME?
Visual analysis (also called chart or technical analysis) refers to the
study of the market itself. Price charts can show individual stocks, industry groups, major stock averages, international markets, bond prices, commodity prices, and currencies. Visual analysis of various types of funds can
also be accomplished. Many people are intimidated by the term technical
analysis. As a result, they deprive themselves of the benefits of a very useful form of analysis. If that is the case with you, simply call it visual analysis because that’s what it is. The dictionary defines visual as “capable of
being seen by the eye; visible.” Technical is defined as “abstract or theoretical.” Believe me, there’s nothing abstract or theoretical about this form
of analysis. I’m often amazed at the number of people who are terrified by
technical analysis but look at price charts all the time. They’re scared more
by the name than the analysis. To relieve that anxiety, we’ll use the terms
visual analysis, market analysis, and chart analysis throughout this
book.

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

19:55

Printer: TBD

What Is Visual Investing?

7

WHY STUDY THE MARKET?
Let’s suppose an investor has some money to invest in the stock market.
The first decision is whether or not this is a good time to put new funds into
the market. If it is, which sector of the market would be most suitable? An
investor has to study the market in order to make an informed decision.
The question is how to accomplish that task.
An investor can read the newspapers, plow through a lot of earnings
reports, call up his or her broker on the phone, or subscribe to some financial publication or web site. All of those things should probably be done as
part of the process anyway. But there’s a quicker and easier way: Instead of
wondering what the market should be doing, why not look at what it is doing? Begin by studying the price trend of major stock averages. Then, look
at the charts of the various stock sectors to see which way they’re trending.
Both steps can be accomplished in a matter of minutes by looking at the
appropriate chart pictures.

CHARTISTS ARE CHEATERS
In a way, using chart analysis is a form of cheating. After all, why does a
stock go up or down? It goes up because its fundamentals are bullish. It
goes down because its fundamentals are bearish. Or, at least, that is how
the market perceives a stock’s fundamentals. How many times have you
seen a stock fall in price in the face of a bullish piece of news? What matters
isn’t always the actual news, but what the market was expecting and what
it thinks of that news.
Why, then, is chart analysis cheating? Because it is a shortcut form of
fundamental analysis. It enables a chartist to analyze a stock or industry
group without doing all of the work of the fundamental analyst. And how
does it do that? Simply by telling the chartist whether the fundamentals of
a stock are bullish or bearish by the direction its price is moving. If the
market perceives the fundamentals as bullish, the stock will be rewarded
with a higher price. A negative market evaluation of a stock’s inherent fundamental value will punish the stock by pushing its price lower. All the
chartist has to do is study the direction of the stock to see if it is going up
or down. It almost seems like cheating, but it really isn’t. It’s just smart.

IT’S ALWAYS JUST SUPPLY AND DEMAND
The simplest way to understand the difference between the two approaches is to consider supply and demand. Simple economics tells us

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

19:55

8

Printer: TBD

THE VISUAL INVESTOR

that when demand increases relative to supply, prices rise. When supply
exceeds demand, prices fall. The same principle applies to stocks, bonds,
currencies, and commodities. However, how does one tell what those supply and demand figures are? The ability to tell which is greater is obviously
the key to price forecasting. The hard way is to actually study all of the supply and demand factors, individually and collectively, to determine which
is greater. The easier way is to let the price itself tell us. If the price is rising,
demand is greater. If the price is falling, supply is probably greater.

CHARTS ARE JUST FASTER
An excellent example of the difference between the two approaches was
provided to me early in my career as a market analyst. Our portfolio manager called me and a fundamental analyst into his office one day and gave
us both the same assignment: to analyze the historic value levels for a list
of stocks that he was considering purchasing for the company’s investment
portfolio. He wanted to know at what level each stock was overvalued
and which were at more reasonable historic levels and more suitable for
purchase.
I went back to my office and got out a long-term chart book showing
price histories, going back several decades, for each stock. I simply noted
the price levels where the stocks had peaked and troughed in the past, and
which stocks were closest to those peaks and troughs. The entire project
was completed the same afternoon.
However, my report wasn’t submitted for another two weeks, which
was how long it took my fundamental counterpart to complete his report.
When both lists were submitted, the funny thing was that we both came
up with essentially the same results. He had taken all of the fundamental
factors, including historic price/earnings ratios and the like, into consideration to determine his numbers for historic valuations. I simply looked at the
price histories of the stocks. We came up with the same numbers, but my
task took two hours while his took two weeks. I learned two things from
that. First, both approaches often give us the same results, demonstrating the enormous overlap between the two. Second, the chart approach
is much quicker and doesn’t require much knowledge of the stocks in
question.

CHARTS DO LOOK AHEAD
The market is always looking ahead. It is a discounting mechanism. We
don’t always know why a market is rising or falling. When we do find out,

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

19:55

What Is Visual Investing?

Printer: TBD

9

the market often goes in the opposite direction. The tendency of markets
to lead fundamental data accounts for most of the discrepancies between
the two approaches.

PICTURES DON’T LIE
Since fundamentals are discounted in the market, market analysis is just
another form of fundamental analysis—a more visual approach, if you will.
Often when I’m asked why a market is rising, I respond by saying that the
fundamentals are bullish. I may have no idea what those fundamentals are.
But I can feel confident that a rising price signals that the market is taking
a bullish view of its fundamentals. It is this very point that makes the case
for market analysis so compelling.
It also demonstrates why studying the market visually is such a vital part of the investing process. It suggests why fundamental analysis
shouldn’t be used in a vacuum. Market analysis can alert an investor to
changes in a market’s supply/demand equation, which would then prompt
a reevaluation of that market’s fundamentals. Or, market analysis can be
used as a check or filter on fundamental assessments. Either way, there is
plenty of room for both disciplines to complement each other’s strengths.

PICTURE ANYTHING YOU WANT
One of the greatest strengths of the visual approach to market analysis is
its ability to monitor a large number of markets at the same time and to
cross over into other investment mediums. It is possible for an investor
to chart markets all over the world. Global stock and bond markets, foreign currencies, stock sectors, individual stocks, bonds, and commodities
can easily be monitored. In addition, the principles of chart analysis can
be applied to any and all of those markets with little knowledge of the respective fundamentals of the markets themselves. Given the trend toward
global investing, and the myriad investment choices now available to the
individual investor, this is no small achievement. And the beauty of it is
that one can do a creditable job of analyzing those markets by mastering a
relative handful of visual tools.

THE MARKET’S ALWAYS RIGHT
Charts work for two reasons. First, they reflect the market’s assessment of
the value of a given stock. How many times have you heard the expression
“You can’t fight the tape”? If you’re bullish on a stock, and it is falling, you’re

P1: JYS
c01
JWBT015-Murphy

November 12, 2008

19:55

Printer: TBD

10

THE VISUAL INVESTOR

wrong in your opinion of that stock (or, as forecasters sometimes like to
say, “early”). If you are short on the stock and it is rising, you’re wrong
again. The market gives us a daily report card. Analysts sometimes say that
a market is rising or falling for the wrong reasons (usually when the analyst
has been wrong on the stock’s direction). There’s no such thing as a market
moving for the wrong reasons. The market is always right. It’s up to us to
get in sync with it. I’ve been told a few times in my career that I was right,
but for the wrong reasons—usually by someone who was wrong for the
right reasons. I’d rather be right for the wrong reasons than wrong for the
right reasons any day. How about you?

IT’S ALL ABOUT TREND
The second reason that charts work is that markets trend. If you don’t
believe it, look at the chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average in
Figure 1.1. If you’re still not convinced, all you have to do to prove it to
yourself is buy a stock that is falling. The existence of a downward trend
will be painfully apparent. The study of trend is what visual chart analysis
is all about. From this point on, the tools and indicators that we employ
will have one purpose in mind—to identify the trend of a stock or market,
either up or down. Figure 1.2 shows why it’s important to be able to tell up
from down.

ISN’T THE PAST ALWAYS PROLOGUE?
Critics of charting claim that past price data can’t be used to predict the
future, or that charts work because of a “self-fulfilling prophecy.” Consider
whether the first claim makes any sense: What form of forecasting doesn’t
use past data? Doesn’t all economic and financial forecasting involve the
study of the past? Think about it. There is no such thing as future data. All
anybody has is past data.
If you are concerned about the self-fulfilling prophecy, turn on CNBC
or any other news outlet and listen to the conflicting opinions of market
analysts. As with any method of forecasting, market analysts often differ
as to how they interpret the same data. I’m often asked why charts work.
Does it really matter? Isn’t it enough that they do work? Keep in mind that
charts are nothing more than a visual history of a stock’s performance. It’s
virtually impossible for a stock to trend in any direction without that trend
being revealed on the price chart. It naturally follows that if trends can be
seen, they can also be acted upon.
