
Seasonal Breadth Momentum’
The Seasons Defined

Every cycle effectively goes through four momentum stages before com-
pletion. This is shown conceptually in Fig. 24.2. The first occurs after down-

side momentum has reached its maximum. At this point the series turns up,
but is still below its equilibrium level. The second is signaled when it crosses
above its zero reference line. The third phase starts when it peaks out from
above zero. Finally, phase four is triggered when the indicator crosses below
the equilibrium point.

For simplicity’s sake, the respective stages have been labeled as spring,
summer, fall, and winter. From both an agricultural and an investment point
of view, the best results occur when planting (investing) is done in the
spring, and harvesting in late summer or fall.

In effect, spring represents accumulation, summer the markup phase, fall
the distribution phase, and winter the markdown phase. In situations in
which a market can be subdivided into components, it is possible to take
this approach one step further by calculating a diffusion index based on the
position of the seasonal momentum of its various components, for exam
ple, industry groups for a stock market average, commodity prices for a com
modity index, and so on. This seasonal momentum approach has two
merits. First, it helps to identify the prevailing stage in the cycle, that is,
whether a high number of components are in an accumulation, markup,
distribution, or markdown phase. Second, it also helps identify major buy-
ing and selling opportunities.

Choice of Time Span

The choice of time span is critical for all momentum indicators, including
those used in the seasonal momentum studies. For example, a series

on asmoothed 13-week ROC will have far less significance in terms of long
term investment strategy than a series based on a 48-month time span-

'This approach was first brought to my attention by Ian S. Notley, Notley Group, Yelton Fiscal’
Inc., Unit 211-Executive Pavilion, 90 Grove Street, Ridgefield, CT 06877. f

Summer| Fall

i

1 4

Spring ‘Winter

. Figure 24-2 Seasonal momentum defined.

approach can be used for daily, weekly, and monthly data. I am sure you
- could expand this concept to include intraday data because the principle

is the same. I have never done so, but encourage active traders to give ita
= ty. Nevertheless, I have found that daily and weekly calculations, even when
greatly smoothed, do not give as reliable a picture as the monthly series.
Monthly seasonal momentum also works well for commodities and inter-
national markets. The indicators represented in the charts included in this
» chapter have been constructed by finding the number of a basket of ten S&P
industry groups that are in their respective winter, spring, summer, OT fall
positions, and then smoothing that data with a 6-month MA.

~ Seasonal (Diffusion) Momentum for the Stock Market?

Chart 24-13 shows all four seasonal momentum curves, based on a basket
~~ of S&P industry groups, between 1963 and 1990. Chart 24-14 shows the same
data for the 1990-2001 period. A high reading in the spring series, for exam-
» ple, indicates that the momentum of a significant proportion of the groups
isin phase 1, that is, below zero and rising. This means that the market is
in a strong position to begin a major advance.

~ "When | first introduced this concept in the third edition of this book, the ability of most of

Us to do the calculations was limited to professionals who had access to powerful computers
.. and a large database. However, it is now more widely accessible since it can be formulated and
ted in any version of MetaStock that contains the security function. For details, go to
¥ww.pring.com.


a56 Part II: Market Structure

Chart 24-13 The S&P Composite.
www.pring.com.) » 1963-1990, and seasonal momentum. (From

3004
200- S&P Composite

100 +

Winter momentum

Chart 24-14 The S&P Composite,
wns pring.cor) » 1990-2001, and seasonal momentum. (From

1000] S&P Composite

Breadth 457

It is important to note that in most cycles there is a chronological
sequence as the majority of groups move from spring to summer, fall, and
finally winter, as shown by the arrows. Bear market lows typically occur
around the time winter momentum peaks. As with all momentum series,
confirmation should come from the price, which in this case would be the

~ $&P Composite.

The peaking out of spring momentum is often associated with the first
intermediate-term peak in the bull market, but it is nota bearish sign. It sim-
ply means that the majority of groups are moving from the spring (accu-
mulation) to the summer (markup) phase. It is bearish only if a significant
number of groups are moving from spring back to winter.

Potential market weakness is signaled when the summer momentum, the
third series, starts to turn down. This is not an actual sell signal because the
market often moves sideways or even higher after summer momentum
peaks. It does, however, indicate that the environment has become much
more selective as the smoothed momentum for more groups moves to the
fall (distribution) phase.

The S&P Composite sometimes declines during the transition from the
summer to the fall phase, but it is more normal for downside momentum to
pick up as the cycle moves from fall to winter, that is, the point at which the
momentum indicators for most groups cross below their zero reference lines.

Bear Market Bottoms

- Major buying points occur when winter momentum reaches its peak and starts to turn

down. Generally speaking, the higher the peak, the greater the potential for

. upside activity. This is because a movement out of winter momentum must

flow into spring. A high and falling level in winter momentum, therefore,
indicates that a significant number of groups have the potential to move into
the spring position, that is, to move to the point from which they have the
greatest potential to rise. This is shown more clearly in Chart 24-15.
Normally, the winter momentum series moves up steadily toward a peak
and then reverses direction. Reversals that come from high readings are usu-

_ ally a reliable indication that the downtrend in the overall market has
- Teversed. Occasionally, winter momentum temporarily peaks out, but the
_ Market itself does not bottom, as in late 1973. This is a very unusual state
_ f affairs, but it does point out that no system is perfect. Intermixing the
“Seasonal momentum analysis with other indicators is very important. In
__ 1973, for example, bond yields were in a persistent rising trend. This is one

Of the reasons it is often important to make sure that other indicators are
acting in sympathy before concluding that a trend has reversed.

_ New bull markets are sometimes signaled by a reversal in the downtrend
in spring momentum, but since the lead times can also be extremely long,
™



458 Part Il: Market Stricture

Chart 24-15 The S&P Composite, 1956-2001, and winter momentum. (From
www.pring.com.)

1600 4
1000 3

600 S&P Composite

je ow we ew enn ew we ap

ise TT eo fe RRR” |

upward movement in spring momentum by itself is no guarantee that the
market will rally.

A confirming signal of a major bottom is often given by a reversal in a trend
of summer momentum occurring simultaneously with, or very close to, a
peak in winter velocity. In other words, winter turns down and summer
reverses to the upside. Generally speaking, the lower the level of summer
velocity when a reversal occurs, the greater the potential for a market rise.

Signs of a Market Peak

Market tops are far more elusive than bottoms, but advance warning is usU-
ally given by a reversal in the uptrend of spring momentum. Lead times can
vary, but it is normally safe to assume that as long as summer and spring
momentum are both rising, higher prices are in store. It is also generally
true that the market will rise for at least a month or so following a peak in
spring momentum, usually much longer.

Market tops normally occur at some point between the in summer
and fall momentum. For example, the stock market peaked in 1983 at the
time when summer momentum peaked. Even a topping out in the
momentum is not always sufficient to trigger a full-fledged bear market.
Declining fall momentum is usually associated with a distribution, °F
topping-out phase, as in 1973 and 1977. Occasionally, group momentum
swings back to summer, thus averting a major market decline. It is only when

= 459

alarge and expanding number of groups fall below their zero reference lines,
that is, move into winter, that a bear market picks up downside momentum.

Indian Summer

During periods such as 1984-1987, which are associated with a strong, per-
sistent linear uptrend, the normal spring-summer-fall-winter sequence
does not occur. Instead, a chronology of a different nature, alternating

==. between summer and fall, enables the market to regain its internal strength

without suffering a major decline. In a sense, the market undergoes an
Indian summer rally.

Asa result, it is not possible to conclude that a peak in summer momen-
tum will always lead to a market decline. It is more important to watch the
~ beginning of the decline in fall momentum to see whether the flow of

‘ groups moves into winter or back into summer.

»~ How to Identify Indian Summers

The best way to determine whether fall momentum will flow back to sum-
mer or on to winter is to watch both winter and summer momentum. As
long as the winter quadrant continues to rise, this is a bearish sign, and it
~ indicates that an expanding number of groups are declining in price. This
will clearly have a negative impact on the S&P Composite.

It is important to note that during the Indian Summer phase between
1985 and early 1987, the winter momentum series never succeeded in deci-
sively crossing above its MA.

Short-Term Seasonal Momentum

Chart 24-16 shows the DJIA together with a spring momentum. This series
is constructed from a basket of 20 stocks in the DJIA. The measurement of
‘rend in this case is the daily KST. The oscillator has been inverted so that
its movements correspond to the ups and downs in the DJIA. Buy signals
are indicated when it first reaches an oversold condition. Signals between
1996 and 2001 are indicated by the dashed vertical lines. Since the data are
short term in nature, so are the ensuing rallies. However, there is certainly
4 nice consistency to these trend-reversal signals.

® Conclusion

The concept of progressive seasonal momentum is important to understand,
en for those who cannot follow this approach on a regular basis. This is



460 Part Il: Market Structure

Chart 24-16 DUIA and DJ spring momentum (inverted).

1200 4
11004
1000 +
900 =|
800 5

: Buy zone oo

ae "aa cree fisge" * an fiseo" “600 is aa]

because it explains how a market goes through its various stages, and the
kind of conditions required for major bull and bear moves.

Summary

© Market breadth measures the degree to which a market index is supported
by a wide range of its components.

© It is useful from two aspects. First, it indicates whether the environment
for most items in a universe (normally equities) is positive or negative.
Second, market breadth indicators signal major turning points through
positive and negative divergences.

* Indicators constructed from breadth data include A/D lines, breadth
oscillators, diffusion indicators, and net new highs.

¢ Breadth divergences are a fine concept, but should be confirmed by @
trend reversal in the market averages themselves.

* New highs and lows can be used to indicate the underlying strength or
weakness of the prevailing trend. Indicators constructed from this data
can be used to flag divergences or measure trends by cumulating the pl
rality of the highs and lows. - 4

¢ Seasonal momentum signals major buying and selling opportunites an
can often be used to identify the maturity of the prevailing primary fen’:

part Ill

Other Aspects
of Market

Behavior


LAP HERERO els

ES

25

Why Interest
Rates Affect the
Stock Market

in this chapter, we will examine why changes in the level of interest rates
are an important influence on equity prices and apply technical analysis to

_ credit market yields and prices.

Changes in interest rates affect the stock market for four basic reasons:

_ * Fluctuations in the price charged for credit have a major influence on the

level of economic activity and therefore an indirect influence on corpo-
rate profits.

* Because interest charges affect the bottom line, changes in the level of
rates have a direct influence on corporate profits and therefore the price
investors are willing to pay for equities.

* Movements in interest rates alter the relationships between competing
financial assets, of which the bond/equity market relationship is the most
important.

* A substantial number of stocks are purchased on borrowed money (known
as margin debt). Changes in the cost of carrying that debt (that is, the inter-
est rate) influence the desire or ability of investors and speculators to
maintain these margined positions. Because changes in interest rates Usu-
ally lead stock prices, it is important to be able to identify primary trend
reversals in the debt market.

463



464

The Indirect Effect of
Interest-Rate Changes
on Corporate Profits

Perhaps the most important effect of interest-rate changes on equity prices
en ae the fact that tight monetary policy associated with rising rates
adversely affects business conditions, wh i i
nn ereas falling rates stimulate the

Given time, most businesses can adj i

me, ijust to higher rates, but when thi

change quickly and unexpectedly most have to curtail expansion plans, mie
inventories, and so on. This has a debilitating effect on the economy and
therefore corporate profits. Higher rates and smaller profits mean lower
price/earnings multiples and therefore lower stock prices.

When the authorities become concerned about the economy, they lower
short-term rates and a reverse effect takes hold.

The Direct Effect of Interest-Rate
Changes on Corporate Profits

Interest rates affect profits in two ways. First, almost all companies borrow
money to finance capital equipment and inventory, so the cost of money,
thatis, the interest rate they pay, is of great importance. Second, a substantial
number of sales are in turn financed by borrowing. The level of interest rates
therefore has a great deal of influence on the ability and willingness of cus-
tomers to make additional purchases. One of the most outstanding exam-
ples is the automobile industry, in which both producers and consumers are
very heavily financed. The capital-intensive utility and transportation indus

tries are also large borrowers, as are all the highly leveraged construction
and housing industries.

Interest Rates and
Competing Financial Assets

Interest-rate changes also have an impact upon the relative appeal of vari-
ous investment sectors. The most significant relationship is that of stocks to
bonds. For example, at any point there is a balance between bonds an!

stocks, in the judgment of investors. However, if interest rates rise faster than
dividends can increase, bonds will become more attractive and, at the mar
gin, money will flow out of stocks into bonds. Stocks will then fall in value

Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Why Interest Rates Affect the Stock Market 465

Technical Principle _ It is not the level of rates that is impor-
at their rate of change because this has the bigger influence on

© until the relationship is perceived by investors to be more reflective of the
© higher level of interest rates.
The effect of interest-rate changes on any particular stock group will
|’ depend upon the yield obtained combined with the prospects for profit
wth. Most sensitive will be preferred shares, which are primarily held for
their dividends and which do not generally permit benefit from profit
pe . Utility stocks are also highly sensitive to interest-rate movements
“since they are held as much for their current dividend yields as for poten-
« tial growth. Changes in the level of interest rates therefore have a very direct
effect on utility stocks. On the other hand, companies in a dynamic stage
~ of growth are usually financed by corporate earnings and for this reason pay
* smaller dividends. These stocks are less affected by fluctuations in the cost
|. ofmoney, since they are purchased in anticipation of fast profit growth and
. future yield rather than an immediate dividend return.

Poa

“F Interest Rates and Margin Debt

~ Margin debt is money loaned by brokers for which securities are pledged

as collateral. Normally, this money is used for the acquisition of equities, but

sometimes margin debt is used for purchases of consumer items, such as
- automobiles. The effect of rising interest rates on both forms of margin debt
_. issimilar, in that rising rates increase the carrying cost. There is, therefore,
areluctance on the part of investors to take on additional debt as its cost
tises. When the service charges become excessive, stocks are liquidated and
the debt is paid off. Rising interest rates have the effect of increasing the
supply of stock put up for sale with consequent downward pressure on
Prices.

- Bond Yields Versus Bond Prices

B When a bond is brought to market by a borrower, it is issued at a fixed inter-
est rate (coupon), which is paid over a predetermined period. At the end



416
6 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

of this maturity period, the issuer agrees to repay the face amount. Sin
- ice

bonds are normally issued in denominations of $1000 (known as Par), this:

figure usually represents the amount to be repai
period. Because bond prices are quoted in powentage tomas vr (bt nn
ic expressed as 100. Normally, bonds are issued and redeemed at be
ey are occasionally issued at a discount (at less than 100) or at remit
(ata price greater than 100), “Premium

ile it is usual for a bond to be issued and redeemed a i

can Huctuate quite widely over its life because imteresvrate levels nee
tinua lly changing. Assume that a 20-year bond is issued with an 8 percent
interest rate (coupon) at par (that is, 100); if interest rates rise to 9 percent,
the paying 8 percent will be difficult to sell because investors have
opportunity to earn a return of 9 percent. The only way in which the
8 percent bondholder can find a buyer is to reduce the price to a level that
would compensate a prospective purchaser for the 1 percent differential in
interest rates. The new owner would then earn 8 percent in interest together
with some capital appreciation. When spread over the remaining life of the
bond, this capital appreciation would be equivalent to the 1 percent loss in
uerest This combination of coupon rate and averaged capital apprecia-
on is nown as the yield. If interest rates decline, the process is reversed,
nd the 8 percent bond becomes more attractive in relation to prevailing
ms So its price rises. The longer the maturity of the bond, the greater will
be is price fluctuation for any given change in the general level of interest

The Structure of
the Credit Markets

the credit markets can be roughly divided into two main areas, known 48
€ short end and the long end. The short end, more commonly known as the
money market relates to interest rates charged for loans up to ] year in matu-
8 ty orma a movements at the short end lead those at the longer end,
sce short aoe more sensitive to trends in business conditions and
o ae e eserve policy. Money-market instruments are issued by
. K eral state, and local governments as well as corporations.
e "3 ong end of the market consists of bonds issued for a period of at
ast 10 years. Credit instruments are also issued for periods of between 1
and 10 years, and are known as intermediate-term bonds.
The bond market (that is, the long end) has three ‘main sectors, which
ire classified as to issuer. These are the U.S. government, tax-exempt issuers
‘State and local governments), and corporate issuers. ,

" Why Interest Rates Affect the Stock Market 467

The financial status of the tax-exempt and corporate sectors varies from
jssuer to issuer, and the practice of rating each one for quality of credit has
therefore become widespread. The best possible credit rating is known as
-» AAAs next in order are AA, A, BAA, BA, BB, and so on. The higher the qual-
“it, the lower the risk undertaken by investors, and, therefore, the lower the
interest rate required to compensate them. Since the credit of the federal
“ government is higher than that of any other issuer, it can sell bonds at a rel-
. atively low interest rate. The tax-exempt sector (bonds issued by state and
local governments) is able to issue bonds with the lowest rates of all, in view
” of the favored tax treatment assigned to the holders of such issues.

Most of the time, price trends of the various sectors are similar, but at
major cyclical turns, some will lag behind others because of differing
demand and supply conditions in each sector.

Bond and money market prices typically top out ahead of the equity mar-
ket at cyclical peaks, The lead characteristics and degree of deterioration
required to adversely affect equities differ from cycle to cycle. There are no
hard-and-fast rules that relate the size of an equity decline to the time period
separating the peaks of bond and equity prices. For example, short- and
> long-term prices peaked 18 and 17 months, respectively, ahead of the 1959
-. bull market high in the Dow. This compared with 11 months and 1 month

for the 1973 bull market peak. While the deterioration in the bond and
Toney markets was sharper and longer in the 1959 period, the Dow, on a
monthly average basis, declined only 13 percent, as compared to 42 percent
. in the 1973-1974 bear market.

A further characteristic of cyclical peaks is that high-quality bonds (such
as Treasury or AAA corporate bonds) decline in price ahead of poorer-
quality issues (such as BAA-rated bonds). This has been true of nearly every
“© cyclical turning point since 1919. This lead characteristic of high-quality

* bonds results from two factors. First, in the latter stages of an economic
expansion, private-sector demand for financing accelerates. Commercial
banks, the largest institutional holders of government securities, are the
