
Have you ever been to an amusement park and ridden the giant
roller coaster? Once you’ve settled into your seat, the safety bar
comes across your lap and then you’re launched up the long, grinding climb. As you crest the top of the tracks, you hold up your hands
and yell as the bottom drops out of the car and you speed into the
curve. One minute you’re going up, the next you’re dropping.
With that mental picture in mind, trading an IPO can be the
market’s equivalent to the coaster ride. IPOs are stocks that have
no market history and, therefore, no price chart to analyze. They can
represent great opportunity and great risk at the same time. From
a technical standpoint, you can’t really use the Market Guys’ Five
Points for Trading Success because there is no uptrend, support level,
or stop level that can be identified. Does that mean you should not
trade IPOs? Not necessarily, but you need to understand the nature
of an IPO. While not all IPOs behave like a four-year-old who just
downed a bag of Skittles, more than a few have the kind of volatility
that tests a trader’s resolve. Take a look at the chart in Figure 8.3.
Xtent Inc. (ticker symbol: XTNT) started trading on February 1,
2007. Within two weeks, it went from a high of $17.24 to a low of
$13.75. As noted on the chart, one day’s trading saw a range of $1.93.

c08.indd 160

11/2/07 12:25:11 PM

E Pluribus Unum

161

Figure 8.3 Xtent Inc. Initial Public Offering Chart

Suddenly, the stock fizzled as the trading range dropped to a mere
$0.08 on triple the volume! Imagine—trading activity increased by
three times, yet the stock flatlined. I don’t know about you, but if I
were in that trade and saw heavy volume and no movement, I would
be jumping at every tick, waiting for the breakout.
Included in a Major Index

Finally, the last screen that we include on the basic list is whether
the stock is included on one of the major indices, such as the list
shown in Table 8.1 (on page 152). If a stock is included in a major
index such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average, then every fund
and ETF that tracks the market based on that index must own the
stock. Almost every mutual fund family includes an index fund for
the major indices. If the stock price falls, you have the assurance
that the large institutional holders of that stock aren’t going to start
selling out of their position. As long as the stock remains a component of the index, these holders will continue to own the stock.
Another consideration for trading stocks that are included in a
major index is the fact that the index is intended to be representative
of the overall market or economy. As such, you wouldn’t expect to
find fundamentally weak companies whose future is in doubt. That
provides some measure of comfort for traders and investors who are
buying that stock. However, if the stock should be dropped from
the index, we’ll refer you back to the mental picture of the coaster
ride we created a few paragraphs ago.

c08.indd 161

11/2/07 12:25:11 PM

162

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Getting Technical
The technical criteria for screening stocks may include any of the
technical indicators that are used in technical analysis. The following
list will give you some ideas of how and why you might use technical
screens to pare down the stock pool:
• Volume changes
• High/low price
• Moving average trends
• Most active
• Gainers and losers
• Bollinger Bands
• Stochastics
Volume Changes

Let’s start the technical screening list with volume. Along with price,
we consider volume to be the other member of the dynamic duo. If
the trading police were to step up and tell us that we could have only
two items with which to trade, we would have to go with price and
volume. Take away either of the two of those and we’d be writing a
book about catering wedding parties. We just couldn’t trade without
considering these two first.
For traders, volume looks like little green and red bars spread
across the bottom of our charts. But consider the word in another
context. Surely, most of our readers have attended a favorite sporting
event such as the Olympics, a football game, or a college basketball
playoff. You have two opponents meeting on the field of play, the
home team (we’ll call them the Bulls) and the visitors (let’s call them
the Bears). When the Bulls are sluggish and their play is sloppy, what
happens to the crowd? Initially, perhaps, they’ll voice their collective
displeasure at the Bulls’ performance. After a time, though, the
crowd will generally settle into a lull. Substandard play by the Bulls
will yield substandard support from the crowd. The result is that
the volume in the arena is reduced to a low hum. At some point
in the game, a couple of the players follow Rick to the concession
stand for a quad-shot espresso. Upon returning to the action, these
newly juiced players start playing with a new spark. They’re advancing the ball down the court with an energy that the fans haven’t seen
so far. Now the crowd becomes engaged and with each advance by

c08.indd 162

11/2/07 12:25:11 PM

E Pluribus Unum

163

the Bulls, their voices crescendo until the arena is echoing with the
volume of their support.
Can you see how we pick up the analogy for trading? Those little
volume bars at the bottom of the chart represent more than just
another line to analyzed. They give us an indication of how much
support there is out there for the price movement. If the traders
start advancing the price but the volume is very low, we have to be
careful because that tells us that others aren’t joining in the action.
When volume spikes on the start of a price move, however, we can
assume that the crowd is jumping into the action. Liquidity, as measured by volume, is the trader’s friend for two reasons. First, more
traders means faster fills. Second, increases in liquidity usually result
in lower spreads—the difference between the bid price and the ask
price. Faster fills and lower spreads actually serve to lower risk.
From a screening standpoint, there are two primary ways to use
volume as a screening tool. The first is to set a minimum threshold
for the average daily volume. A common measure is the five-day average daily trading volume. We could set the screen in such a way that
it filters out stocks whose five-day average trading volume is below
500,000 shares. The only results that show up from this screen will be
stocks that have traded on average at least 500,000 shares over each
of the last five trading days. One word of caution here: Be sure to
glance at the volume bars on your chart before you enter a trade that
has passed through this screen. It’s possible to have a stock with this
trading history:
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5

20,000 shares
10,000 shares
2.6 million shares
35,000 shares
15,000 shares

This stock has a five-day average trading volume of 536,000
shares. That’s enough to allow it to pass the screen we just set up.
However, you can see that the average was skewed by a one-day spike
and the true average is closer to about 15,000 shares. A quick look at
the volume histogram will reveal any anomalies that need to be
accounted for before entering the trade.
The second way to employ a volume screen is to look for stocks
with an increase in trading volume. For example, we could set up a

c08.indd 163

11/2/07 12:25:12 PM

164

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

screen that shows us all stocks that have a 10-day average trading
volume at least 25 percent greater than the 90-day average trading volume. In this case, we’re looking for stocks where the fans in the arena
are getting louder than they’ve been recently. If we’re walking past
10 different arenas, we’re trying to find the one with the most energy
so that we can join in on that game. This screen will show us stocks
that are increasing in volume and, therefore, are attracting more participation from the market. Remember, for the trader, volume drives
price movement and helps to lower risk through higher liquidity.
High/Low Price

Next on our technical list is the high/low screener. This is a simple
but powerful tool that streams a list of stocks making new highs and
stocks making new lows. Figure 8.4 shows an example of a high/
low screening tool. On the left is the list of stocks making new lows.

Figure 8.4 High/Low Screening Tool

c08.indd 164

11/2/07 12:25:12 PM

E Pluribus Unum

165

The first column is the stock ticker symbol. The second column shows
the trade price that generated the new low, and the third column is a
running count of how many times during the day the stock has posted
a new low. You can see at the top of the list that Sherwin Williams
(ticker symbol: SHW) posted a trade price of $42.10, which was the
37th new low for that trading day. On the right side of the screener
is the list of stocks making new highs for the day. Notice the listing
for Iron Mountain Inc. (ticker symbol: IRM) about halfway down the
list. That stock has a highlight across the entire line, indicating that
the trade price is not only a daily high but also a 52-week high. When
it posted a trade price of $43.21, that was the 133rd new high for the
day as well as the highest trade price in the last 52 weeks.
The reason for screening for stocks that are making new highs
and new lows is that we want to put our money where the money is
flowing. Stocks make new highs when traders and investors are buying them. We want to buy stocks that are going up, and a great way
to find stocks that are going up is to look for the new highs. On the
flip side, when traders and investors are selling stocks, the prices will
make new lows. We also want to sell stocks when the money is flowing
out of them, and a great way to find falling stocks is to look for new
lows. It’s no more complicated than that. Like we’ve said many times,
trading isn’t easy, but it isn’t complicated either. It’s an ordinary
endeavor that requires extraordinary discipline.
Moving Average Trends

We’ve included screening for moving average trends on the list
because it is a clean and simple way to identify an uptrend. Our
favorite way to apply this screen is threefold:
1. Price is above the 20-day simple moving average (SMA).
2. 20-day SMA is above the 50-day SMA.
3. 20-day SMA and 50-day SMA are both trending up.
Clearly, you can adjust the period on the moving averages and
create a screen that has different sensitivities. Using the 20-day
and 50-day SMAs compares the short-term trend to the intermediateterm trend. You could just as easily use the 50-day SMA and the 200-day
SMA to compare the intermediate-term trend against the long-term
trend. Alternatively, you could use the exponential moving average

c08.indd 165

11/2/07 12:25:12 PM

166

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 8.5 Price > 20-day SMA > 50-day SMA

(EMA) rather than the SMA. These adjustments are more a matter of
personal preference than a correct versus incorrect application. The
idea here is that we want to use a simple technical screen to generate
stock candidates that are in an uptrend. When the price is trading
above the moving averages, the moving average will act as support.
The short-term moving average will only run above the intermediateterm moving average when the stock is accelerating in the uptrend.
The picture that we see in Figure 8.5 is exactly what we’re looking for
with this screen.
Most Active

The next two on the technical list are included to give you an idea
of how to find stocks that others are trading. These stocks are not
necessarily the best candidates in terms of the technical or fundamental criteria. Rather, the idea here is to find the stocks that are
attracting the most attention based on volume or price movement.
The most active stocks can usually be found on just about any report
that measures the performance of the market. Most actives are
generally reported by exchange, so we’ll see the NYSE Most Actives,
the Nasdaq Most Actives, and so on. Be aware that a stock may hit the
most active list for any variety of reasons, good or bad. Making it to
the most active list does not always entail a significant news event.
Many of the stocks on the most active list are the widely held largecaps that almost every investor and institution trades as part of a

c08.indd 166

11/2/07 12:25:12 PM

E Pluribus Unum

167

portfolio. Sometimes, though, a stock hits the most active list when
an earnings surprise is announced or there is pending litigation. In
these instances, you have to be very careful about the increased volatility that comes with the increased volume. There’s nothing wrong
with running the rapids—just watch out for the waterfalls.
Gainers and Losers

Looking at the top gainers and losers, in terms of both absolute and
percentage movement, is a good approach to generating trading candidates. When using this screen, it’s important to know the exchange
or index from which these stocks originate. Figures 8.6 and 8.7 both
show a list of the top gaining stocks. However, Figure 8.6 is generated from the American Stock Exchange (Amex), while Figure 8.7
is drawn from the S&P 500. All but two of the Amex stocks trade
below $10 per share, while only one of the S&P 500 stocks is below
the $10 threshold. The cheaper the stock, the less price movement
is required to create a large percentage change. When you screen
from the S&P 500, you’re drawing from a pool of larger established
companies, whereas a screen from the entire Amex would include
many lower-priced stocks.
Bollinger Bands

Finally, rounding out the technical screening list are two representative technical indicators: the Bollinger Bands and stochastics. We
really don’t need to go into the details of these indicators beyond what
was covered in Chapter 4. These indicators are included in this list to
show how any technical indicator may be used as a filter for screening.
We saw how the Bollinger Bands may sometimes be used as an indication of a reversal for stocks that are channeling within the bands. One
application of the Bollinger Bands as a screening tool is to look for
stocks that are within a certain distance of the bands. For example,
we could specify that we want stocks that are currently trading within
10 percent of the lower Bollinger Band. This will generate a list of
stocks that are close to the lower Bollinger Band, and we would then
scan the charts to see if the price is above or below the band. We eliminate the stocks trading below the band and then search for stocks
that appear to be channeling within the bands. The ideal setup in
this example would be a stock that is approaching the lower Bollinger
Band and appears to be ready for a rally back into the channel.

c08.indd 167

11/2/07 12:25:13 PM

168

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 8.6 American Stock Exchange Top Percentage Gainers

Stochastics

In the same fashion, we noted that one application of the stochastic
oscillator is to identify overbought and oversold conditions. In general, when a stock has a stochastic value below around 20 percent,
we would consider that stock to be oversold. If we look for the price
to correct in the direction of the stochastic, then this would be a

c08.indd 168

11/2/07 12:25:13 PM

E Pluribus Unum

169

Figure 8.7 S&P 500 Top Percentage Gainers

long candidate. To set up a screen using the stochastic, we could
filter for any stock with a fast stochastic (%K) value less than 20 percent. Again, these values may all be adjusted to increase or decrease
the number of stocks that pass the filter. Obviously, the smaller the
stochastic number, the fewer the number of stocks that will pass
the screen.

c08.indd 169

11/2/07 12:25:13 PM

170

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Putting the Fun in Fundamentals
We know plenty of traders who will pass by this section because they
place all of their stock into the basic and technical criteria. They’re
naturally suspicious of anything that gets reported by the accountants
and analysts. After the wild ride that many investors experienced with
such names as Enron, Lucent, and WorldCom, it would be tough to
blame them. There are probably just as many investors who will skip
the basic and technical sections, dismissing them as attempting to
read the market tea leaves. They’ll jump right to the fundamental list
as the holy grail of finding the stocks. We like to balance the two, use
the fundamentals to identify what to buy or sell, then apply the basic
and technical screens to identify when to buy or sell.
• Earnings
• Price-to-earnings ratio (P/E)
• Price-to-book
• Analysts’ ratings
• Revenue
• Sales per employee
• Ranking with sector or industry
Earnings

Our fundamental list starts with two criteria that go hand-in-hand.
The first is earnings, and the second is the P/E. Earnings are simply
the profit generated by the company’s operations for a specific
reporting period, usually a fiscal quarter. The earnings are probably
the most watched and analyzed measure of a company’s performance.
Part of the reason lies in the simplicity of the concept. We may be dazzled by some more arcane accounting metrics, but most of us can
appreciate the answer to this one question: Is the company making
money or losing money? During the gold-rush days of the 1990s’ technology boom, many fast-growth companies were plowing every available dollar into business expansion and capturing market share. These
companies were often given a free pass regarding their absence of
earnings. A new measure was brought in to replace earnings—eyeballs.
This was an attempt to justify losing money so long as the company
was expanding into the marketplace. The problem was that eyeballs
don’t make purchases. It was a strange twist to watch companies

c08.indd 170

11/2/07 12:25:13 PM

E Pluribus Unum

171

explain that while they may be losing money, they’re making it up in
volume. That is to say, they used to be a small company losing a little
money, now they’re a big company losing a lot of money.
P/E and Price-to-Book

As a way to benchmark the earnings, it’s common to divide the
per-share price of the stock by the per-share earnings. This yields a
price-to-earnings ratio, or P/E. Different industries have different
standards by which P/Es are evaluated. Technology companies, for
example, are expected to have higher P/Es than utility companies.
The stock price reflects the expected growth of the company and the
industry that it represents. We mentioned a moment ago those companies that don’t have any earnings. How do we evaluate a company
if they don’t have any “E” to “P” on? Again, creative accountants and
analysts will highlight alternative measures such as price-to-sales or
price-to-book. The book value of a company is the theoretical value
of the company if all company assets were liquidated. Presumably,
even zero-profit, high-flying technology companies could hawk their
silk ficus trees and cubical partitions on eBay.
Either of these measures may be used to screen for trade candidates. Screening for earnings may be as straightforward as specifying that earnings are greater than zero. That screen will filter out
any company that isn’t reporting a profit. With the P/E, it is more
common to determine the average P/E for the industry you’re
interested in and then using that average as the benchmark. A quick
way to determine an industry average P/E is by looking at the ETF
for that industry. The ETF P/E will be the weighted average of the
constituent stocks within that ETF.
Analysts’ Ratings

Moving down the list we have the analysts’ ratings. We’ll do our
dead-level best not to appear too jaundiced in discussing this
point, but we really have seen some egregious failures by analysts.
Recently, an analyst for a major Wall Street firm wrote an upbeat
report on a company that specializes in making mortgages to cashpoor home buyers. The company, New Century Financial, had
lost half its market value in the previous month, trading around
$15 per share. The very next day, the company announced that

c08.indd 171

11/2/07 12:25:14 PM

172

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

it would cease writing new loans and needed emergency funding
to survive. The stock collapsed to $3 per share and has since filed
for bankruptcy protection. It makes you wonder if the analyst had
inadvertently written up the wrong company. You’d be wondering
only until you dug a bit deeper and found that the Wall Street firm
reportedly had a long-standing relationship financing New Century
Financial. The best advice we can give when it comes to reviewing
analyst recommendations is to see which analysts are completely
independent and which are tied to a banking or underwriting
division. A good example of the former is Standard & Poors, which
provides investment research, ratings, and risk assessments. S&P
assigns ratings to companies on a one-star to five-star scale, with a
five-star rating as the highest. It’s quite easy to screen stocks based
on a minimum S&P star rating. How much value do we assign to
the latter? Modifying a saying from Rick’s dad, “An analyst’s rating
and $3.50 will get you a cup of coffee.”
Revenue, Sales per Employee, and Ranking

The last three on the list, revenues, sales per employee, and sector
or industry ranking, are all used primarily as comparative measures.
As we mentioned earlier, this list isn’t all that you have to choose
from. Company strength, performance, and rankings are evaluated
in a variety of ways, and any of the evaluation criteria may be used
for a screen. As with the basic and technical screens, we would caution against applying too many criteria together and then assuming that the final list is worthy of your investment or trading dollars.
Your trading plan should detail the process by which you arrive at
your trading decision. Screening for stocks is a part of that process,
not the entire process in and of itself.

Buy the Rumor, Sell the News?
The final screening list is included because of the ubiquity of the
phrase, “Buy the rumor, sell the news.” The fact is, stock prices are very
susceptible to rumor and news. Sometimes they present traders with
opportunities; other times, it’s best for the trader to step out of the
game until the news and speculation pass. Screening for news usually
requires scanning for keywords. For example, if you want to screen for
earnings news, you may use such keywords as earnings, whisper number,
