
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

Risk Management

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

281

different mind-set. The key here is to realize that your intuition and perceptions regarding probabilities are unreliable and must be backed up by logic, reasoning, and testing of
relevant scenarios.

Uncertainty as Risk
One commonly used definition of risk in many fields of finance is that risk is uncertainty.
For instance, when different assets are being evaluated, the standard deviations of their
returns are often used as a proxy measure of risk. This raises a few issues that are often ignored: First of all, is this right? Is uncertainty an appropriate measure of risk? This
is what is taught in business schools around the world, so it is often accepted by practitioners without question. True, there are applications in other fields of finance where
uncertainty may be a good measure of risk. For instance, in corporate finance, managers
often prefer a project that has a lower, more certain return to one that has much higher
potential payout but with more uncertainty. Certainty of cash flows is the goal in some
cases because it allows for the most efficient allocation of resources—surprises are not
good. Though this is appropriate from the manager’s perspective, it may not be the best
standard to apply to trading and investment management, where strategies may sometimes be completely dependent on positive surprises and outliers.
This desire for certainty finds its way into investment management when portfolio
managers use the standard deviation of an asset’s returns, measured from past returns,
as a predictor of future risk. This is potentially flawed on several fronts. First, there is
no guarantee that future returns will carry similar variation to historical returns. In fact,
it is easy to construct a study comparing standard deviations and distributions for assets
across different time windows that will reveal the folly of this assumption. It is also
entirely possible that an asset may carry risks that are not visible in the return series. For
instance, the returns of a trader who simply writes option premiums every month are
probably extremely consistent. A strategy like this may very well show many consecutive
positive months (or years) with little or no variation, but there is no accounting for the
hidden risk of an eventual catastrophic loss—execute this strategy long enough, and
there will be a day of reckoning. Other examples might be complex derivatives, such
as those that precipitated the 2007–2009 financial crisis, that have embedded structural
risks; a return series is irrelevant for such an asset, especially if the market for them
is illiquid and inactive. Quantitatively, there is no way to understand these risks from a
simple examination of returns, but qualitative assessment might reveal some of the flaws
and hidden risks in many of these cases.
Symmetry of risk is another issue that standard models may not capture very well.
In the case of the short premium options trader, there is unseen large left-tail risk, but in
other cases, the risks may be dramatically skewed to the upside. Which of these carries
more risk: a fund that will return 5 percent annually with a 10 percent standard deviation
or a fund that will return 5 percent annually with an asymmetrical risk profile extending
5 percent downward and 15 percent upward? The second fund has dramatically higher

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

282

TRADING STRATEGIES

variability, but all of the extra “risk” is skewed to the upside—in this case, variability is
opportunity, not risk, as we saw earlier with fixed fractional position sizing. Simplistic
measures of risk will consistently misprice asymmetrical risks in the real world.

MISUNDERSTOOD RISK
If the academic world and market researchers are somewhat divided on how to measure
risk, it is no wonder that traders are a little confused. One of the key skills of competent
trading is excellent risk management; this can be achieved only if the risks are fully
understood and accepted. It is important for traders to think deeply about the nature of
the risks they are assuming, and to put them in the context of their expected returns.

Generating Positive Expected Value
We can redefine the expected value equation like this:
E = (Probwin × Sizewin) − (Probloss × Sizeloss ) ∴
E = Reward − Risk
Win ratio =

Probwin
Probloss

Reward/risk ratio =

Sizewin
Sizeloss

where the probabilities and sizes of wins and losses are averages over a large set of
trades.
The job of a trader seeking to take consistent money out of the market can be simplified to making the E in this equation bigger than zero, or, more formally, to achieving
a positive expected value over a large set of trades. It should be clear that there are two
paths leading to this same end: the trader can get there through having either a high win
ratio or a high reward/risk ratio. Any combination of the two that results in a positive
expected value will make money in the absence of transaction costs. There is no inherent advantage to high-probability trading, and there is also no reason to think that “high
risk/reward” trades are better.

The “Risk” of Risk/Reward
Mark Douglas (2001) makes a good argument that one of the major reasons traders
struggle psychologically is that they are unable to fully accept the risk in any trade. I
would go one step further and say that the reason they are unable to accept the risk is
that they don’t really understand that risk. This may be a radical idea, but, over a large

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Risk Management

Printer: Hamilton Printing

283

set of trades, I would argue that the “risk” part of the risk/reward equation is not actually
true risk.
We live in a world of probabilities, not certainties. No matter how good a trader you
are or how good your system is, the outcome of any one trade is more or less a coin
flip. You can be a great trader and have three or four losing trades in a row, but this
is not actually a risk. The losses on those trades are not true risk; they are the cost
of doing business. Consider the case of a retail business with a simple business model:
the business buys things (inventory), marks them up, and hopefully sells them for a little
more than it paid for them. If this were your business, would you consider the money you
spent on inventory to be risk, or is it simply a planned expense? Certainly, there are risks
associated with your business: you can buy insurance to guard against fire, theft, flood,
or other damage, but inventory expense is a regular, recurring expense as are normal
trading losses.
Some might call this an argument over semantics, but it is actually a very important
distinction. When you enter a specific trade, you do not know if you will make or lose
money on the trade, so there is a possibility of loss, but over a large enough set of trades,
there is a near certainty of a profit if you are trading with a positive expectation. This
loss is not, in the long run, a risk. (If you are not trading with a positive expectation, then
you have a different problem.) Traders are paid for assuming the correct risks at the
correct time within a larger-scale, positive expectancy framework. Until you fully assimilate this truth, you will struggle—this is probably the one belief the separates profitable
discretionary traders from everyone else.

PRACTICAL RISKS IN TRADING
There are many very real risks in trading. Some of them are obvious, many of them are
misunderstood, and some of them are unknowable. The purpose of this section is to get
you thinking about these risks, some of which you will encounter every day, and some of
which you may meet only once in your career. This is not an exhaustive list of all possible
risks, but it does give you some ideas of things to think about.

Trading Without an Edge
One of the worst possible sources of risk must be acknowledged up front—perhaps the
trader actually does not have an edge in the market. Larry Harris (2002) calls traders who
trade without an edge futile traders, and has this to say about them:
Futile traders expect to profit from trading, but they do not profit on average.
They cannot recognize the difference between their expectations and their results.
They may be irrational, they may have poor information about their results . . .
or they may be of limited mental capacity.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

284

TRADING STRATEGIES

He goes on to define inefficient traders, saying:
Inefficient traders lack the skills, analytic resources, and access to information to
trade profitably. They may do everything that profitable traders do, but they do not
do it well enough to trade profitably. . . . [Their] profits are not sufficient to cover
their losses to more skilled and better-informed traders. Inefficient traders generally make poor decisions about when to trade and when to refrain from trading.
Without a real trading edge, everything else is a waste of time. Nothing will help;
the trader is simply doomed to lose money because the markets are actually worse than
our theoretical random walk zero-sum games—the markets are actually a negative-sum
game due to trading frictions and transaction costs. It is impossible to make money trading without a real edge in the market, and, furthermore, if you don’t know what your
edge is, you don’t have one.
A surprising number of retail traders operate without an edge, and they consistently
bleed money. Why would anyone do that? As Harris speculated, perhaps they may be of
limited mental capacity, but probably a more common reason is poor record keeping.
Few retail traders keep professional-level records tracking every aspect of their performance over a significant period of time. Though record keeping seems like an incredibly mundane topic, the discipline of tracking performance is a core skill of professional
trading. It is not uncommon to see working traders devote more attention to the process
of record keeping than to actual trading. If you are keeping good records and carefully
tracking your trade stats, the numbers will not lie.
Many traders fail and trade without an edge because they do not know how to do the
correct analysis to understand their edge, or they make any of a number of mathematic
errors in that analysis. (See Chapter 12 for some specific tools and a structured approach
to this analysis.) Traders may work hard and sincerely believe they are trading with an
edge, but they often are not, and they are confused by the fact that their trading accounts
are continually decreasing in value. Many discretionary traders will resist the idea of a
systematic, structured approach to trading, but I am not advocating that—I am, however,
pointing out the necessity of that approach in analysis and in designing your trading
system. Unless you do this analysis, how can you be sure you are really trading with an
enduring edge in the market? Fail to do this, and you will lose.

Execution Risk
Execution risk is a topic that covers a number of events, including some that are out
of the trader’s control. Every trader should approach the market with a precise plan
for when and where to enter and exit the market on every trade. Execution risk is the
divergence between those intended points and the actual prices received. Though these
differences will sometimes be in the trader’s favor, on balance they will not be. Slippage,
missed trades, and miscellaneous execution errors add up; collectively, these types of

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

Risk Management

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

285

mistakes can become a trading friction that will significantly erode the trader’s edge in
the market.
The sources of these errors will vary from trader to trader and from market to market
and will even be different at different points in a trader’s career. For instance, newer
traders often miss trades because they are nervous about the (false?) risk associated
with the trade. They may hesitate or they may jump the gun and execute trades when
their methodology does not actually call for an entry. Some traders randomly alter sizes,
sometimes taking a few trades on much larger size, or they may try multiple entries with
smaller size. The end result of all of this is that realized results will start to diverge from
the theoretical edge.
Execution risk is, to some extent, a normal cost of doing business. Most executions
that are time-sensitive will involve paying the spread on at least one, or maybe both,
sides of the trade. In liquid markets, this is a negligible expense unless your strategy
trades frequently, but for active traders, even the cost of paying a penny spread in and
out can be a significant drag on performance. It is also important to consider what liquidity conditions may exist when you need to get out of a trade quickly. In some thin
markets (e.g., illiquid futures, currencies, or small-cap stocks), slippage of 10 percent or
more is possible at times. Though this is an extreme example, remember that slippage
can be a much larger cost than the novice trader would expect. Another reason that execution may diverge from backtested results is that sometimes, in equities, it may not
be possible to locate shares for a short sale, or other regulatory restrictions may interfere with the transaction. It is impossible to fully account for events like this in research
and backtesting.
Execution risk can be minimized to some extent through experience and the acquisition of good execution skills. It is also important to invest money in technology, infrastructure, and relationships with the best brokers. A good broker should have competitive
rates, but no trader should have to deal with a subpar platform or a poor Internet connection. Furthermore, new ideas in new markets should be explored on very small size
to judge the difficulties of execution in the unfamiliar territory. If a trader normally risks
$5,000 on a trade, perhaps a foray into a new market would be done in a minuscule size,
risking $50 per trade. There may be issues as size is increased, but it is always a good
idea to have your mistakes and errors on small size where possible.

Disaster Risk
Some disaster risks are fairly common, but some are almost impossible to plan for.
Examples of fairly mundane risks are loss of power or Internet connection, a hard drive
crash, or some other mechanical failure. It is important to have backup systems and
to have a plan that extends several steps further than that. But there are many more
serious risks that bear consideration. What would a natural or man-made disaster in a
major financial center do to your trading program? What if you could not access your
trading accounts for a period of days or weeks? Some of these risks are systemic risks

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

286

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

and, frankly, cannot be managed very well. There is no point in obsessing over things you
cannot control, but there is great value in being as prepared as you possibly can be.

Markets Evolve. Do You?
Throughout market history, there have been many ideas that have worked for a while
or in one specific environment, and then they stop working, often after being published.
Though we try to build our trading programs on principles that will not change, any trading plan is a specific expression of those tendencies expressed in one specific way. It is
completely possible that what worked yesterday will not work tomorrow. This is reality.
Stuff, as they say, happens. Markets evolve and erase certain kinds of trading edges.
This is why any system, including a discretionary one, should be subject to some
sort of control process, similar to the ones used in manufacturing and quality control
(see Chapter 12). The idea is to identify normal variation in the system and then to flag
events that seem to violate that normal variation. This is not a simple task, as markets
are subject to much more randomness than any manufacturing process, and large surprises are normal for many trading systems. However, with a little work and adaptation,
it is possible. Monitoring your performance for severe changes or degradation can give
early warning and allow time to make some adjustments. If you are trading an idea that
stops working, you will incur some losses. This is unavoidable, but a control process will
monitor those losses as they evolve and give a cutoff point at which trading should be terminated. The real danger is not recognizing that something has changed, and continuing
to pour money into a trading system that has become a bottomless hole.

Event Risk/Tail Risk
Tail risk refers to extreme events in the tails of a distribution. We might observe a commodity trade for several years, and see that most of its daily returns fall within +/−2
percent of the previous day, with the occasional large move out to 4 percent. However, it
is entirely possible that that same market could make a 25 percent move tomorrow, out
of all proportion to anything in the historical record. Figure 9.4 shows a daily chart of
Procter & Gamble (NYSE: PG) covering several months, including the day of the May 6,
2010 Flash Crash. This was a fairly boring blue-chip stock that was not prone to making
volatile movements, but nearly an entire decade of price gains were erased in less than
30 minutes, only to be almost completely regained within the next few minutes. This was
a move that most market participants probably thought was impossible, and yet it happened. There are other stocks that showed even more dramatic movements on this day,
and this type of event happens several times a year in individual stocks.
In many cases, though not all, these large standard deviation events will be driven
by geopolitical events or natural disasters and are completely unpredictable. It is the
nature of these events that they are complete surprises. In addition, they are also more
or less unhedgeable; appropriate hedges do exist for most of these risks, but the costs of
applying them continuously will set a hurdle rate that would be difficult to overcome. For

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Risk Management

287

FIGURE 9.4 Daily Chart of PG During the 2010 Flash Crash

instance, the cost of fully hedging a complex portfolio with options can easily run over
10 percent on an annualized basis. With that kind of haircut, you have to ask yourself
just how good you think you are. Can you hedge, beat the hedge hurdle, and still make
enough to make the venture worth your time? Not likely.
When most traders talk about tail risk, they refer to the kind of events that can put
a trader out of business, but remember that tail events are not always bad. Sometimes
the trader may be positioned on the right side of the surprise move, and it turns out
to be a gift. Though some traders have tried, it is very difficult to structure strategies
designed specifically to take advantage of these events, because they are so infrequent
and volatile. Even if you are fortunate enough to be on the right side of such a move,
there is no guarantee that you will find adequate liquidity to exit at a profit.

Correlation
Correlation is a major concern in portfolio design and analysis, but also may have a
larger than expected impact on an active trader holding a handful of positions. Though
correlation is usually considered in the context of longer-term portfolios, correlation risk

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

288

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

cannot be ignored by the active trader. For instance, an equity swing trader who intends
to hold positions for two to four weeks may often be holding five or more positions,
distributed across various sectors and industries. Normally, these positions would be
quite likely to each follow its own course, with some small degree of dependence on
the overall index. A futures swing trader may hold positions in currencies, metals, and
grains that turn out to be much more tightly correlated than expected. If a major event
hits the market, they will all move together. In a nutshell, correlation is bad because
it destroys diversification effects—diversification is not there exactly when you need it
most. A trader may believe she is risking 3 percent of her portfolio on four different
positions, but if they are highly correlated, it is much more like one large position risking
12 percent of equity. This is far more than most traders intend to risk on any one position,
but they do it all the time when they underestimate correlation and risk, and the risk of
shifting correlations.
There is a good reason to expect increased correlations in times of financial stress:
large pools of money tend to move together in times of crisis. This has been well known
and documented for decades, but the rise of ETF products has given more investors
access to broad swaths of asset classes. Many of these assets are being pooled in various
funds as general risky assets that will be dumped en masse in times of systemic stress.
If this trend of aggregation continues, and it seems likely that it will, this effect is likely
to intensify. Active traders must always consider the possibility that every position they
hold can move against them at the same time.

Liquidity Risk
For most traders, the main danger of low liquidity is that you may be unable to execute
at prices you intend. Even moderately sized orders can sometimes move markets far
more than expected; if the order is time-sensitive, as in exiting a position at a stop point,
heavy slippage can result. This is to be expected if the position represents a significant
percentage, or multiple of, an asset’s average daily trading volume. What might not be so
obvious, and thus is more dangerous, is that lack of liquidity can pose a threat to much
smaller positions in normally liquid markets. In addition, this effect has been exacerbated
in many markets by the risk of high-frequency trading (HFT) programs that provide what
is essentially predatory liquidity. Automated market makers are capable of bidding and
offering tight spreads, and then widening those spreads when other orders take liquidity
from the order book, at speeds far beyond human reaction time.
