
[202]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

cess—wealth without risk, if you will. It’s just not a realistic
expectation. Nonetheless, building an investment portfolio
can be exciting, and trying out modern remedies for age-old
problems lets you exercise your animal spirits. If you crave
excitement, I would encourage you to do exactly that. Life is
short. If you want to enjoy the fun, enjoy! But not with one
penny more than 5 percent of your investment assets.
That can be your Funny Money account. But at least
95 percent of your investments should be in your Serious
Money account. That core of your program should consist
of at least 50 percent in index funds, up to 100 percent.
What about your Funny Money account? Enjoy the fun of
gambling and the thrill of the chase, but not with your rent
money and certainly not with college education funds for
your children, nor with your retirement nest egg. Test, if
you will, two or three aggressive investment strategies.
You’re likely to learn some valuable lessons, and it probably
won’t hurt you too much in the short term. Here are seven
Funny Money approaches, and my advice about using them:
1. Individual stocks? Yes. Pick a few. Listen to the
promoters. Listen to your broker or adviser. Listen
to your neighbors. Heck, even listen to your
brother-in-law.
2. Actively managed mutual funds? Yes. But only if
they are run by managers who own their own firms,

W H AT S H O U L D I D O N OW ?

[203]

who follow distinctive philosophies, and who invest
for the long term, without benchmark hugging.
(Don’t be disappointed if the managed fund loses to
the index fund in at least one year of every three!)
3. “Closet index” funds whose returns are tied closely
to the returns of the stock market and that carry
excessive costs? No.
4. Exchange traded funds? Those that track defined
industry sectors that exclude the field in which the
family breadwinner earns his or her living? Maybe.
Those that hold the classic index portfolio? Yes.
But in the Serious Money account. Whatever the
case, don’t speculate in ETFs. Invest in them.
5. Commodity funds? No. Of course, there will be
commodity bubbles that will attract you only after
they have inflated to absurd proportions. But unlike
stocks and bonds, commodities have no fundamentals to support them (neither earnings and dividends nor interest payments).
6. Hedge funds? No. Too much hype. Too much diffusion of performance among winners and losers.
Too many different strategies. Too many successful
managers who won’t accept your money. Too much
cost and too little tax efficiency. The management
fees are so high that they often destroy even the
small chance you have of winning. (The hedge

[204]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

fund, it is said, is not an investment strategy but a
compensation strategy.)
7. Hedge funds-of-funds? No. Really, no. If a regular
hedge fund is too expensive, just imagine a fund of
hedge funds that lays on another whole layer of
expenses.

In your Serious Money Account,
50 percent to 95 percent in classic index
funds. In your Funny Money Account,
not one penny more than 5 percent.

If you decide to have a Funny Money Account, be sure
to measure your returns after one year, after five years, and
after ten years. Then compare those returns with the returns you’ve earned in your Serious Money Account. I’m
betting that your Serious Money will win in a landslide. If it
does, you can then decide whether all that fun was adequate
compensation for the potential wealth you’ve relinquished.
Fun, finally, may be a fair enough purpose for your
Funny Money account. But how, you ask, should you invest
your Serious Money Account—that 50 percent to 95 percent of your assets which you now depend on, or will one
day depend on, for retirement? Use an index fund strategy.
Even better, use it for 100 percent of your assets.

W H AT S H O U L D I D O N OW ?

[205]

The fact that few of you are likely to go that far
doesn’t mean it isn’t the best strategy. Here, listen to
Warren Buffett: “Most investors, both institutional and
individual, will find that the best way to own common
s tocks is through an index fund that charges minimal fees.
Those following this path are sure to beat the net results
(after fees and expenses) delivered by the great majority
of investment professionals.” (Don’t forget that indexing
is also, for most investors, the best way to own bonds.)

Reasonable alternative strategies for
supplementing the index funds
in your Serious Money portfolio.

While I favor the pristine and classic all-U.S.-stockmarket and all-bond-market approach, there are perfectly
reasonable alternative strategies for supplementing the
index funds in your Serious Money portfolio. Kept within
limits, here are some acceptable variations:*
• An international flavor: While international businesses comprise more than 30 percent of the revenues and profits of U.S. corporations, many
* Because of space limitations, I deal with each strategy in a cursory manner here. But further study on your part will be rewarded.

[206]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

investors seek a larger global participation. Although foreign stocks account for about one-half
of the world’s market capitalization, I recommend
that they account for no more than about 20 percent of your own equity portfolio. By far the
soundest way to acquire that participation is to
hold (no surprise here!) a low-cost total international index fund that tracks the returns of all nonU.S. corporations. A modest holding in a low-cost
emerging market index fund is also a reasonable
approach, but be sure you understand the risks.
• Slice-and-dice: Impressed both by the long-term performance (and recent performance) of value stocks
and small-cap stocks, some investors hold the allmarket (or S&P 500) index fund as the core, and
add a value index fund and a small-cap index fund as
satellites. I’m skeptical that any kind of superior performance will endure forever. (Nothing does!) But if
you disagree, it would not be unreasonable to hold,
say, 85 percent in the core, another 10 percent in
value, and another 5 percent in small-cap. But doing
so increases the risk that your return will fall short of
the market’s return, so don’t push too far.
• Bond strategy: The all-U.S.-bond-market portfolio
remains the bond investment of choice. It holds investment-grade corporate bonds, mortgage-backed

W H AT S H O U L D I D O N OW ?

[207]

securities, and U.S. Treasurys, and has an intermediate-term maturity in the range of 5 to 10 years.
Yet we all differ in our liquidity preferences, income requirements, and tolerance for volatility.
Combining a mix of index funds linked to shortterm, intermediate-term, and long-term bonds in
varying amounts is a sound way of honoring these
preferences. I don’t recommend money market
funds in this mix (they are for savings, not for investment), but rather favor short-term bond funds
for investors who lean toward greater short-term
stability of principal and in return are willing to accept less durability of income over the long term.
• Inflation protection: Inflation-linked bonds provide
excellent protection against the long-term erosion
of the purchasing power of the dollar, particularly in
tax-deferred accounts. The U.S. Treasury offers
these bonds in various maturities, which pays a
basic interest rate (currently about 2.4 percent on
the 10-year Treasury note) and is adjusted for inflation (currently expected to be about 2.3 percent).
This all-in yield totals 4.7 percent, the same as the
regular 10-year Treasury. The difference is that if
inflation rises (or for that matter, falls), the total return that you earn will reflect the change. Since the
value of Treasury note at maturity is deemed risk-

[208]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

free, there is no need for the diversification of an
index fund. If you prefer a bond fund owning inflation-linked bonds, choose only the lowest-cost funds
(in effect, an index strategy).
• Asset allocation: How much in stocks? How much
in bonds? Asset allocation is almost universally considered the most important determinant of your
long-term investment return. Most of us will want
more stocks when we’re young, have relatively small
assets at stake, many years to recoup losses, and do
not depend on investment income. When we’re
older, we’re likely to prefer more bonds. If we’ve
planned intelligently and invested wisely, our asset
accumulations have grown to substantial size; we
have far less time on our side; and when we have retired we will rely on our portfolios to produce a
steady and continuing stream of income. My favorite
rule of thumb is (roughly) to hold a bond position
equal to your age—20 percent when you are 20, 70
percent when you’re 70, and so on—or maybe even
your age minus 10 percent. There are no hard-andfast rules here. (Most experts think my guidelines
are too conservative. But I am conservative.)
• Balanced index funds: Since the formation of the
first balanced index fund in 1990 (60 percent total
U.S. stock market, 40 percent total U.S. bond

W H AT S H O U L D I D O N OW ?

[209]

market), many variations on that theme have been
created. First came Life Strategy Funds, each with
a fixed allocation ranging from roughly 20 percent
to 80 percent in stocks (often with a moderate international allocation), and the remainder in U.S.
bonds. More recently, Target Funds have come to
the fore. Here, investors can begin with an allocation appropriate to their age, which inches gradually toward a more conservative allocation as they
approach the retirement age they have targeted.
Such gradual rebalancing makes considerable
sense. Essentially, your allocation strategy is on automatic pilot for your lifetime. The most effective
way to implement this strategy is through target
funds investing in stock and bond index funds.
Such a strategy is likely to be carefree (even boring), just as it is likely to be enormously productive.
The low-cost index fund is especially important
today in your asset allocation strategy. With the equity premium—the spread between the prospective
stock return (about 7 percent per year) and prospective return on the U.S. 10-year Treasury Bond (now
less than 5 percent)—at only about 2 percent, you can
eat your cake and have it too. For index funds can deliver virtually that entire premium to investors. In
contrast, even costs as low as 2 percent per year for

[210]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

an actively managed equity fund would erase the entire premium. Under these circumstances, for example, a fund investor with 75 percent stocks in an
active equity fund and 25 percent in bonds would
earn a net annual return of 5 percent per year. But an
investor in a passive equity fund, pursuing a far more
conservative 50/50 strategy, would earn 6 percent.
Twenty percent more return with 33 percent less risk
would seem to be an offer that’s too good to refuse.

For all the inevitable uncertainty amidst the
eternally dense fog surrounding the world of
investing, there remains much that we do know.

As you seek investment success, realize that it’s never
given to us to know what the returns stocks and bonds
will deliver in the years ahead, nor the future returns that
might be achieved by alternatives to the index portfolio.
But take heart. For all the inevitable uncertainty amidst
the eternally dense fog surrounding the world of investing, there remains much that we do know. Just consider
these commonsense realities:
• We know that we must start to invest at the earliest
possible moment, and continue to put money away
regularly from then on.

W H AT S H O U L D I D O N OW ?

[211]

• We know that investing entails risk. But we also
know that not investing dooms us to financial failure.
• We know the sources of returns in the stock and
bond markets, and that’s the beginning of wisdom.
• We know that the risk of selecting specific securities, as well as the risk of selecting both managers
and investment styles, can be eliminated by the
total diversification offered by the classic index
fund. Only market risk remains.
• We know that costs matter, overpoweringly in the
long run, and we know that we must minimize
them. (We also know that taxes matter, and that
they, too, must be minimized.)
• We know that neither beating the market nor successfully timing the market can be generalized
without self-contradiction. What may work for the
few cannot work for the many.
• We know that alternative asset classes such as
hedge funds aren’t really alternative, but simply
pools of capital that invest—or overinvest or disinvest—in the very stocks and bonds that comprise
the portfolio of the typical investor.
• Finally, we know what we don’t know. We can
never be certain how our world will look tomorrow,
and we know far less about how it will look a
decade hence. But with intelligent asset allocation

[212]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

and sensible investment selections, you will be prepared for the inevitable bumps along the road and
should glide right through them.
Our task remains: earning our fair share of whatever returns that our business enterprises are generous enough to
provide in the years to come. That, to me, is the definition
of investment success. The classic index fund is the only investment that guarantees the achievement of that goal.
Don’t count yourself among the losers who will fail to outpace the stock market. You will be a winner if you follow the
simple commonsense guidelines in this Little Book.
Don’t Take My Word for It
The ideas in this closing chapter seem like common
sense to me, and perhaps they seem like common
sense to you as well. But if you have any doubt, listen
to their echo in these words by Clifford S. Asness,
managing principal of AQR Capital Management.
“We basically know how to invest. A good analogy is
to dieting and diet books. We all know how to lose
weight and get in better shape: Eat less and exercise
more . . . that is simple—but it is not easy. Investing is
no different. . . . Some simple, but not easy, advice for
good investing and financial planning in general includes: diversify widely . . . keep costs low . . . rebalance in a disciplined fashion . . . spend less . . . save

W H AT S H O U L D I D O N OW ?

more . . . make less heroic assumptions about future
returns . . . when something sounds like a free lunch,
assume it is not free unless very convincing arguments
are made—and then check again . . . stop watching
the stock markets . . . work less on investing, not
more. . . . In true Hippocratic fashion: Do No
Harm! You do not need a magic bullet. Little can
change the fact that current expected returns on a
broad set of asset classes are low versus history. Stick to
the basics with discipline.”
The wisdom of Cliff Asness is in fact age-old. Consider these thoughts from Benjamin Franklin, the master of common sense and simplicity. “If you would be
wealthy, think of Saving as well as Getting. . . . Remember that time is money. . . . Beware of little Expenses; a small Leak will sink a great Ship. . . . There
are no Gains, without Pains. . . . He that would catch
Fish, must venture his Bait. . . . Great Estates may venture more, but little Boats should keep near
shore. . . . Tis easy to see, hard to foresee. . . . Industry,
Perseverance, and Frugality make Fortune yield.”
The simple ideas in this chapter really work. A few
years ago, I received this letter from a Vanguard
shareholder holding our 500 Index Fund and Total
Stock Market Index Fund, several of our managed
equity funds and taxable and tax-exempt bond
funds, and a diversified list of individual stocks.
(continued)

[213]

[214]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

“Most of my shares were purchased when you
were chairman. I am 85 years old and have never
earned more than $25,000 a year. I started investing in
1974 with $500. I have only bought—never sold. I remember when things were not going well, your advice
was ‘stay the course.’ ” He enclosed a list of his investments at the start of 2004: Total value, $1,391,407.
As a dyed-in-the-wool indexer, of course, I believe
the classic index fund must be the core of that winning
strategy. But even I would never have had the temerity
to say what Dr. Paul Samuelson of M.I.T. said in a
speech to the Boston Society of Security Analysts
in the autumn of 2005: “The creation of the first
index fund by John Bogle was the equivalent of the invention of the wheel and the alphabet.” Those two essentials of our existence that we take for granted
every day have stood the test of time. So will the
classic index fund.

Acknowledgments

IN WRITING THIS BOOK, I have received incredibly
wonderful support from the entire (three-person) staff of
Bogle Financial Markets Research Center, the Vanguardsupported unit that began its formal activities at the
beginning of 2000.
I want to express special thanks to Assistant to the
President Kevin P. Laughlin, who joined me in 1999 and
is among the longest-serving of the 13 assistants who have
worked with me over the years, going all the way back to
1960. Kevin has done just about everything but actually
write this book—researching subjects, developing data,
checking sources, helping to edit the text, working with
the publisher. He has done it not only with excellence but
with a patience and equanimity that have to be seen to be
believed.
Emily Snyder, my executive assistant for 17 years now
(and with 22 years of service on the Vanguard crew), has

[216]

A C K N OW L E D G M E N TS

also been an enormous help, with extraordinary skill,
steadfast finesse, and unfailing good humor. While I
think she winced when I told her that, yes, I’d be writing
my sixth book (and only a few short months after the publication of number five, The Battle for the Soul of Capitalism), she has turned my scrawled writing on piles of
legal pages into a beautifully rendered typescript, and she
patiently carried me through the usual eight or so edits
that I can’t help myself from doing—all in the pursuit of a
clear, accurate, logical, and reader-friendly text.
While Sara Hoffman is new to our little group, she,
too, did her share of endless typing and retyping, adjusting the rhythm of my writing to the frantic pace of our activity, also with skill, patience, and good humor.
I should note that I take full responsibility for the
strong opinions expressed in this Little Book. These
opinions do not necessarily represent the opinions of the
present management of Vanguard. I remain deeply dedicated to Vanguard and its crew members, and continue to
“press on, regardless” in the furtherance of the values
that I invested in the firm when I founded it in 1974, and
during the 25 years in which I served as chief executive,
then chairman, and then senior chairman.

