
important pieces. Focus on those key concepts that exert influence over and over again. The trendrange axis, S/R, and cross-verification all define repeating tactics through each market session.
Indices point to key changes in market momentum. Individual stock trends will lead or lag major
index movement. This important spread provides a quick reading of that stock’s relative strength (as
compared to the index) that signals convergence or divergence with the intended execution strategy.
In turn, this relationship follows or opposes the current buying or selling bias. Together they align
entry according to major market cycles.
Look for stocks that move more sharply than their related indices. This tendency gains importance
when the index breaks into expansion. During general market rallies and selloffs, swing traders may
have several promising stocks to choose from at the same time. Always trade the one that provides
the highest reward potential at the lowest measurable risk. This favors stocks that lead the market at
the time of execution. But first make sure that equity and index relate to each other in a logical way.
For example, a large technology stock may compare well to the Nasdaq 100 but a small cap may
not.
Price movement reacts to round market numbers. These whole numbers can trigger hours or days of
swing activity when they strike during key cycles. One excellent way to find opportunity scans
market action for stocks with above-average volume that trade at or near market numbers. Take the
scan output, pull up the price chart and see how that number played out through past retracements.
Extensive conflict at the barrier will spike volume and volatility upon its return. Note whether it
previously acted as support, resistance, or a pivot. It will likely show the same characteristics on the
next pass.
Intraday charts respond to whole numbers as well. In addition to multiples of 10, single digits act as
swing levels for smaller-value and less volatile stocks. Stops congregate just beyond these numbers
and trigger volatility spikes when hit. Look for a small penetration through each new number,
followed by a short pullback. Tiny congestion patterns will appear on the 1-minute chart that use
one side of the digit to draw S/R. Keep in mind that single numbers represent minor barriers that
will get taken out easily when larger forces are at work.
First-hour range breakouts carry over an effective strategy from the futures markets. The high and
low set from 9:30 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. often reflect key S/R for that day’s action. Swing traders enter
positions on breakouts above and below these levels or fade midday attempts to break through
them. Classic pullbacks often follow first-hour breakouts and provide low-risk entry that relies on
the same tactics as other types of S/R. Early range extremes may set up well past the first hour, so
don’t watch the clock too closely. These highs-lows as well as 2- and 3-day extremes all respond to
the same execution tactics.
Keep intraday Fibonacci study simple. Even a single tick will print violations of classic retracement
levels. Apply Fib grids to larger intraday trends and avoid using them for very short-term swings.
Don’t bother with any minor retracement levels. Apply only the 38%, 50%, and 62%. Stay aware of
broader retracement levels on the daily chart and stay out of their way unless they are part of a
larger strategy. Fibonacci exerts influence in many different ways, but don’t go crazy looking for all
of them. The best positions come to the swing trader, not the other way around.

FIGURE 15.5
CMGI prints a high-odds CV×4 short sale pattern on this morning gap down. Note the converging elements: (1) Price

breaks through the 62% retracement. (2) Price breaks the descending trendline. (3). Price gaps through major support.
(4) The gap fills an opposing gap and completes an island reversal. Also note how the action on the first bar violates the
whole number 50. This setup demands immediate execution as close to the opening price as possible.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Overlap Fib grids across several days of trading to locate hidden swing levels. The extremes
between the last hour of one session and the first hour of the next offer clues to how far price will
pull back before breaking through a first-hour range. Or lay a grid across the first-hour range to
assist different breakout strategies. These fascinating trend measurements also define the charting
landscape after sharp opening gaps. Fill areas frequently appear right at the 62% retracement and
confirm a trend reversal if price action closes the hole.
Recognize and categorize each gap before planning a strategy to trade it. Consider that most gaps
represent multiple-time frame events. The same price bar may signal a continuation move in one
time frame and an exhaustion reversal in another. When a gap conflicts through different trends, it
invokes major whipsaws and should be avoided. The price action shortly after a gap suggests how it
will handle a first test. If bars thrust away from a new up gap immediately, it signifies demand that
should produce a solid bounce on the first retracement. Price should not fill the gap unless that
bounce fails and rolls over. When price immediately reverses after a new gap, it may fill quickly
and keep going through a new expansion move in the opposite direction.
FIGURE 15.6
Rambus swings continuously off whole numbers during these 2 days of violent price movement. Note the

numerous candle shadows that reach across round levels but then jump back before the 5-minute close. This price
action quickly cleans out mental and physical stops while it signals strong movement in the opposite direction.
Focus trade execution on whole number S/R to improve timing.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Learn to position trade profitably before considering intraday execution. Longer holding periods
reduce risk and let newer participants apply tools in a less demanding environment. Build
knowledge through lower-volatility stocks that move in slow motion. Regional phone carriers,
utilities, and retail sectors offer clean trends that respond to classic technical analysis. But they react
sluggishly and permit many trading errors with little penalty. Decrease position size, sit back, and
work methodically through each analysis and execution without hurry. Then seek more aggressive
positions after confidence grows and trade management becomes instinctive.
Day trading demands the skilled application of complex tools in a very noisy environment. Intraday
profits require quick thinking, fast fingers, and advanced market knowledge. Many unqualified
applicants fall into this difficult execution practice and fail miserably. The bright colors and
flashing numbers of a real-time quote screen look just like a video game. But nothing could be
further from the truth. Behind the numbers, a master game of trickery seeks to rob novice trading
accounts. And the neophytes never realize that their survival depends on joining the insiders rather
than fighting them.

Scalping and intraday swing trading constitute two different strategies. Some Nasdaq traders scalp
tiny movement on the Level II bid-ask and 1-minute charts. This contrary practice works through
the smallest oscillation available within the market day. But dozens of other intraday trends respond
to classic swing tactics. Holding periods from 5 minutes to 6 hours capture many different
opportunities. Even 15-minute to 30-minute positions offer better rewards than the teenies that
occupy the scalping game. And swing traders can apply the same Pattern Cycle techniques on the
30-minute setup and the 3-week pattern.
FIGURE 15.7
Lay a Fib grid across the first hour range to identify natural intraday swing levels. ADC Telecommunications
prints a 4-point morning range that persists through most of the session. Price draws a first rise pattern after the
opening selloff and then pulls back to test the 62% retracement. A last-hour rally finally lifts price through the
earlier highs and sets up a gap for the next morning.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FIGURE 15.8
The head and shoulders pattern signals a profitable short sale on this low-volatility electric utility chart. Also note
the pullbacks that reward precise entry with small gains during the 10-point rally. Neophytes build account size
and gain needed experience when they trade stocks not favored by active or professional speculators.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

PULLBACK EXECUTION
A promising stock takes off and rises sharply, but the swing trader misses the entry and watches in
frustration as it clears one hurdle after another. Finally, the trend slowly stops and reverses. As the
5-minute chart shows a decline and selling pressure builds on the Level II screen, an important
entry decision looms. Should the trader buy the pullback after missing the first opportunity or stand
aside to avoid the risk of a false breakout?
Intraday trend pullbacks require both skill and patience to trade profitably. Some corrections or bear
rallies persist, while others reverse quickly toward new highs or lows. So what signals determine
which outcome is more likely? And what short-term tools predict how far a trend will retrace before
the primary direction reassumes control?
The first pullback after a breakout or breakdown has high odds of rapidly ejecting in the direction of
the new trend. But watch the countertrend depth closely for hidden obstacles. For example, if a
correction breaks through several minor support levels before a bounce, the new rally will likely fail

when price first tests the short-term high. This common scenario may still produce a good trade.
With enough reward between the entry and short-term high, place a sell order 1/16 or 1/8 below the
double top and ride the bounce into a quick fill.
Try a 6-out rule to measure and trade the first pullback. Start a count with the first bar lower than
the parabolic extension of a new uptrend. The next leg should begin no later than the sixth
congestion bar. Why does this work? Many intraday traders set their short-term chart indicators to
periods that measure five to eight price bars. Six-bar corrections display short-term support at these
common settings and induce participants to enter new positions. If price does not eject quickly, the
next bar may signal a short-term trend change on many of these charts and trigger waves of reflex
selling. This induces a larger-scale pullback that prints a more complex pattern before testing the
price extension.
Odds increase that a breakout or breakdown will resume when the chart draws a pullback at a
mirror angle to the new trend. For example, price often pulls back at a 45° slant after an uptrend
prints at the same inclination. This angle reflection suggests a bull flag formation that will eject into
a continuation move under most circumstances. If the pattern does not print clearly on the pullback
but the angle is right, shift down to the next-lower time frame and see how it looks in that view.
Flags often hide in this lower dimension.
Look for a small sideways pattern after sharp expansion through a breakout level. In an uptrend, this
congestion prints near the upper price boundary and clings to it. These high, tight flags mark classic
continuation patterns that can be used for low-risk trade execution. They also work well in bear
markets after breakdowns. Apply the 6-out rule to manage this simple range. The next surge should
not begin until signals flash across many chart screens. So execute on the fourth or fifth bar with a
limit order deep within the small pattern. This order placement allows a cheap exit if the 6-out rule
triggers a failure.
Intraday markets often correct in the classic ABC wave pattern. Countertrends to rallies follow a
natural tendency to pull back, bounce, and then pull back again before finding support. Swing
traders often fool themselves and jump on the first bounce rather than wait for a correction to
completely unwind. This strategy may produce a profitable trade but it also incurs many trend
relativity errors. The deeper a trend corrects, the less likely it will take out the old high or low
quickly and break into another wave. For this reason, only tight and small ABC patterns provide
dependable signals for new primary impulses.
Measure the ABC pattern with a Fib grid. Because corrections tend to reverse at 38%, 50%, or 62%,
well-formed waves may signal which level is most likely. As the pullback breaks into a C wave,
target the extension by adding the length of the A wave to the starting point for the C wave. They
often match size and project right into a major Fibonacci level. Or just wait until this pullback
completes and prints a short-term reversal pattern, such as a double top or bottom. Then trade a
breakout in the opposite direction. Overlay grids of different trend lengths to improve accuracy. A
38-62 pattern targets major bounce zones and important reversals. Expect whipsaws and a high
level of market noise when different lengths don’t match up.
Apply swing strategy through ranges and momentum tactics through trends. But don’t get confused
when buying a pullback. Dip buying in an uptrend actually signifies a swing trade. Execution takes
place in the pullback’s shorter time frame as price action moves in the opposite direction to the
underlying rally. This time alignment provides safer entry than chasing price gains at new highs.
FIGURE 15.9
Two pullbacks offer fast profits on Phone.com. Price falls to a new low near the end of the lunch hour and then pulls
back for trade execution before dropping 3 more points. It slowly climbs back to the old trendline, broken low, and 38%

retracement. Price then pierces the top Bollinger Band and prints dark cloud cover on the 1-minute bars. Use the Adam
and Eve pattern on the 1-minute chart to execute a quick short sale that yields another 2–3-point gain.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

TRADE MANAGEMENT
Successful swing traders master both time and information. Their short-term speculation mines an
attractive time/cash profile that allows greater profit than simple investment. But it also incurs
heavier losses without highly-skilled execution and management.

PERFECT ENTRY
Short-term participants exploit individual quirks of market behavior that reveal themselves through
Pattern Cycles. They measure reward:risk carefully, stay defensive at all times, and book highprobability profits. As holding period lengthens, they stand firm when small violations and
whipsaws shake out weaker hands. They realize that the trend-range axis works through all time
frames and all market conditions.
FIGURE 15.10
Ciena breaks to a new low and pulls back to test resistance. The small opening gap drops price below solid congestion
between 155 and 160. It finds support at 150 and rises through an ABC bear rally. Note how the A and C waves print

almost the same length. The 38% retracement marks an obvious short sale target with cross-verification from the gap
and overhead supply. But several whipsaws shake out early shorts until price action finally violates the intraday low.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Success requires flexibility but not too many tactics at any given time. Experienced swing traders
execute a few well-defined setups for weeks or months before the crowd catches up and forces a
change in planning. Consistent profits don’t require chasing the hottest stock or latest news. Lower
beta issues make excellent trading vehicles with managed risk. Focus on taking a little money out of
the market each day. Over time, it can lead to a sizable fortune.
Well-timed execution produces a very high percentage of profitable trades. Focus on optimizing
entry and exit over all other considerations. Examine the time character of each part of the market
day and align positions in accordance with its major cycles. For example, never buy weakness in the
last hour if price is near the bottom of its daily range. Keep one eye on external events that can turn
rallies into selloffs in a few seconds. Then believe the numbers and forget the news.
Remember this golden rule of swing trading: excellent entries on mediocre positions will make
more money over time than bad entries on good positions. Consider execution of a single direct
move rather than holding a stock through a nerve-wracking pullback. Increase share size to book a
substantial profit but walk away quickly to manage risk. Or only scale in with part of a position and
then wait for the next big price move. In either case, remember to enter in mild times and exit in
wild times.

Learn to step in front of the crowd on pullbacks and behind it on breakouts. Always be ready to
move against it when conditions favor a reversal. Stand aside when confusion reigns and the crowd
lacks direction. Recognize herd emotions through the tape and become a student of their
psychology. Every pattern has a natural breaking point where the crowd will lose control, give up,
or show irrational exuberance. Find it and execute just before the curtain rises.
Use market orders to get in fast when positions can be managed closely in real-time. Place limit
orders when active participation is not an option or when trading systems require them. These
conditional orders also satisfy the need to bind decisions to specific numbers. They offer an
excellent vehicle for strategy and risk-management. For example, place a limit order near the far
side of an ET and walk away. It will trigger only if a low-risk opportunity appears. Pull the order
and go on to the next trade if price doesn’t reach that level.
Stay away from external information that does not advance trading performance. Avoid stock
boards, financial TV, and the news ticker through most market sessions. Never mix fundamental
and technical numbers: one lies while the other tells the truth. Watch out for personal bias that can
affect short-term decisions. The end of the financial world may come soon, but probably not in the
next 30 minutes or 3 days.
Focus on execution numbers and learn technology later. Swing trading requires broad skills and a
solid understanding of the charting landscape. Modern technology makes a good trader better but
will not bring success to a loser. As market software evolves, execution systems will become more
transparent and less urgent to the active participant. This will never happen with swing tactics or
strategies. Master the technology as your trading experience grows. But remember that long-term
success requires highly original methods to beat the competition.

THE FILL MACHINE
Choose the swing trade broker-dealer wisely. Modern markets offer many routes for execution, and
this selection will strongly impact results. Discount brokers charge lower commission rates in
exchange for access to standard and wholesale order routing. The direct order interface costs more
for each transaction but executes through ECNs and faster exchange systems. A new generation of
broker-dealers features execution hybrids as well as fees based on single shares rather than fixed
commissions.
Consider the impact of slippage and commission in your personal trading plan. This will rule out
specific strategies and narrow broker choices. Invariably, newer traders underestimate these costs
and miscalculate their performance. High transaction fees undermine profitable trading. The
greatest impact comes from tactics that require high trade frequency or small share size.
Alternatively, when swing traders execute small positions and hold them for longer periods,
transaction costs take a smaller piece of the total profit.
Discount brokers work orders through a variety of market interfaces but favor the payment for order
flow system. Large wholesale market makers contract with brokers to handle segments of their
trading volume and receive a small fee for each transaction. Limit orders will appear on Level II
screens through the wholesaler system. But trade execution depends on the quality of the contract
between the broker-dealer and market maker. Many wholesalers provide guaranteed fills in ordinary
markets. But participants rarely see price improvement through these executions, and they are
plagued by late fill reports, broken trades, and missing stop orders.
Late fill reports adversely affect trade strategy. Avoid new intraday positions when fill reports don’t
return immediately after a marketable order. Extend holding period when using any discount

broker interface. Minutes may pass in a volatile position before receiving trade confirmation. This
builds risk because no exit can be taken until the position shows as active. Longer holds reduce the
odds that mental stops will strike before receiving the fill report. In any case, change trading
accounts or consider a direct-access interface if the broker consistently reports late fills.
Direct-access brokers combine ECN participation with advanced exchange order routing. Public
posting through Level II takes place within 1–2 seconds after entering an inside order. An execution
will be almost instantaneous when it crosses with another customer who trades in the opposite
direction. Direct-access traders can buy on the bid and sell at the ask with ease in flat markets. But
this practice becomes almost impossible during strong trends.
Modern advanced systems suffer from a lack of liquidity. ECNs depend on strong customer
participation to enable cross-orders through all market tiers. Even with competing ECNs, only highvolume stocks exhibit enough interest to avoid major slippage. Swing traders who use these brokers
must avoid stock setups that don’t permit easy execution or they must choose longer holding
periods where slippage will take a smaller bite. Direct access permits order broadcast directly to
market makers and Instinet. This solves some liquidity problems, but these systems grind down in
fast markets as participants quickly pull existing orders.
Neophytes gravitate toward expensive direct-access systems regardless of their needs. These
colorful real-time screens mesmerize the unskilled brain as they blink market information.
Developers purposely build this software to resemble a video game rather than a serious tool.
Everyone wants to be a player and hopes that technology will compensate for lack of trading
experience. And the forces behind these systems do little to discourage that fantasy. They present
these terminals as ultimate power machines to their predominantly white male audience.
Many brokerage accounts cannot support full-blown software systems. They chew up capital
quickly and encourage overtrading by those who can least afford it. They also build the illusion that
Level II has major secrets to reveal. Many insiders present this valuable screen as a trading tool
rather than execution tool. This has little basis in reality. The high noise-to-signal ratio masks
longer-term buying and selling pressure while professionals cloak true demand so that no one can
accurately predict the future beyond a few ticks.
Level II still offers a powerful execution system. ECNs shine when positions execute against the
short-term trend. As markets turn, high liquidity allows instantaneous fills without slippage. Swing
traders use these times to initiate strategies that fade the current emotions. Neophytes that don’t
require a full-blown execution system should still consider Level II access even if they use a
discount broker.
Direct-access systems require a tactical shift by those who emigrate from discount brokers. The lack
of guaranteed fills opens up new slippage danger and requires learning several new skills. Take the
time to investigate the available routing methods and their limitations. New users should avoid the
software’s smart entry options that shop through various methods until the order executes. While
this artificial intelligence saves brainpower and supports advanced trading strategies, it also works
more slowly than direct ECN placement and can lead to trouble if a position moves away from the
limit price. Apply basic routing first, and add smart routing after learning how these tools work in
different market conditions.
Very small accounts should focus on transaction costs more than trade execution. Low capital may
build fortunes, but the odds do not favor long-term success. Choose inexpensive Web-based quotes
to control costs and rule out all forms of day trading. Take only small positions after extensive
