
Fig 5.13 High Volume Test – Bad News !!
However, what if the test fails and instead of low volume appearing there is high volume, which is a problem. In
starting to move the market away from the accumulation area, and executing the first part of the test by marking
prices lower, this has resulted in sellers returning in large numbers and forcing the price lower.
Clearly on this occasion, the selling from the old trading range has not been absorbed in the accumulation
phase, so any further attempt to take the market higher may struggle or fail.
A failed test means only one thing. The insiders will have to take the market back lower once again, and
quickly, to shake these sellers out. The market is not ready to rise further, and the insiders therefore have more
work to do, before the campaign can be re-started. This is equivalent to a failed test in an advertising campaign.
Perhaps the pricing of the product is not quite right, or the marketing message is not clear. Either way, the test
has shown that something isn’t right and needs to be addressed. For the insiders it's the presence of too many
sellers still in the market.
The original 'mopping up' campaign needs to be restarted, to absorb these old positions. The insiders will then
relaunch their campaign again, and re-test the supply as the market begins to rise. On a failed test we can
expect to see the insiders take the market back into the congestion area once again, to flush out this selling
pressure before preparing to breakout again, with a further test. Any subsequent test on low volume will then
confirm that selling pressure has now been removed.
Testing is one of the key tools that the insiders use, in all markets. Like everything else in VPA, it is a simple
concept, based on simple logic, and once we understand the concept of accumulation and the structure on the
chart, we will begin to see tests occurring in all time frames and in all markets. It is one of the most powerful
signals you will see, as it is the insiders sending a clear message that the market is about to break out and
move higher.
In the example in Fig 5.13 the insiders were testing for any residual selling pressure, often referred to as
'supply', following the accumulation phase. With a full warehouse they were all set to roll out the campaign and
the last step was to check that all the selling in the price levels immediately ahead had all been absorbed. In

this case it hadn’t! However, once the test has been repeated and confirmed with low volume, the market will
move higher.

Testing Demand
But what of the reverse scenario, where we are coming to the end of a distribution phase. The last thing the
insiders want is to start a campaign to begin filling their warehouses again, move back into an area which has
seen high demand (buying pressure) only for the buyers to take the market in the opposite direction.
Once again a test is employed to make sure that all the buying (demand) pressure has been absorbed in the
distribution phase, and this is done with a test of demand as the campaign gets under way.
In this case the distribution campaign has been in progress for some time. The insiders have moved the market
from the wholesale price level, to their target level for retail prices, and are now happily selling on waves of
bullish news. The investors and speculators are rushing in and buying, fearing that they are missing out on a
golden opportunity, and motivated by greed. The insiders pull in more demand by whip sawing the prices and
gradually emptying their warehouses of all the inventory of stock.
Finally, when the campaign is complete, it's time to start the next phase of moving the market lower, and as the
trend starts to develop, the price action moves back into areas which only recently had seen high volume
buying. Once again a test is required, this time to test demand. If the demand is low, then all the buying has
been absorbed in the distribution phase as we can see in the schematic in Fig. 5.14.

Fig 5.14 Low Volume Test – Good News !
Here we have the end of the distribution phase. The warehouses are empty, and the next stage is a sharp move

lower, to repeat the process and move into an accumulation phase once again.
As the distribution phase ends, the insiders want to make sure that there is no demand still remaining in price
areas which, until recently, had seen strong buying during the entry into the distribution phase. Once again, they
test. The market is marked higher using some news, and if there is no demand, closes back near the open, with
very low volume. This is what the insiders want to see. No demand, as shown by the low volume. They are now
safe to start moving the market lower, and fast, as they now need to replenish their warehouses again.
Fig 5.15 is definitely NOT what the insiders want to see as they prepare to move away from the distribution
price region. The market is marked higher and buyers flood in, thinking that the bullish trend is set to continue
and move higher still. As before, a failed test stops the campaign in its tracks, and the insiders have to move
back into the distribution price area, and clear these buyers out of the market, using the same processes as
before. Once complete, then a further test is made, and if on low volume, then the trend lower will gather pace,
and move quickly away from the distribution region, trapping traders into weak positions at this level.

Fig 5.15 High Volume Test – Bad News !
Now we know what to look for, you will see testing occurring ALL the time, ONCE this has been preceded by an
accumulation or a distribution phase. We may even see a series of tests, perhaps the first has low volume,
followed by a second or third which have lower volume still. This is simply confirming that the insiders are
preparing the next phase of a campaign, and the key is simple. Once prices break away from the congestion
areas created during these two phases, we can be assured that the next stage is then under way.
Before moving on to consider the selling climax and the buying climax, at this point in the book I think it's
appropriate to answer a couple of questions which sometimes puzzles both traders and investors.
The first question is – why do markets take longer to rise than to fall, and is this something to do with the

insiders?
The second question is – over what time frames do these cycles of filling and emptying the warehouse typically
last?
Let me answer the first, which also leads into the second. Market insiders only have two objectives. The first is
make us fearful and the second is to make us greedy. They have no purpose in life, other than to create
emotional responses which will ensure that we always do the wrong thing at the wrong time, but they always do
the right thing at the right time.
A quote from the late great John Templeton who wrote:
“Heed the words of the great pioneer of stock analysis Benjamin Graham: ‘Buy when most people…including
experts…are pessimistic, and sell when they are actively optimistic.’”
Let's think about this logically and try to answer the first question. The markets have been in free fall, with panic
selling by investors and traders. Then comes a period of calm as the market moves sideways into the
accumulation phase, as the warehouses are stocked up ready for the move higher.
Now at this stage, remember, that from an insiders point of view, they have just frightened everyone to death,
and the last thing they want to do, is to suddenly send the market soaring in the opposite direction. This would
soon drive every investor and speculator away. After all, there is only so much emotion that traders can take,
and too much too soon would quickly kill the goose that lays the golden egg. A calm approach is required. The
tactic now is to quietly start to build confidence back up, moving prices higher steadily, without frightening
anyone out of the market, and gradually drawing the buyers back in.
Soon, the panic selling is forgotten as the markets recover and confidence is slowly restored. This also suits the
insiders, as they have a full inventory to sell, and want to take their time, and certainly don't want to see large
volume buying as they move the market higher. At this stage, it is is about maximising profits, and the biggest
profits are to be made once the distribution target price levels are reached at the retail level. It would be
madness to suddenly mark up the market to the retail level, as many investors would then feel they had missed
out on the move, and not join in later.
The strategy here is one of confidence building by taking the market higher slowly, and then gradually to move
faster, generating the belief in the investor or speculators mind that this is a market with momentum, which is
gathering pace all the time, and is an opportunity not to be missed to make some easy money.
The upwards trend then starts to gather pace, moving higher in steps, pausing, reversing a little, drawing in
buyers, tempting others, then moving higher still, until close to the distribution area, the market picks up speed
as buyers crack under the emotional pressure of missing out, and jump in.
Throughout the upwards journey, the inventory is gradually reduced, but topped up in minor reversals with
sellers taking their profits, and helping to maintain levels for the final phase of the campaign.
This is the emotional journey that the insiders have mastered. It is the reason markets move higher in a series of
higher highs and higher lows, with pauses and minor reversals along the way. It is a confidence building
exercise, designed to restore confidence after the fear, and replace it with another emotion – greed. These are
the two levers that the insiders have, and they are used to devastating effect, and the only weapon that you
have in your armoury is VPA.
After greed comes fear – again!
With their warehouses now empty, the insiders need to get back to the 'bottom' and fill them up as quickly as
possible. Again, we would do exactly the same thing in their position.
However, the insiders have nothing to sell now, and the only way to make money fast is to refill the warehouse
again and begin another campaign. The market crashes lower, panic selling ensues, fear is triggered and the
warehouses are filled once more. And so the cycle repeats, time and time and time again. The best analogy I
can think of here is of an old fashioned helter skelter that we might see at a fair ground. It takes effort to get to
the top, walking up all the steps, but the slide down on a mat is very quick! That's how the markets work. Up in
stairs and down in elevators. The old fashioned board game of ‘snakes and ladders’ expresses this effect

perfectly, it’s up on the ladders, and then a slide all the way back down on the snake!
I hope this is now beginning to make sense, as it is only once we start to think of the markets in these terms that
we begin to realise how anyone, other than the insiders, ever makes money. This is another point. The insiders
have to be careful, for the simple reason that if the price action was continually and unrelentingly volatile, then
traders and investors would look elsewhere for investing and speculating opportunities.
Just like Goldilocks and her porridge, the motto here is 'not too hot and not too cold'. The insiders have learnt
their craft and honed their skills over decades. Most investors and speculators lose. You are lucky. By the end
of this book you will become a VPA expert and be able to see and recognise all the tricks they play. They are
there in plain sight and all we have to do is interpret the signals and then follow the insiders. It really is that
simple.
Moving to the second question which was how often is this cycle repeated? And here I will let you into a secret.
This was a question I wanted to ask Albert Labos all those years ago as we sat in a rusty cabin on the President
learning all about the market makers (as he referred to them) and their tricks. I actually wrote down the question
and asked my neighbour in the class, but he didn't know the answer either.
What I thought at the time was this. I understood about the accumulation and distribution phases which made
perfect sense to me, but then I started to think. Also, remember that at the time we were really looking at trading
indices, so essentially long cycles. I thought to myself that if the cycle was perhaps 10, 15, or 20 years, then this
was a long time for a market maker to wait to make a profit from his (or her) buying and selling. Perhaps it was
longer, and from one big market crash to another. Perhaps it was decades? I didn't dare ask the question at the
time, and now I wish I had!
The answer to the question is that these cycles occur on all time frames from tick charts, to 1 minute charts, to
15 minute and hourly charts, and to daily, weekly and monthly charts. The best way to think of this is to imagine
a set of nested Russian dolls.
The smallest doll, fits inside a slightly larger doll, which fits inside a larger doll, and so on. In the context of
these cycles, we can imagine the same thing with a chart. An accumulation and distribution cycle on a one
minute chart, may last a few hours, and be part of a larger cycle on a slower time frame chart, which in turn itself
will be part of a larger cycle and so on. This is an important concept to grasp, as it brings in two important
aspects of market behaviour.
First, that these cycles happen in ALL time frames, and second that by watching price action across multiple
time frames you will start to see these cycles developing and unfolding and confirming one another as a result.
A cycle that has already started on a one minute chart, will be setting up on 5 minute chart, and possibly just
developing on the 15 minute chart.
Let me quote from Richard Ney again and his book The Wall Street Gang, books every trader and investor
should try to read. They contain a wealth of information, and they give us a broad perspective on volume and
price, along with an excellent view on how the specialists manipulate the markets. Whilst the books primarily
focus on stocks, the principles are identical and relevant to all markets. In equities it's the specialists, insiders or
market markets, in futures it's the large operators, and in spot forex it's the market makers again.
This is what he says about time frames :
“The specialist's objectives can be classified in terms of the short, intermediate and long term. Thus we can see
that there are three broad classifications into which we can place the market's price movements.
He then goes on to say
“The short term trend. This can last from two days to two months. Within this trend there can be even shorter
term trends lasting no more than several hours. The importance of the short term trend is that it is within this
context that the specialist resolves his day to day inventory problems with his intermediate and long term
objectives always in view. It is as though the short term trend is the spade with which the specialist digs the
investor's intermediate and long term grave.”
“The ticker tape provides us with a microscopic view of the techniques of big block distribution at the top and big

block accumulation at the bottom on behalf of the specialist's inventory.”
“It is impossible to look solely at the tape as it passes in review and hope to determine longer term trends in the
market. One can understand the tape and decipher its code of communication only when experience is shaped
through memory – or through the use of charts. In a manner of speaking short and long term charts provide both
a microscopic and a telescopic view of what has happened. In the final analysis, we need both in order to make
financially rational decisions.”
The reason that I have quoted this section from his book here, is that it neatly sums up the points I am trying to
convey in this chapter.
Remember, this book was published in 1974, when the ticker tape was still in use, but we can replace the ticker
tape with an electronic chart, on a short time scale. The concepts and principles are the same. We use the fast
or ultra fast time frame as our microscopic view on the market, and then zoom out to our longer term time frames
to give us that broader perspective on the volume and price relationship.
Now again, this is all relative, so for a scalping trader, this might be a 5 minute, 15 minute and 60 minute chart.
A swing trader may consider a 60 minute, 240 minute and a daily chart. A trend trader may utilise a 4 hour, daily
and weekly chart.
Therefore, regardless of the trading strategy and market, equities, commodities, bonds or forex, the point is that
to succeed as a speculative trader or as an investor, the VPA relationships should be used in conjunction with
multiple time frames. On a single chart VPA is immensely powerful, but when the analysis is ‘triangulated’ using
slower time frames, this will give you a three dimensional approach to the market.
There is nothing wrong with focusing on one chart, but remembering the analogy of our three lane highway,
where we are sitting in the middle lane with our wing mirrors on either side giving us a view on the fast and slow
lanes, this will help to build confidence levels, while learning, and more importantly once you start to trade live.
To round off this chapter, I now want to focus on the the last two concepts of insider behaviour, namely the
selling climax and the buying climax, before putting the whole cycle together in some simple schematics to help
fix the broad principles.

The Selling Climax
As I outlined earlier in the book there is a degree of confusion about these two concepts, so let me try to explain.
In the past, most people who have written about this subject, have done so from a personal perspective. In other
words, when we buy or when we sell in the market. However, in the context of the insiders it is what they want
us to do. Their sole objective is to get us to buy in the distribution phase, and to sell in the accumulation phase.
In terms of 'who is doing what' during these two phases, in the accumulation phase, the 'public' are selling and
the insiders are buying, and conversely in the distribution phase the 'public' are buying and the insiders are
selling.
This book is written from the perspective of the insiders, the specialists, the big operators and the market
makers, and hopefully like me, you want to follow them! I hope so at any rate. As Albert used to say, we want to
buy when they are buying, and sell when they are selling. Simple! Which is really what this book is all about.
When I describe and write about a selling climax, to me, this is when the insiders are selling and occurs during
the distribution phase of the campaign. A buying climax is when the insiders are buying during the
accumulation phase. To me, this just makes more sense. It may be a question of semantics, but it is important,
and I would like to clarify it here, as many people refer to these events the other way round!
Just to be clear, a selling climax appears at the top of the bullish trend, whilst the buying climax appears at the
bottom of a bearish trend, and reflects the actions of the insiders, and NOT the public!
The selling climax is the 'last hurrah' before the insiders take the market lower. It is the culmination of all their
efforts, and is the point at which the warehouse is almost empty and requires one last big effort to force the
market higher, drawing in those nervous traders and speculators who have been waiting and waiting for the
right time to jump in, and can finally wait no longer. They give in to the fear of missing out, and buy.

This happens two or three times on high volume with the market closing back at the open, and at the end of the
distribution phase. Following the selling climax, the market then breaks lower, and fast. This tranche of buyers,
along with all the others, is then trapped at this price level, as the insiders move the market away from this
region and back down the helter skelter to begin the process again.
Let's look at a typical example of what we might see as the selling climax marks the end of the distribution
phase, and we can think of it in terms of fireworks – this is a firework display which marks the end of the event!
Once again, Fig 5.16 is simply a schematic of what to expect in the selling climax. Here the insiders have taken
the market to their target level, at which they are selling inventory at retail prices, to happy buyers who believe
that this market is going to the moon.

Fig 5.16 The Selling Climax – Firework Show
The insiders are happy to oblige, selling into the demand, moving the market lower, then back higher drawing in
more demand, until they are close to clearing their inventory.
At this stage the price action becomes more volatile with surges higher followed by a close back to the open
price, with increasing volumes of buyers flooding into the market, fearing they will miss out on the next leg up in
the bullish trend. The next leg is in the opposite direction.
Finally, the inventory is cleared and the market sells off, moving lower and back out of the distribution phase.
The clues for us, as VPA experts, are there to see.
Here we will see high volume coupled with a candlestick which has a deep upper wick and narrow body, and is
one of the most powerful combinations of price action and volume we will ever see on a chart. Naturally, I will
be covering this in detail later in the book.

These are the 'upper wick' candles that we looked at in chapter 3, and as I explained there, they are immensely
powerful and reveal so much, particularly when combined with volume. The insiders are having one last effort
to clear their inventory and mark prices higher early in the session. Buyers flood in, taking the market higher,
fearful of missing out, with high or ultra high volumes, before the insiders take the market lower to lock these
traders into weak positions, helped lower by profit taking. Some traders will sense that the market is 'over
bought' at this level.
This price action is repeated several times, with the insiders selling into the demand, each time the price is
pushed higher, before closing the candle lower at or near the opening price, helped by profit takers closing out.
The colour of the body of the candle is unimportant. What is important, is the height of the wick, the repeated
nature of this price action, and the associated high volumes. This is sending a clear signal that the market is
ready to move fast, and as the warehouses are all empty, the reaction will be quick. The insiders are now
jumping on their mats, and heading off down the helter skelter, back to 'square one' to begin the process once
again with an accumulation phase. When we see this price action, following a distribution phase, it's best to be
in front of your screen – ready and waiting! Now let's look at the opposite of the selling climax, which is the
buying climax. This is the firework party that marks the end of the accumulation phase, and signals the start of
the bullish trend higher.
