This makes binary options a particularly lucrative way to play small percentage moves
without the added RAMM planning needed with leveraged instruments.
Greater simplicity can boost earnings: This fixed holding period and payout vastly simplify
trading. That can boost profits because:
There are just fewer mistakes to make: Once you've bought a call (to be long the currency
pair) or put (to open a short position) at a price and position size you deem acceptable, no
further planning or monitoring is needed. You need only be correct about the overall price
direction over the life of the binary option. That's it. For example, as long as the pair has
appreciated, even just slightly, by the time the option expires, the call binary option earns
about 70 percent. If it fell, even just incrementally, by the expiration time, the put option also
earns about 70 percent. Usually,2 risk management is limited to choosing your entry points,
and money management is limited to choosing position sizes that don't risk over one to three
percent of your account. Beyond these, there's no chance to make fatal RAMM mistakes
regarding planned profit taking and stop loss points, etc. Reward-risk ratios, exit points, etc.
are generally fixed or irrelevant. See the full “Binary Options Pros and Cons” material on the
companion website for illustrations of how binary options' greater simplicity can boost your
profitability.
You can make decisions faster: This simplicity also raises the odds of being profitable
because it cuts down the decision-making time when you need to move fast, as is often the
case for those trading shorter-term positions or breaking news.
Low entry cost: Depending on the broker, options can cost as little as $10, maybe less.
Cons
Negative risk-reward ratio: Winning trades typically yield 70 percent over your investment,
while losing trades typically cost you 85 percent, sometimes more, depending on the broker. That
means you have to be right over 55 percent of the time just to break even.
On the other hand, it's much easier to be right most of the time with binary options because the
only thing that you must be right about is the overall trend during the life of the option, as noted
above.
Throughout this book we've encouraged you to use strategies that allow you to be wrong most of
the time and still make money, and for standard forex trading that makes sense given the greater
complexity and thus more chances for mistakes. The far greater simplicity of the binary option
trading decision, fully detailed in the appendix on the website, balances this disadvantage and for
many traders will outweigh it as they hit a higher percentage of winning trades. Still, those who
are skilled at RAMM will usually be able to attain better practical risk-reward ratios with
standard (spot market) forex trading, though they still risk greater than anticipated losses when
price gaps beyond their stop losses.
No advanced order placement: This means you have to be ready and waiting to go if you want a
specific entry point. At minimum that's inconvenient, and for those who are not always watching
the markets (who is?), it can mean missed opportunities.
Less selection: Most binary option brokers don't offer as wide a range of assets to trade as most
of the better forex brokers, though all offer the most popular ones, so this is a problem only for
some.
Binary options brokers provide fewer services. For example, charting packages, as well as

content offerings (both training and trade guidance) tend to be minimal or non-existent. Any
serious binary option trader will need to find their own charting software and data feed in order
to do any real technical analysis.
Again, see the Appendix on the website for the full story.

Notes

1. Zach Miller, Tradestream Your Way To Profits (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010).
2. Sarah Morgan, “New Tool for Currency Traders: Mimicry,” SmartMoney (August 2011),
www.smartmoney.com/invest/currencies/new-tool-for-currency-traders-mimicry-1312324538631/ .
3. Dave Lemont, “Will I Have the Same Profitability as the Trade Leaders I Follow?” © Currensee
Inc., www.currensee.com/newsletter/issue4-article1.
4. Interview with Jonathan Assia, Insight Corporate Governance Germany, November 2011, pp. 10–
11, and Tom Groenfeldt, “Better Foreign Exchange Investing Through Social Networking,” Forbes
(July 2011), www.forbes.com/sites/tomgroenfeldt/2011/07/26/better-foreign-exchange-investingthrough-social-networking/.
5. “Currensee Provides Emerging Money Managers with New Route to Alternative Investments,”
Wealth Adviser (April 2011), www.wealthadviser.co/2011/04/04/111575/currensee-providesemerging-money-managers-new-route-alternative-investments.
6. “Compensation,” © Currensee Inc., www.currensee.com/tradeleaders/compensation.
7. Sarah Morgan, “New Tool for Currency Traders: Mimicry,” SmartMoney (August 2011),
www.smartmoney.com/invest/currencies/new-tool-for-currency-traders-mimicry-1312324538631/ ;
Michael Greenberg, “U.S. Forex Brokers Account Profitability Comparison” (October 2010),
http://forexmagnates.com/us-forex-brokers-account-profitability-comparison.
8. Alon Levitan, Etoro Head of Strategic Marketing, email message to author, December 26, 2011.
9. “Currensee Alternative Investment Program Surpasses $6 Billion in Trading Volume” ©
Currensee Inc. (June 2011), www.currensee.com/about-us/news-events/currensee-alternativeinvestment-program-surpasses-6B-trading-volume.
10. Alon Levitan, Etoro Head of Strategic Marketing, email message to author, December 26, 2011.
11. eToro, Regulation and license (accessed, August 2011), www.etoro.com/trade/etoro-andbrokers.aspx.
12. Forex Magnates Retail Forex Market Quarterly Report for Q1 2011,
http://forexmagnates.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/Forex_Magnates_Q1_2011_preview.pdf.

CHAPTER 12
Forex for Income
The Smartest Oxymoron
I know, the title sounds like an oxymoron. The stereotypical private currency trader is a risk-taking
short-term speculator. Income investors lean toward steady, reliable long-term returns.
However, the need for currency diversification is one of the most important lessons of the Great
Financial Crisis. Ignoring it involves some toxic combination of ignorance, foolishness, laziness,
and/or recklessness.
I can help you with only the first one, though if you have read this far the other three probably don't
apply to you.
The lesson isn't new. It has been ongoing for decades. Remember Europe on $5.00 a Day, or when
one U.S. dollar (USD) was worth hundreds of Japanese Yen (JPY), or even just when oil was under
$50 a barrel? For those too heavily in the wrong currencies, currency risk has been a slow, quiet but
steady drain on net worth.
However there's substantial risk of that draining sound getting louder as the process accelerates.
With most developed world central banks keeping rates low and stimulus flowing as they hope to
inflate away their debt burdens, it's likely that the purchasing power of most major currencies will
continue to erode. That means you've got to get your portfolios diversified into assets tied to the best
currencies. Your portfolio needs currency diversification just as much as it needs asset and sector
diversificaton.
The past chapters have been mostly for traders, albeit the longer-term, more conservative variety,
but still for those who are willing to regularly move in and out of positions over days, preferably
weeks or months.
This chapter is mostly for the more passive investors willing to hold quality assets for the long term
regardless of short-term fluctuations, as long as these produce either long-term appreciation, a
relatively steady, high yield for passive income, or some combination of the two.
This chapter covers just two ways that these investors can use forex markets as another source of
steady income:
1. Identify currencies in strong long-term uptrends and allocate portions of your income portfolio
portfolio to assets that provide direct or indirect exposure to those currencies for a steady
currency diversified income stream.
2. Engage in long-term carry trades either via direct spot market currency pair investments or
through income assets denominated in high-yield currencies purchased with lower-yield
currencies. Either way, the goal is to profit from interest rate differentials (explained in the
following section).

Let this chapter serve as a wake-up call for income investors to diversify by currency as well as by
sector and asset type.

RIDE LONG-TERM FOREX TRENDS FOR LOWER
RISK, HIGHER INCOME
Until we were well into the Great Financial Crisis, currency diversification was one of the most
neglected topics for income investors. With the long-term value of most developed world currencies
being undermined by growing national debt levels, investors are starting to get the message.
Even today, much of the advice that purports to cover overseas investing focuses on individual
foreign stock or bond picking without regard for the quality of the underlying currency. That brings
some diversification, but still fails to consider whether or not you're diversifying into a currency that's
any better than what you've already got. The purpose of diversifying into other currencies is to get into
those with the best chances for long-term appreciation. A good investment in a bad currency can
become a bad investment, and vice versa.
In other words, first you identify the currencies you want represented in your portfolio, then you
allocate a percentage of your portfolio to each one, and finally, you choose the individual assets that
provide that given percentage exposure. That's the basic idea.
Obviously you'll need to weigh the quality of the stocks, bonds, or other assets versus that of the
currency. For example, if there's an abundance of quality high-yield income stocks in Canada and
relatively few in Switzerland or Australia, you might allocate more heavily to Canadian income
investments.
Here's the short version of the steps involved.
1. First identify the right currencies:
Study weekly or monthly charts of currencies or representative currency indexes for your
projected holding period. If you're planning on holding for five to 10 years, you want to see
trends over the prior five to 10 years. See Figure 12.1 for an example of how I compared the
CAD's performance to that of the USD, GBP, EUR, and JPY from mid-2006 to mid-2012.
Identify the currencies with the healthiest uptrends over that period.
Check that the underlying national economic fundamentals support that trend with relatively
good growth, or at least consistently low ratios of debt to gross domestic product (GDP) and
a culture of fiscal discipline, not growing budget and trade deficits. For example, the JPY
has performed well over the past decades, but its underlying fundamentals have been
worsening. Japan's formerly high rate of individual savings that supported demand for JPY is
plummeting as its population ages into retirement.
Allocate percentages of your portfolio for income-generating instruments denominated in or
tied to those currencies.
2. Then shop around for specific assets you want that are denominated in or exposed to those
currencies so that you have a set portion of your portfolio in both the right currencies and assets
in those currencies. The research method is the same as for any stock, bond, fund, and so on. The
only difference is that in addition to your normal screening criteria, you screen by country or

currency.
FIGURE 12.1 CAD Monthly Charts Showing CAD performance versus (clockwise): USD, GBP,
JPY, EUR from June 1, 2006 to mid-April 2012, almost 6 years
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Why Income Investors Neglect Currency Diversification
There are reasons why forex considerations get ignored by income investors.
For individual investors, forex is mostly a short-term speculator's market; it is unfamiliar territory
with a discomforting reputation for high-risk, complex, and stressful short-term trading with high
attrition rates. Most of the free forex advice found online is either directly or indirectly paid for by
the online retail forex brokers. The better ones hire some of the best writers. There are also forex
content sites that are supported by broker advertising. Forex brokers make their money on trading
volume, and thus have an interest in promoting short-term trading that generates much higher trading
volumes. The low start-up costs and high profit potential also help attract the less sophisticated
seekers of get-rich-quick schemes and the simple gamblers.

Long-Term Trends for Long-Term Investors
As noted earlier when we discussed the advantages of trading in longer time frames, the common

focus on short-term trading is sadly ironic. Forex markets produce some of the most reliable longterm trends compared to more traditional stock and corporate bond markets, because the fundamentals
of nations change more slowly than those of corporations. These long-term trends are well suited for
helping long-term buy-and-hold investors attain greater capital gains and income, with the reduced
risk that comes from diversification into other markets outside of their native country.
The trick is to find nations that have both rising currencies and rising asset markets. You'd use
monthly charts covering five to 10 years, looking at both forex pairs (as illustrated in Figure 12.2) and
major global stock and bond markets.
FIGURE 12.2 USDCAD Monthly Chart, January 2000 to August 18, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Being in the right investments but in the wrong currency is like swimming against a strong current.
No matter how much you think you're moving ahead, the current keeps pulling you back, impeding
your progress or setting you back despite otherwise successful investment choices.
Conversely, being in both the right investments and the right currency is like swimming with the
current; you progress much faster if your investments swim well, and even if they don't, they can still
get carried forward in value by the current of a rising currency. In other words, even if your
investments aren't the best, if they're linked to or denominated in the right currency, your net worth
keeps moving in the right direction.
For anyone else hurt by the long-term decline in the USD, GBP, EUR, etc., the need to be aware of
long-term forex trends and to diversify into currencies that are in long-term uptrends versus most
others is one of the most important and painful lessons of the past years. Large forex-savvy
multinational corporations have been aware of the trouble and routinely hedge forex exposure, but
many smaller businesses and individual investors are only just beginning to awaken to the need for
currency diversification.1 Even though the USD has been in overall decline versus many major
currencies (like the AUD, CAD, and JPY) for a decade or more, or for many decades (down 75
percent versus the CHF since 19702), reputations die hard, and most U.S. investors grew up believing
the USD was the safest currency to own, backed by the best economy, and a soundly managed

financial and public sector.
Following is a case study illustrating the benefits of picking the right currency for dividend stock
investors. The focus is on combining the right currency and stock market, though an appreciating
currency is obviously an equally potent bonus for bond investors.

CASE STUDY: CANADA 2000–2011: APPLYING
FOREX TRENDS TO EQUITIES INVESTING
Imagine that back at the beginning of 2000 an American investor (No. 1) decided to seek currency
diversification for his portfolio beyond the United States, converted $100,000 USD to CAD, and
invested the sum in a basket of Canadian stocks that comprise the S&P/TSX index, an index that
tracks the Toronto Stock Exchange. His friend, fellow American investor No. 2, took the same sum
and invested it in the S&P 500 index.
Note: The following assumes that dividend stock prices of the United States and Canada move in
the same direction as the primary national stock indexes just for the sake of comparison, and does not
take into account gains from dividends.

The USD versus the CAD: Guess Which Has No Debt/GDP Problem
What happened to the USD versus the CAD is shown in the chart in Figure 12.2 of the USDCAD.
Obviously, we have a strong and overall very steady 10-year downtrend for the USDCAD. Here
are the numbers:
USDCAD, January 2000:

1.4478

USDCAD, August 18, 2011:

0.9839

Change:

−0.4639

Percent change:

+32.04%

So, since January 2000, investor No. 1 gained 32.04 percent over investor No. 2 just on currency
appreciation.

Equities: Canada Is Not Japan
Of course currency appreciation by itself isn't necessarily enough. If you don't have the right
investments in a given currency, you still could lose. For example, just looking at relative currency
performance, the JPY looks like an even better investment. If you sold U.S. dollars and bought the
JPY in 1990, you did even better than with the CAD in the preceding example.
Figure 12.3 shows the USDJPY chart from May 1990 to August 2011.
FIGURE 12.3 USDJPY Monthly Chart, May 1990 to August 17, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Again, it is another obvious long-term downtrend for the USD, this time versus the JPY. Here are
the numbers:
USDJPY, May 1990:

159.47

USDJPY, August 2011: 76.45
Nominal change:

83.02

Percent change:

52%

However, if you invested your JPY in the Nikkei 225, look what happened (see Figure 12.4).
FIGURE 12.4 Nikkei 225, 1990 to August 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Your 52 percent gain in currency appreciation was more than counteracted by a nearly 75 percent
drop in the Nikkei over the same period.
Meanwhile, look how your U.S. dollars performed if invested in the S&P 500 over the same period
(see Figure 12.5).
FIGURE 12.5 Nikkei 225 versus S&P 500, 1990 to August 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The 52 percent currency loss was more than made up for by the vast outperformance of U.S. stocks

during this period, particularly during 1990 to 2000.
However, things went better for Canada. Note in Figure 12.6 how the representative index of
Canadian shares fared versus the S&P 500, a good barometer for U.S. stocks (and risk assets in
general).
FIGURE 12.6 S&P/TSX Composite Index versus S&P 500, January 4, 2000, to August 15, 2011:
Canadian Stocks versus U.S. Stocks
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The S&P/TSX composite basket of stocks rose almost 50 percent from January 2000 to mid-August
2011. Meanwhile, the S&P 500 lost 20 percent in this same period.
For example: If in January 2000 you converted $100,000 USD to CAD, then invested that in the
S&P/TSX composite index or a similar basket of stocks:
$100,000 USD put into CAD in 2000 became:

$132,040

That $132,040 invested in stocks grew to be about ($132,040 * 150% S&P/TSX appreciation): 198,060
That $100,000 USD invested in the S&P in 2000 became about:
Difference

80,000
$118,060

In sum, our sample passive investor No. 1 who went with Canadian currency and stocks benefited
from both currency and stock trends for a gain of $98,060 versus a $20,000 loss for No. 2, who stuck
with U.S. currency and stocks.

Be Aware of Tax Withholdings and Credits
Some countries withhold a percentage of nonresidents' dividends, though it's possible to obtain a tax
credit from the United States for foreign tax withholdings on your dividends. For example, Canada
withholds 15 percent of dividends of nonresidents. The United States grants a tax credit for that
withholding. Obviously, check this with your tax advisor regarding your particular situation, or just
do an online search.
A lot has been written about the Canadian tax withholding issue in particular, given that Canada
offers some great income stocks and one of the lowest debt/GDP ratios in the developed world. It
also has a healthy banking system that largely avoided the reckless real estate lending and resulting
losses found in the United States, Ireland, Spain, and so on. That means, barring a deep global
financial crisis, the CAD is unlikely to suffer risk of devaluation via money printing and inflation.

For Further Investigation: Online Resources
For learning more about building a currency-diversified portfolio of income-producing investments,
here are a few of my favorites to consider.

SeekingAlpha.com
As with ETFs, SeekingAlpha.com (SA) is the best starting point. Its sophisticated readership is very
interested in steady income investments that allow you to ride out market volatility, so SA has a rich
“Investing for Income” section. There are some good basic educational tools, but its big strength is the
enormous daily flow of articles on all kinds of income investments, including those that provide some
forex diversification. SeekingAlpha.com has built up a huge archive of articles, which you can search
when seeking information on a specific idea or topic, like Chinese dividend stocks. SA has a huge
following, so almost anyone seeking to build or maintain a reputation in this area is going to be
posting here at some point, including yours truly, so you'll quickly get an idea about writers you want
to follow on this topic.
I really hope to get back to writing on quality income stocks that provide diversification out of the
USD and EUR at some point. These articles were rewarding for both myself and my readers, one of
whom described them as “a top quality subscription quality newsletter free of charge.” Stay tuned.

Other Writers to Follow
Here are a few writers to follow in this space. Unfortunately most of their material is via paid-for
subscription, but they do offer some free content either in free e-mail newsletters (admittedly with a
heavy focus on promoting the paid subscriptions) or on their assorted websites.
Peter Schiff is one of the senior blogger/authors on having a globally diversified portfolio of
relatively conservative, high-quality non-U.S. income stocks. Just search his name and you'll find
plenty of material worth considering. For those seeking managed accounts in this area, he's principal
of a firm specializing in this niche, Euro Pacific Capital, Inc. I can't vouch for the quality of their
managed accounts, but they've got the right idea. Peter Schiff's articles are usually good, as are those
of his senior market strategist, John Browne (check out the guy's profile on SeekingAlpha.com—just
remember to cue the James Bond music).
Roger Conrad is another one of the very best on investing in non-USD-denominated income
vehicles. If you search his name online, you'll find he offers some free e-mail newsletters, though he
saves his best stuff for his paid subscription newsletters, including ones that focus on Canadian and
Australian stocks. He also has newsletters on master limited partnerships and utility stocks, both U.S.
and non-U.S. based. They aren't cheap but they are excellent. If you're going to manage your own
stock and bond portfolio, these newsletters are well worth a look, and last I checked they allowed
readers to cancel at any time with a full refund, so there's little risk in trying them out.
