is somewhat beyond the scope of this introductory book on devel-

170

PART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

oping a system. However, I would suggest that you look at the
independence of the various markets you select. You will profit
most by selecting markets that are relatively independent because
you will be more likely to have at least one market that is in a legitimate profit-making trend than you will if all your markets are
related or dependent.
Market Direction
Whether you are trading a market turning point or jumping on
board a fast-moving trend, most people need to assess the predominant direction that the market has been moving in over the
last 6 months. You need to understand what kind of “animal” you
are dealing with in “today’s” market. This is the long-term trend of
the market.
Ed Seykota, who has made millions trading the markets, once
told me that he would take a chart of the market, hang it on the
wall, and walk to the other side of the room. If the trend of the market was obvious from the other side of the room, then it was a market that he would consider. Eds style had a lot of merit in the 1960s
and 1970s when there were a lot of long-trending markets.
Although the principle behind it is still valid, shorter criteria
might be more appropriate now that market trends tend to be
shorter.
Generally, people make money in up markets or down markets. However, there are really three directions in which the market
can move-up, down, or sideways. Markets tend to trend-move
up or down significantly-about 15 to 20 percent of the time. The
rest of the time, they move sideways. You need to be able to assess
when those conditions occur. For example, a lot of traders have systems that constantly keep them in the market. However, if you
accept sideways as a condition of the market, then you probably
want a system that will keep you out of the market the 70 percent
of the time in which you are not likely to make money. You simply
need some sort of signal to monitor when sideways is occurring.
Perry Kaufman has developed an excellent vehicle for doing so. We
will explore it later in this chapter.
The person who is always
in the market iS going to spend a lot
of time in sideways markets, which could mean losses and high

commissions. Thus, you might want to take a look at avoiding sideways markets as a part of your methodology.
Setup

Conditions

Setup conditions, as mentioned earlier, are conditions that must
occur, according to your concept, before you enter the market.
When you have such setup conditions, they generally improve
your chances of a significant move in your favor.
Most people make money in the markets because the market
moves a significant amount from the entry point. The various concepts discussed in Chapter 5 are all designed to detail the conditions under which you can expect a significant market move.
Generally, all these concepts consist of market setups.
Setups might consist of:
. A window of opportunity during which you might expect
a turnaround
. Fundamental conditions that must exist before you enter
the market
. Seasonal situations that might attract your attention
. Any of a number of other significant criteria that might be
useful
Setups are not usually criteria for entering the market. Instead, they
are necessarv criteria that you should expect before you will even
consider tak&g a position in the market.
Different kinds of setups that have proved themselves are the
topic of this chapter. We’ll be talking about setups that are useful
for the stock market and setups that are
useful for futures markets, forex” markets, option markets, or other speculative areas. In fact, you’ll learn that many
publicly offered systems, because of the
lotto bias described in Chapter 2, consist of nothing but setups. But first let’s
discuss the last phase of entry-market
timing.

CHAPTER 7 Using Setups

Market Timing

“Failed-Test” Setups

Let’s say you’ve selected the markets you want to trade. You
understand your concept, and the current predominant direction
of the market fits your concept for trading. You also have several
market setups, and those conditions have also been met.
However, one more key criterion should exist before you actually
enter the market-the move you are expecting should start. In
other words, if you are predicting a large up move in the marketbecause of fundamentals, a seasonal pattern, an expected turning
point date, or any other reason-hances are that your move will
not have begun at the time you first predict it. Profitable traders
and investors usually wait for the move to begin before they enter
the market.
As you’ll see in the next chapter on entry, very few entry techniques beat a simply random entry-a coin flip at a random time to
determine whether to go long or short in the market. Consequently
you need to do whatever you can to improve your odds. The best
way of improving your odds is to make sure the market is moving
in the direction you are expecting before you enter the market. This
is basically your timing signal. We’ll be discussing a number of significant timing signals in Chapter 10.

Test setups are basically failed tests of a previous high or low. After
that high or low occurs, many interesting patterns occur. The Ken
Roberts method, given below, for example, is based upon a failedtest setup.
The reason such tests can work is because they are commonly
used as entry signals. These entry signals might set up trades that
return big profits, but they are not that reliable. The logic behind
tests as an entry signal is to use false breakouts (moving to a new
high or low) to set up the trade.
For example, Connors and Raschke have one pattern that they
facetiously call Turtle Soup.“ It’s called Turtle Soup because a
famous group of traders, called the Turtles, was known for entering the market on 20-day breakouts. In other words, if the market
made a new 20.day high, they would enter a long position. Or, in
contrast, if the market made a new 20-day low, they would enter
into a short position. Today, most of these 20-day breakout signals
are false breakouts-in other words, they don’t work and the market falls back. Thus, Turtle Soup gets its primary setup from 20-day
breakouts that are expected to fail. The Turtles have made a lot of
money trading these breakouts (see “Channel Breakouts” in
Chapter S), so be careful here.
Figure 7-1 shows an example of a Turtle Soup pattern. The
chart shows several 20-day breakout highs in mid-July. In each case
the breakout high is followed by a substantial (albeit short-term)
decline. You could make money with each of them as a short-term
trader.
If I showed you enough examples of such patterns working,
you’d probably get very excited about them. There are a lot of
examples that work and many examples that fail. The pattern is
only worthwhile, in my opinion, if you can combine it with the
other parts of a trading system-such as exits and position sizmgthat are really important to making money in the market.
Another high-probability setup is based on the observation
that when a market closes in the top part of its trading range, it has
a strong probability of opening higher. The converse is also true.
This is an extremely high-probability setup with a 70 to 80 percent

SETUPS FOR STALKING THE MARKET
Readers who are familiar with my home-study course on peak performance trading and investing know that one of the ten tasks of
trading is called “stalking.” It amounts to shortening your time
frame to find entry conditions to make your risk even lower. Shortterm setups constitute the best stalking tools,
There are many of these, so I will simply present three categories of short-term setups and give an example of each. My comments about these setups simply reflect my own opinion about
them. Connors and Raschke have written a book, Street Smnrts, covering many different short-term setups for those of you who would
like a lot more detail. If you actually plan to trade these patterns, I’d
suggest that you study their book.

PART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

Figure 7-l Turtle Soup setup

reliability for a more extreme opening in the same direction the
next day. This could be used for an exit in a trading system, but it
can also be used as a test setup.
Another observation is that even though there is a high probability of the market opening up in the same direction, the probability that it will close in that direction is much lower. In addition,
when you have a trending day yesterday (i.e., the market opened
up at one extreme and closed at the other), there is an even greater
probability of a reversal. Thus, it might provide a basis for a “testpattern” setup. What you need in this pattern is some sign of a
reversal. Three setups are involved in this “test” pattern, as shown
in Figure 7-2.
1. In Figure 7-2 look at the pattern beginning on the eighth
of December. The market has a trending day-opening up
at one extreme and closing at another. That is the first part
of the setup.

Figure 7-2 Trending day plus follow-through as a “test” pattern setup for entry

2. On December 9 the market continues its move by opening
down more (i.e., that’s the next part of the setup), shown
at point 2 on the figure.
3. The market opens with another move in the same
direction as the close (e.g., if it closed lower, then the
market opens down even more; if it closed higher, then
the market opens up even more). Notice that as the day
continues on December 9, the market reverses and goes
above yesterday’s low close. This is the last part of the
setup (and in this case it is actually the entry signal). It’s
shown at point 3 on Figure 7-2.
Notice in the figure that the market closes higher and then
continues to go up for several more days. Remember that all I did
was find a graph to illustrate the pattern. Don’t get too excited
about setups because they are only a small part of the equation for
making money

176

PART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

If your goal is to do short-term trading, or “swing” trading,
then failed-test setups are probably what you want to use. Now
that you understand the principle involved in failed-test setupsthe market tests a new extreme principle and then falls back-you
can design your own related setups without needing to rely on the
ideas used by others. Experiment on your own!
Climax Reversals or Exhaustion Pattern Setups
These setups follow the same principle as the failed-test set-ups
except that there is some additional evidence to suggest that the
move is an extreme that will not follow through. These setups are
typically designed to pick low-risk trades that signal a reversal of
trend. They require, as part of the setup, each of the following:
. A signal that the market has already reached an extreme
* A highly volatile environment
. A move in the direction you want to trade as your entry
point
These types of patterns can vary a lot, and many such “climax” moves are typically “chart” patterns that are difficult to
objectively describe so that they can be computerized. I tend to dislike using chart patterns because there is strong evidence that many
of them might not be “real” patterns that one can objectively trade.
Thus, we’ll just confine the discussion to a “gap” climax move.
Gap Climax Move
One sign of a climax move is that of the market gapping to a new
extreme, but failing to show follow-through. The market then falls
back and closes in the opposite direction of the climax move.
Another possibility is that the market, on a subsequent day, shows
signs of filling the gap. Such setups are based on two observations: (1) Gaps to an extreme tend to be filled, and (2) days that
reverse from market extremes tend to have follow-through the
next morning.
Here’s how you might trad~e such a move:
1. The market gets to a new extreme (i.e.;~this‘is
setup).

your climax

177

CHAPTER 7 Using Setups

2. You might want another setup indicating high volatility,
such as the average true range of the last 5 days is 2 to 3
times the average true range of the last 50 days. However,
this sort of criterion might not be necessary.
3. The market shows signs of weakness such as (a) closing at
the opposite end of the range from the extreme or (b)
starting to close the gap on a subsequent day.
4. You would then place an entry order, expecting a shortterm move against the previous trend.
In my opinion, these patterns are dangerous. What you are
attempting to do is stop a freight train that is going very fast. You
are hoping it will reverse a little so that you can get something off
it (i.e., some profits), knowing that it could take off again going just
as fast as it did before.
Climax setups, in my opinion, are primarily for brave shortterm traders. The primary use of these setups for long-term
traders would be to become familiar enough with them to avoid
entering the market around such moves, since they have a high
probability for a short-term reversal. If you are interested in such
trades, then by all means study the Connors and Raschke book,

Street Smarts.

Retracement

Setups

The next type of setup that you might want to consider in shortterm trading (or stalking your long-term trades) is the retracement.
Basically, this kind of setup involves (1) finding the longer-term
trend of the market; (2) getting some sort of pullback from the
trend; and then (3) entering in the direction of the trend based upon
some third type of signal such as a resumption of the trend with a
new high. These are very old trading techniques. For example,
Wyckoff was fond of saying,
Don’t buy on breakouts. Wait for the retracement test.
Trend-following signals, once triggered, will usually be followed by some sort of retracement-at least, intraday. That intraday retracement can be used as a low-risk setup for entry. Several
such retracements, shown on a daily basis, are clearly visible in

FILTERS VERSUS SETUPS

Figure 7-3. In each case, a breakout (labeled B) is followed by a
retracement (labeled R).
Figure 7-3 shows a clear breakout signal in bonds from July 23
through July 25. This breakout is followed by a slight retracement
on July 28 and 29 and then a very low-risk breakout to a new high
on July 30. However, there may have been an even better intraday
entry right after the first major breakout on July 23 or perhaps on
July 24.
Retracement setups are an excellent consideration for trend
followers. They have many advantages in that (1) they allow you to
place tight stops and thus extmct high reward-to-risk trades; (2)
you can use them for short-term “swing” trading or for long-term
“position” trading; (3) they give you a way to get into a market that
you might have originally missed; and (4) they provide you with
an excellent way to get back into a market once ‘you have been
stopped out. Consider developing your own retracement setup.

I used to say that filters were one of the ten critical components of
a trading system. Chuck LeBeau, who often is a guest presenter at
our system seminars, then usually said during his presentation that
you should totally avoid filters. Filters might help you predict the
market in hindsight, but they wouldn’t help you trade the market
in the present.
Let me explain Chuck’s comment. Because of the lotto bias,
people want to know the perfect entry signal to the market so that
they can “control” the market prior to entry. When you are looking
at past data, the more you can use indicators to fit the data, the
more accurate those indicators will
seem to perfectly predict every turn in
the data.
Most trading software will have
several hundred indicators built into it.
You can use those indicators, almost
automatically, to totally curve-fit past
markets. For example, you can use an
oscillator, a moving average, and some
cycles and almost perfectly predict
what some historical market did at
almost any time. The result is that you
will probably feel extremely confident about trading, but find that
your “highly optimized” indicators do not help you at all when trying to trade today’s markets.
Some people try to get around this by optimizing over the
short term (i.e., the last several months) in the hopes that indicators
optimized for more recent historical data will accurately reflect
today’s market as well. The task is usually fruitless, however, if too
many indicators are used.
Generally, the simpler your system is, the better it will work
trading the markets. However, there is one general exception to this
rule. Many different indicators will generally help you in trading
the market if each of fhose indicators is based upon a dr@rent type of

data.

This really provides us with a critical difference between filters and setups. Filters typically are based upon the same data and

should be avoided in your system. Setups, which are based upon
different data, are quite useful. As long as your setups are based
upon different, but reliable, data, more is generally better.
Let’s take a look at what I mean by different types of data by
looking at some of the setups you can use. Here are some of the
examples given previously.
Time Filter
You have some idea when a move is
supposed to occur because of your various models. Time is different from
price data, so such a setup could be
very useful. Time filters might include
cycles, seasonal data, astrological influences, etc. Look at Chapter 5 for interesting time setups that might be useful in your trading
Price Data in Sequence
You might require that your price data occur in a specific sequence.
This kind of setup is usually more valuable than simple price data
if it’s based upon some high-probability relationship that you’ve
observed in the market. Take retracement setups, for example: (1)
The market establishes a trend; (2) the market makes a retracement;
and (3) the market shows some sort of movement back in the direction of the original trend. These are all price data, but they occur in
a specific, logical sequence that has some meaning.
Fundamental Data
You have some idea of what the “supply” and “demand” characteristics are for the market you ares trading. For example, you might
have statistics for the soybean crop and also some statistics about
new foreign demand for this market. For an equity security, you
have information on customer acceptance of a company’s new product or the success of internal cost reductions. See the discussions of
Gallacher and Buffett for some examples of fundamental setups.

Volume Data
The amount of activity in your particular market is quite different
from the current price data and could be quite useful. There’s a lot
written about volume data, especially by stock market experts like
Richard Arms. The Arms Index is now given regularly with market
updates. It was originally known as the TRIN trading index. This is
the ratio of advances to declines divided by the ratio of up volume
to down volume.
Here’s how you might use it as a setup. Use a moving average
of Arms Index (typically use about five days). A reading above 1.2
indicates a potential bottom and a reading below 0.8 indicates a
potential top. These are short-term trading opportunities of 1 to 3
days. However, these readings should be combined with an entry
signal of price moving in the expected direction.
Composite Data
If your market consists of a number of items, then you might have
some valuable information simply knowing what those various
items are doing. For example, in the stock market knowing what
the market as a whole is doing is quite different, but valuable, information from knowing what each component of the market is doing. How
many stocks are advancing? How does
the volume of rising stocks compare
with the volume of declining stocks?
If you are trading a market index,
you can look at what all the individual
stocks are doing. Generally, people who
try to trade a market index, such as the
S&l’, without looking at anything but
the price data of the index could be at a
severe disadvantage compared with all
the experts who are looking at composite data.
One example of a composite indicator, given with every market update, is the tick. The tick is the difference between all NYSE stocks on an uptick versus those on a

downtick. Here’s how you might use the tick as a setup. An
extreme reading in the tick can often predict a market turn-at least
in the short term. Thus, an extreme in the tick would be an example of a test setup. You would simply trade some sort of reversal
signal that occurs once this extreme was reached.

The second narrow-range setup might be something more like
the following:

Volatility

When you have an inside day of this sort, a breakout in either direction is typically a good short-term trading pattern.

This refers to the amount of activity in the market and is generally
defined by the range of prices. It’s generally quite useful information that is very different from just price alone.
Several years ago I conducted a computer trading seminar in
which the purpose was (1) to become familiar with some trading
software and then (2) to develop some systems that, based upon
historical testing, would return 100 percent per year or more without optimizing. I had assumed that most people would do this
through developing a high-expectancy trading system using great
exits and then combining it with a money management method
that would stretch the system to its limits. Most people did it that
way, except for one. The one exception found that a measure indicating that the market was in a very narrow range was a potential
predictor of a movement of some force. When you combine a narrow-range setup with good entry, you have a great chance of a high
reward-to-risk trade.
Here are a couple of ideas for narrow-range setups:
1. The market is in a trend as measured by any number of
indicators such as being above or below a moving
average, having a high ADX value, etc.
2. The market moves into a narrow range which might be
shown by comparing the range of the last 5 days with the
range of the last 50 days. The ratio would have to fall
below some predetermined value such as the range of the
last 5 days being less than or equal to 60 percent of the
range of the last 50 days.
You would then need one of the entry signals given in the next
chapter. This sort of setup can easily add 10 to 15 cents to your
expectancy per dollar risked in a long-term trend-following system.

1. The market has an inside day (i.e., its price range is
contained between the high and low of the previous day).
2. The market has the narrowest range of the previous X
days.

Business

Fundamentals
