
- 246 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Just give me a pillow. I'll sleep on the kitchen table."
Signora Altonelli was a different person when she returned to remove the
coffee tray. She glared at Marco as if he'd already molested her daughter.
She glared at Francesca as if she wanted to slap her. She huffed around the
kitchen for a few minutes, then retired somewhere back in the apartment.
"Are you sleepy?' Francesca asked.
"No. You?"
"No. Let's talk."
"Okay."
"Tell me everything."
He slept a few hours on the sofa, and was awakened by Francesca tapping on
his shoulder. "I have an idea," she said. "Follow me."
He followed her to the kitchen, where a clock read 4:15. On the counter by
the sink was a disposable razor, a can of shaving cream, a pair of eyeglasses,
and a bottle of hair something or other-he couldn't translate it. She handed
him a small burgundy leather case and said, "This is a passport. Giovanni's."
He almost dropped it. "No, I can't-"
"Yes, you can. He won't be needing it. I insist."
Marco slowly opened it and looked at the distinguished face of a man he'd
never meet. The expiration date was seven months away, so the photo was
almost five years old. He found the birthday-Giovanni was now sixty-eight
years old, a good twenty years older than his wife.
During the cab ride back from Bazzano, he'd thought of nothing but a
passport. He'd thought about stealing one from an unsuspecting tourist. He'd
thought about buying one somewhere on the black market but had no idea
where to go. And he'd pondered Giovanni's, one that, sadly, was about to be
useless. Null and void.
But he'd dismissed the thought for fear of endangering Francesca. What if he
got caught? What if an immigration guard at an airport got suspicious and
called his supervisor over? But his biggest fear was getting caught by the
people who were chasing him. The passport could implicate her, and he
would never do that.
'Are you sure?" he asked. Now that he was holding the passport he really
wanted to keep it.

- 247 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Please, Marco, I want to help. Giovanni would insist."
"I don't know what to say."
"We have work to do. There's a bus for Parma that leaves in two hours. It
would be a safe way out of town."
"I want to get to Milano," he said.
"Good idea."
She took the passport and opened it. They studied the photo of her husband.
"Let's start with that thing around your mouth," she said.
Ten minutes later the mustache and goatee were gone, his face completely
shaven. She held a mirror for him as he hovered over the kitchen sink.
Giovanni at sixty-three had less gray hair than Marco at fifty-two, but then
he'd not had the experience of a federal indictment and six years in prison.
He assumed the hair coloring was something she used, but he was not about
to ask. It promised results in an hour. He sat in a chair facing the table with a
towel draped over his shoulders while she gently worked the solution
through his hair. Very little was said. Her mother was asleep. Her husband
was still and quiet and heavily medicated.
Not long ago Giovanni the professor had worn round tortoiseshell
eyeglasses, light brown, quite the academic look, and when Marco put them
on and studied his new look he was startled at the change. His hair was
much darker, his eyes much different. He hardly recognized himself.
"Not bad" was her assessment of her own work. "It will do for now."
She brought in a navy corduroy sports coat, with well-worn patches on the
elbows. "He's about two inches shorter than you," she said. The sleeves
needed another inch, and the jacket wouldVe been tight through the chest,
but Marco was so thin these days that anything would swallow him.
"What's your real name?" she said as she tugged on the sleeves and adjusted
the collar.
¦Joel."
"I think you should travel with a briefcase. It will look normal."
He couldn't argue. Her generosity was overwhelming, and he needed every
damned bit of it. She left, then came back with a beautiful old briefcase, tan
leather with a silver buckle.

- 248 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"I don't know what to say," Marco mumbled.
"It's Giovanni's favorite, a gift from me twenty years ago. Italian leather."
"Of course."
"If you get caught somehow with the passport, what will you say?" she
asked.
"I stole it. You're my tutor. I was in your home as a guest. I managed to find
the drawer with your documents, and I stole your husband's passport."
"You're a good liar."
"At one time, I was one of the best. If I get caught, Francesca, I will protect
you. I promise. I will tell lies that will baffle everyone."
"You won't get caught. But use the passport as little as possible."
"Don't worry. I'll destroy it as soon as I can."
"Do you need money?"
"No."
"Are you sure? I have a thousand euros here."
"No, Francesca, but thanks."
"You'd better hurry."
He followed her to the front door where they stopped and looked at each
other. "Do you spend much time online?" he asked.
"A little each day."
"Check out Joel Backman, start with The Washington Post. There's a lot of
stuff there, but don't believe everything you read. I'm not the monster they've
created."
"You're not a monster at all, Joel."
"I don't know how to thank you."
She took his right hand and squeezed it with both of hers. "Will you ever
return to Bologna?" she asked. It was more of an invitation than a question.
"I don't know. I really don't have any idea whats about to happen. But,
maybe. Can I knock on your door if I make it back?"
"Please do. Be careful out there."
He stood in the shadows of Via Minzoni for a few minutes, not wanting to
leave her, not ready to begin the long journey.
Then there was a cough from under the darkened porticoes across the street,
and Giovanni Ferro was on the run.

- 249 -

John Grisham

The Broker

As THE HOURS PASSED WITH EXCRUCIATING SLOWNESS, LuiGI
GRADUally moved from worry to panic. One of two things had happened: either the
hit had already occurred, or Marco had gotten wind of something and was
trying to flee. Luigi worried about the stolen bag. Was it too strong a move?
Had it scared Marco to the point of disappearing?
The expensive smartphone had shaken everyone. Their boy had been doing
much more than studying Italian, walking the streets, and sampling every
cafe and bar in town. He'd been planning, and communicating.
The smartphone was in a lab in the basement of the American embassy in
Milan, where, according to the latest from Whitaker, and they were talking
every fifteen minutes, the technicians had been unable to crack its codes.
A few minutes after midnight, the two intruders next door evidently got tired
of waiting. As they were making their exit, they spoke a few words loud
enough to be recorded. It was English with a trace of an accent. Luigi had
immediately called Whitaker and reported that they were probably Israeli.

- 250 -

John Grisham

The Broker

He was correct. The two agents were instructed by Efraim to leave the
apartment and take up other positions.
When they left, Luigi decided to send Krater to the bus station and Zellman
to the train station. With no passport, Marco could not buy a plane ticket.
Luigi decided to ignore the airport. But, as he told Whitaker, if their boy can
somehow buy a state-of-the-art cell phone PC that cost about a thousand
bucks, maybe he could also find himself a passport.
By 3:00 a.m. Whitaker was yelling in Milano and Luigi, who couldn't yell
for security reasons, could only curse, which he was doing in English and
Italian and holding his own in both languages.
"You've lost him, dammit!" Whitaker screeched.
"Not yet!"
"He's already dead!"
Luigi hung up again, for the third time that morning.
The kidon pulled back around 3:30 a.m. They would all rest for a few hours,
then plan the day ahead.
He sat with a wino on a bench in a small park, not far down Via dell'
Indipendenza from the bus station. The wino had been nursing a jug of pink
fluid for most of the night, and every five minutes or so he managed to lift
his head and utter something at Marco, five feet away. Marco mumbled
back, and whatever he said seemed to please the wino. Two of his colleagues
were completely comatose and were huddled nearby like dead soldiers in a
trench. Marco didn't feel exactly safe, but then he had more serious
problems.
A few people loitered in front of the bus station. Around five- thirty activity
increased when a large group of what appeared to be Gypsies came bustling
out, all speaking loudly at once, obviously delighted to be off the bus after a
long ride from somewhere. More departing passengers were arriving, and
Marco decided it was time to leave the wino. He entered the station behind a
young couple and their child and followed them to the ticket counter where
he listened as they bought tickets to Parma. He did the same, then hurried to
the restroom and again hid in a stall.
Krater was sitting in the stations all-night diner, drinking bad coffee behind a
newspaper while he watched the passengers come and

- 251 -

John Grisham

The Broker

go. He watched Marco walk by. He noted his height, build, age. The walk
was familiar, though much slower. The Marco Lazzeri he'd been following
for weeks could walk as fast as most men could jog. This fellow's pace was
much slower, but then there was nowhere to go. Why hurry? On the streets
Lazzeri was always trying to lose them, and at times he was successful.
But the face was very different. The hair was much darker. The brown
corduroy cap was gone, but then it was an accessory and easy to lose. The
tortoiseshell eyeglasses caught Krater's attention. Glasses were wonderful
diversions but so often they were overplayed. Marco's stylish arm ani frames
had fit him perfectly, slightly altering his appearance without calling
attention to his face. The round glasses on this guy begged for attention.
The facial hair was gone; a five-minute job, something anyone would do.
The shirt was not one Krater had seen before, and he'd been in Marco's
apartment with Luigi during sweeps when they looked at every item of
clothing. The faded jeans were very generic, and Marco had purchased a
similar pair. The blue sports coat with worn elbow patches, along with the
handsome attache, kept Krater in his chair. The jacket had many miles on it,
something Marco could not have acquired. The sleeves were a bit short, but
that was not uncommon. The briefcase was made of fine leather. Marco
might somehow find and spend some cash on a smartphone, but why waste
it on such an expensive briefcase? His last bag, the navy blue Silvio he'd
owned until about sixteen hours ago when Krater grabbed it during the
melee at Caffe Atene, had cost sixty euros.
Krater watched him until he rounded a corner and was out of sight. A
possibility, nothing more. He sipped his coffee and for a few minutes
contemplated the gentleman he'd just seen.
Marco stood in the stall with his jeans bunched around his ankles, feeling
quite silly but much more concerned with a good cover at this point. The
door opened. The wall to the left of the door had four urinals; across were
six lavatories, and next to them were the four stalls. The other three were
empty. There was very little traffic at the moment. Marco listened carefully,
waiting to hear the sounds of human relief-the zipper, the jangle of a belt
buckle, the deep sigh men often make, the spray of urine.
Nothing. There was no noise from the lavatories, no one wash

- 252 -

John Grisham

The Broker

ing their hands. The doors to the other three stalls did not open. Maybe it
was the custodian making his rounds, and doing so very quietly.
In front of the lavatories, Krater bent low and saw the jeans around the
ankles in the last stall. Next to the jeans was the fine briefcase. The
gentleman was taking care of his business and in no hurry about it.
The next bus left at 6:00 a.m. for Parma; after that there was a 6:20 departure
for Florence. Krater hurried to the booth and bought tickets for both. The
clerk looked at him oddly, but Krater couldn't have cared less. He went back
to the restroom. The gentleman in the last stall was still there.
Krater stepped outside and called Luigi. He gave a description of the man,
and explained that he appeared to be in no hurry to leave the men's room.
"The best place to hide," Luigi said.
"I've done it many times."
"Do you think it's Marco?"
"I don't know. If it is, it's a very good disguise."
Rattled by the smartphone, the $400 in American cash, and the
disappearance, Luigi was not taking chances. "Follow him," he said.
At 5:55, Marco pulled up his jeans, flushed, grabbed his briefcase, and took
off for the bus. Waiting on the platform was Krater, nonchalantly eating an
apple with one hand and holding a newspaper with the other. When Marco
headed for the bus to Parma, so did Krater.
A third of the seats were empty. Marco took one on the left side, halfway
back, by a window. Krater was looking away when he passed by, then found
a seat four rows behind him.
The first stop was Modena, thirty minutes into the trip. As they entered the
city, Marco decided to take stock of the faces behind him. He stood and
made his way to the rear, to the restroom, and along the way gave a casual
glance to each male.
When he locked himself in the restroom, he closed his eyes and said to
himself, "Yes, I've seen that face before."
Less than twenty-four hours earlier, in Caflfe Atene, just a few

- 253 -

John Grisham

The Broker

minutes before the lights went out. The face had been in a long mirror that
lined the wall with an old coatrack, above the tables. The face had been
seated nearby, behind him, with another man.
It was a familiar face. Maybe he'd even seen it before somewhere in
Bologna.
Marco returned to his seat as the bus slowed and approached the station.
Think quickly, man, he kept telling himself, but keep your cool. Don't panic.
They've followed you out of Bologna; you can't let them follow you out of
the country.
As the bus stopped, the driver announced their arrival in Modena. A brief
stop; a departure in fifteen minutes. Four passengers waddled down the aisle
and got off. The others kept their seats; most were dozing anyway. Marco
closed his eyes and allowed his head to drift to his left, against the window,
fast asleep now. A minute passed and two peasants climbed aboard, wildeyed and clutching heavy cloth bags.
When the driver returned and was situating himself behind the wheel, Marco
suddenly eased from his seat, slid quickly along the aisle, and hopped off the
bus just as the door was closing. He walked quickly into the station, then
turned around and watched the bus back away. His pursuer was still on
board.
Krater's first move was to sprint off the bus, perhaps arguing with the driver
in the process, but then no driver will fight to keep someone on board. He
caught himself, though, because Marco obviously knew he was being
followed. His last-second exit only confirmed what Krater had suspected. It
was Marco all right, running like a wounded animal.
Problem was, he was loose in Modena and Krater was not. The bus turned
onto another street, then stopped for a traffic light. Krater rushed to the
driver, holding his stomach, begging to get off before he vomited all over the
place. The door flew open, Krater jumped off and ran back toward the
station.
Marco wasted no time. When the bus was out of sight, he hurried to the front
of the station where three taxis were lined up. He jumped into the backseat
of the first one and said, "Can you take me to Milano?" His Italian was very
good.
"Milano?"
"Si, Milano."

- 254 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"E molto caro!" It's very expensive.
"Quanto?"
"Duecento euro." Two hundred euros.
"Andiamo."
After an hour of scouring the Modena bus station and the two streets next to
it, Krater called Luigi with the news that was not all good, and not all bad.
He'd lost his man, but the mad dash for freedom confirmed that it was
indeed Marco.
Luigi's reaction was mixed. He was frustrated that Krater had been outfoxed
by an amateur. He was impressed that Marco could effectively change his
appearance and elude a small army of assassins. And he was angry at
Whitaker and the fools in Washington who kept changing the plans and had
now created an impending disaster for which he, Luigi, would no doubt get
the blame.
He called Whitaker, yelled and cursed some more, then headed for the train
station with Zellman and the two others. They'd meet up with Krater in
Milano, where Whitaker was promising a full-court press with all the muscle
he could pull in.
Leaving Bologna on the direct Eurostar, Luigi had a wonderful idea, one he
could never mention. Why not just simply call the Israelis and the Chinese
and tell them that Backman was last seen in Modena, headed west to Parma
and probably Milano? They wanted him much more than Langley did. And
they could certainly do a better job of finding him.
But orders were orders, even though they kept changing.
All roads led to Milano.

- 255 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The cab stopped a block away from the Milano central train station. Marco
paid the driver, thanked him more than once, wished him well back home in
Modena, then walked past a dozen more taxis that were waiting for arriving
passengers. Inside the mammoth station, he drifted with the crowd, up the
escalators, into the controlled frenzy of the platform area where a dozen
tracks brought the trains. He found the departure board and studied his
options. A train left for Stuttgart four times a day, and its seventh stop was
Zurich. He picked up a schedule, bought a cheap city guide with a map, then
found a table at a cafe among a row of shops. Time could not be wasted, but
he needed to figure out where he was. He had two espressos and a pastry
while his eyes watched the crowd. He loved the mob, the throng of people
coming and going. There was safety in those numbers.
His first plan was to take a walk, about thirty minutes, to the center of the
city. Somewhere along the way he would find an inexpensive clothing store
and change everything-jacket, shirt, pants, shoes. They had spotted him in
Bologna. He couldn't risk it again.
Surely, somewhere in the center of the city, near the Piazza del Duomo,
there was an Internet cafe where he could rent a computer for fifteen
minutes. He had little confidence in his ability to sit in front of

- 256 -

John Grisham

The Broker

a strange machine, turn the damn thing on, and not only survive the jungle of
the Internet but get a message to Neal. It was 10:15 a.m. in Milan, 4:15 a.m.
in Culpeper, Virginia. Neal would be checking in live at 7:50.
Somehow he'd make the e-mail work. He had no choice.
The second plan, the one that was looking better and better as he watched a
thousand people casually hop on trains that would have them scattered
throughout Europe in a matter of hours, was to run. Buy a ticket right now
and get out of Milano and Italy as soon as possible. His new hair color and
Giovanni his eyeglasses and old professor his jacket had not fooled them in
Bologna. If they were that good, they would surely find him anywhere.
He compromised with a walk around the block. The fresh air always helped,
and after four blocks his blood was pumping again. As in Bologna, the
streets of Milano fanned out in all directions like a spiderweb. The traffic
was heavy and at times hardly moved. He loved the traffic, and he especially
loved the crowded sidewalks that gave him cover.
The shop was called Roberto's, a small haberdashery wedged between a
jewelry store and a bakery. The two front windows were packed with
clothing that would hold up for about a week, which fit Marco's time frame
perfectly. A clerk from the Middle East spoke worse Italian than Marco, but
he was fluent in pointing and grunting and he was determined to transform
his customer. The blue jacket was replaced with a dark brown one. The new
shirt was a white pullover with short sleeves. The slacks were low-grade
wool, very dark navy. Alterations would take a week, so Marco asked the
clerk for a pair of scissors. In the mildewy dressing room, he measured as
best he could, then cut the pants off himself. When he walked out in his new
ensemble, the clerk looked at the ragged edges where the cuffs should have
been and almost cried.
The shoes Marco tried on would have crippled him before he made it back to
the train station, so he stayed with his hiking boots for the moment. The best
purchase was a tan straw hat that Marco bought because he'd seen one just
before entering the store.
What did he care about fashion at this point?
The new getup cost him almost four hundred euros, money he hated to part
with, but he had no choice. He tried to swap Giovanni's

- 257 -

John Grisham

The Broker

briefcase, which was certainly worth more than everything he was wearing,
but the clerk was too depressed over the butchered slacks. He was barely
able to offer a weak thanks and goodbye. Marco left with the blue jacket,
faded jeans, and the old shirt folded up in a red shopping bag; again,
something different to carry around.
He walked a few minutes and saw a shoe store. He bought a pair of what
appeared to be slightly modified bowling shoes, without a doubt the ugliest
items in what turned out to be a very nice store. They were black with some
manner of burgundy striping, hopefully built for comfort and not
attractiveness. He paid 150 euros for them, only because they were already
broken in. It took two blocks before he could muster the courage to look
down at them.
Luigi got himself followed out of Bologna. The kid on the scooter saw him
leave the apartment next to Backmans, and it was the manner in which he
left that caught his attention. He was jogging, and gaining speed with each
step. No one runs under the porticoes on Via Fondazza. The scooter hung
back until Luigi stopped and quickly crawled into a red Fiat. He drove a few
blocks, then slowed long enough for another man to jump into the car. They
took off at breakneck speed, but in city traffic the scooter had no trouble
keeping up. When they wheeled into the train station and parked illegally,
the kid on the scooter saw it all and radioed Efraim again.
Within fifteen minutes, two Mossad agents dressed as traffic policemen
entered Luigi's apartment, setting off alarms-some silent, some barely
audible. While three agents waited on the street, providing cover, the three
inside kicked open the kitchen door and found the astounding collection of
electronic surveillance equipment.
When Luigi, Zellman, and a third agent stepped onto the Eurostar to Milano,
the kid on the scooter had a ticket too. His name was Paul, the youngest
member of the kidon and the most fluent speaker of Italian. Behind the
bangs and baby face was a twenty-sbc-year-old veteran of half a dozen
killings. When he radioed that he was on the train and it was moving, two
more agents entered Luigi's apartment to help dissect the equipment. One
alarm, though, could not be silenced. Its steady ring penetrated the walls just
enough to attract attention from a few neighbors along the street.
