
From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

7

The Commodities Futures Trading Commission and the National futures Association have developed regulations to make sure that these programs state "past results are not indicative of future returns" and clearly
show the difference between hypothetical and actual results. Nevertheless,
the average retail trader consciously or subconsciously equates the number of times that a system successfully picks the market's direction with
how successful the system is at making money, which are not necessarily
the same thing.
The need to correctly pick the market's direction can quickly deteriorate into an almost obsessive fixation with beating the market. There is a
need to anthropomorphize the markets into a person or entity that has feelings and emotions and that you are attempting to outwit. In this way you
make the markets into your own personal archvillain. Somehow, by your
wits alone, you can become more clever, faster, or insightful than your foe,
the amorphous unemotional market you are attempting to beat. This is simply not the case. The market makes you money and the market loses you
money, on its own terms, in its own ways. No matter how successful you
are at picking the market, it can switch direction at any time. That alone
makes it important to fixate on the success of the trade itself, not necessarily on how well you picked it.
A trader who fixates on market picking gets only one thing- that warm
fuzzy feeling of being right- while missing the fact that the success of a
trade comes from the ability to manage the trade itself. The constant insistence that you be right about every trade you pick is a common mistake
of retail traders. The approach to being right about the market's direction
over being profitable rarely leads to success. In fact, it does quite the opposite; it pits the trader against the very system he hopes to make money
from. The constant struggle ends up clouding the trader's judgment and
driving him to treat the market as an adversary that must be battled as
opposed to an ally that he is sharing opportunities with.
Needing to be right about the market's direction rather than being profitable is not the domain of just the retail trader. Professional traders can
find themselves on the wrong side as well, focusing on getting the market
right as opposed to being profitable.
Following are some examples of traders who chose being right over
being profitable.
In 1974 Dany Dattel of Herstatt Bank lost a total of $360 million
(unadjusted for inflation) trading the USDIDEM. Clearly one of the
first, if not the first, currency trading meltdowns, Dattel's actions
led to the collapse of Herstatt Bank, originally founded in 1792
(Borse Online, www.graumarktinfo.de/gm/grauestars/firmen/dickedinger/:
Herstatt-BankDany-Dattel-und-die-DM-Deals/493304.html).
In 1994 Robert Citron drove one of the most prosperous counties in
the nation into bankruptcy. Citron used derivatives to support his bet that

8

DESIGNING T HE T RAD E

interest rates would not increase. If not for the fact that he was using the
county's money, his mistake would not have been noticed. Instead Citron lost his interest rate bets to the tune of $1. 7 billion. Orange County,
California, had to file bankruptcy and cut back on various municipal services for years in order to recover, solely because of Citron's actions
("The California Wipeout," Time, www.time.com/time/magazine/article/
0,9171,982029,00.html).
The need to be right about the market's direction is an endemic disease of the industry. While we would hope that traders and companies
would learn from mistakes made a decade or two ago, we still see the
same patterns repeating themselves, from Amaranth Advisors losing big
in the natural gas market, Barings Bank taking a nose dive in the Nikkei
futures market, to Societe Generale losing the most money to date, trading
European Index futures. In each instance the management was willing to
tum a blind eye to the activities of their traders as long as they kept getting the right picks, but they were quickly ready to abandon them and label
them rogue traders when they were no longer picking the right markets.
Instead of putting the necessary safeguards in place that would protect the
banks or hedge funds from loss, management operated with the belief that
it was good enough to have someone who could pick the right trade.
This was just such a case at Amaranth Advisors. In 2005 their trader
Brian Hunter had made enormous profits, to the tune of $3 billion, in natural gas market spreads. The impact that Hurricane Katrina had in halting
the Gulf region's ability to refine oil played a significant part in Hunter's
success. While he had successfully called the market in 2005, when he attempted to do it a second time he got it all wrong. The spread trades that
he had set up for 2007 and 2008 quickly deteriorated, and Amaranth lost
$6.5 billion. The need to be right about the market's direction led Hunter to
purchase and hold illiquid contracts far past their prime.
Had Amaranth's positions simply been on the other side of the
market, they would have made $6.5 billion. Had they used a proper
hedge to protect themselves against being wrong, they may have only
lost a fraction of the $6.5 billion that put them out of business. Had
Amaranth simply prepared for the possibility of their trade picker
not being right about the markets this time, the story would have
ended completely differently. This is the benefit of having 20/20 hindsight ("Betting on the Weather and taking an Ice Cold Bath," New
York Times, www.nytimes.com/2006/09/29lbusiness/29insider.html?-1'=
1&oref=slogin).
The same thing happened to Barings Bank. Nicholas Leeson originally
made trades that were quite profitable for Barings. The first set of profits
he racked up accounted for 10 percent of the bank's entire annual income.
In hopes that he could duplicate his success, he was allowed to execute

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

9

riskier and riskier strategies, while at the same time secretly hiding various
losses that he was accumulating. While the fraud is inexcusable, Barings
was suffering from the same fixation that Amaranth was, being right about
the market's direction as opposed to being profitable (Rogue Trader by
Nicholas Leeson, Little Brown and Company 1996).
Most recently in the news we have seen Societe Generale lose the
equivalent of $ 7.1 billion. Jerome Kerviel has been painted as a rogue trader
who acted on his own in racking up the largest losses in history. As of this
writing, more information is coming out about Kerviel's "rogue trading." If
Kerviel is to be believed, two tidbits of information stand out: first, his aggressive trading style was practiced by all the traders at the firm and was
tacitly encouraged by the management's turning a blind eye to it; second, in
the previous year, Kerviel, using similar, if not the exact same, tactics had
made the bank $2 billion. If it is found to be true that his trading activity directly led to $2 billion being added to Societe Generale's bottom line, then
his trading activity will be seen in a completely different light, and Societe
Generale will be seen as more of an accomplice to this debacle than a victim ("Rogue Traders a Nightmare Scenario for Finance CEOs," ABC News,
http://abcnews.go.com/Business/story?id=4205 767&page= 1).
By no stretch of the imagination can anyone believe that the men
caught in these situations acted professionally. While they operated under the auspices of professional traders, they behaved like amateurs. If
major banks and hedge funds, with billions of dollars on the line, can
make the mistake of believing that being right about the market's direction
takes precedence over being profitable, how can the average retail trader
avoid it? More importantly, what does it mean to be profitable in the markets? And is being right about the markets that bad?

Choosing Being Profitable Over Being Right
Lefty Gomez, baseball Hall of Famer, said it best: "I'd rather be lucky than
good." The failure of many retail traders is their insistence that being right
is good trading; this leads them to ignore the fact that their terribly successful trade was simply the luck of being at the right place at the right time.
Separating being right from being profitable takes a mental shift in
what you believe trading is truly all about. It is easy to let your ego get
wrapped up in enjoying how smart you are and in knowing the right answer to any problem. All throughout school, from grade school to graduate
school, we are rewarded for picking the right answer, whether it's multiple
choice or free response; as long as we write down the right answers for the
teacher or professor we guarantee ourselves that we will get the "A."
Our society doesn't encourage playing it safe or any form of mediocrity. If you write a paper that is less than stellar, or you are a "c" student

10

DESIGN ING T HE T RAD E

in school, it is assumed that you aren't living up to your potential. That type
of behavior is simply not tolerated. Being normal or average in any way is
considered a shame.
Add up all of the constant positive reinforcement you get when you
get things right, the rejections of mediocrity, along with a constant diet of
the perseverance pop psychology that we are all subjected to ("No guts, no
glory," "No pain, no gain," "It ain't over until the fat lady sings"), and the
surprise is not that traders have failed in the past; it's that more of them
haven't failed a lot worse.
As long as you are motivated by the need to successfully pick the market's direction you will be plagued by the inability to trade like a professional. In fact, you will be committing the same mistakes that Hunter,
Citron, Dattel, Kerviel, and Leeson all committed against their employers.
Your mistakes may not make headlines like theirs did, but you will be doing it to yourself, a type of rogue trading. You will work at cross purposes
against your desire to be profitable in your trading. The goal is to strive to
be profitable at all costs and sometimes that can be accomplished in the
most simplest of ways.
Being profitable over being right doesn't mean you don't want to
choose markets well; far from it. Every trade has three potential scenarios: profit, loss, and breakeven. If you have only one possible scenario,
profit, in mind when you start you have negated two-thirds of your potential outcomes. This in tum eliminates how much preparation you put into
protecting yourself against the other two scenarios.
Yet this is exactly what happens when traders choose to be right. By
fixating on the end goal of profits at all cost, a type of tunnel vision envelops
the trader. All new information about the situation, new twists and turns
of the market, as well as fundamental shifts in supply and demand, are
ignored or thrown out the window leaving the trader with a fixation on his
original goal rather than having the flexibility to change.
A penny saved is a penny earned.

-Ben Franklin
The decision to be profitable over being right can lead a trader into
making a different set of choices about how he interacts with the markets.
By deciding to be profitable, plans are put in place to protect yourself from
one trading potential-loss-and to help you bring about another trading
potential more often-breakeven, or as close to break even as possible.
When it comes to trading futures and forex there is a professional class
of traders: Commodity Trading Advisors (CTAs). This class of traders is
similar to the mutual fund managers of stocks. They have more strict reporting requirements than their Hedge Fund counterparts, but are able to

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

11

be involved in various highly aggressive investment arenas, futures-forexOTC and options, that their stock market counterparts wish they could participate in. These CTAs are what is considered the gold standard of commodities and forex trading.
Regulated CTAs, as a rule, must write down their strategies, have a
specific risk of ruin structure, and halt their trading at specific loss levels.
On top of all that, they have various reporting requirements and must show
that they can produce a return if they claim they can. The statistics that
surround the success of this group can be practically underwhelming.
It is said that out of ten trades they may have six trades that are losers,
two trades that are marginal winners or breakeven, and two bona fide home
runs. Where their success lies is not in their winners. It is in their ability to minimize the losses on the six losing trades, and, more importantly,
their ability to have any breakeven trades at all. By keeping themselves well
guarded on those eight trades, they set themselves up for the home runs to
find them. When the professional traders maintain and preserve as much
capital as possible, it keeps the odds of success within their grasp.
The success of CTAs comes from their ability to waste little precious
time in the trading dead ends. Knowing when to admit they're wrong,
quickly, is an essential trading skill, oftentimes more important than being
right about the market's direction. By minimizing the need to be right, they
are able to focus on the trades that aren't being successful and take the necessary corrective action to end the trade or tum it into a breakeven trade.
This is what is meant about being profitable- trading to control the
most probable outcome loss, and letting the profits take care of themselves.
While it might not be the most glamorous approach to trading, it is the
most empowering way to approach it. Focusing on being profitable frees
you from the need to always be right when picking the markets to trade,
it helps you prepare for the potential losses, and lets the potential profits
take care of themselves.

Money
What does money mean to you?
Does money mean freedom, opportunity, nothing, everything, choice?
Your relationship to money will be reflected in your trading. Whether you
hold on to losing trades or cut your losses quickly will be a clear example of
what the capital you are trading with represents to you. If you are chasing
trades, cutting your profits short, or pyramiding your contracts with little
or no safety net, you are acting out your hidden money desires.
When retail traders come to trading they have one goal in mind: Make
as much money as possible. There is no question in their mind that they
are in the ideal environment that will help all their dreams come true. The

12

DESIGNING THE TRADE

problem with pinning such high hopes on trading is that how they approach
the money they bring to trading will be directly affected in their trading.
There is a precarious balance of caring too much and caring too little.
On the one hand, if you care too much about the money you bring to
the markets, it makes it difficult to make trades. You become afraid that
every trade you take will wipe you out. Once you finally enter the markets
you assume that the trade you are in has got to pan out-so you hold on to
it a little too long and you lose some, if not all, of your money on the trade.
You chase markets so you don't miss out on opportunities, even if they are
long past.
Caring for your capital too much can be fatal. It is a quick road to disaster. Yet many retail traders do just that. It all stems from the simple fact
that they aren't bringing risk capital to the table. The money that they are
using for trading is money they really can't afford to lose. So they operate
from a deep fear of losing all their capital. This inevitably leads them to
bringing their fear to life.
The combination of caring for your capital too much and the fear of losing it is prevalent in trading. No one is immune to it. Even traders at large
institutions, as we discussed earlier, get caught on this negative money cycle. The trick is not to ignore that these emotions can influence you, but to
recognize that these feelings may be overwhelming and you won't be able
to simply trade through them. You may actually have to halt your trading
to gain perspective on the situation.
Caring too little for your capital is the other side of the same coin.
When you care too little for your capital, you operate as if you were in Las
Vegas. You are willing to take every bet no matter how long the odds are,
hoping for your long shot to come in. This approach to money foments a
belief in the big score. Trading and treating the markets as one giant slot
machine, with each pull of the trade trigger you are looking for the out-ofthe-balI-park return, with little regard to the process and 100 percent focus
on the outcome.
This is the type of trader who constantly gives his profits back to the
market. This is the type of trader who will constantly fund his trading account with little realization that it isn't the market that keeps losing him
money; it's his approach. This is the type of trader who will eventually
give up trading with a lot of good war stories, but will claim that trading
is rigged.
The quickest way to trading burnout is caring too much or caring too
little for your capital. Each approach can be an exhausting way to trade
that leaves you drained, dazed, and confused at how you got to where you
are in your trading. In order to trade like a professional trader, you have to
take a different approach to what the markets mean to you in relation to
the capital you put in and what you hope to achieve.

From Retail Trader to Professional Trader

13

Demo Trading
As a trader sometimes there is a need to reboot. Professional traders are

never afraid to reinvent themselves. They will come up with new systems
or new trading tactics when they become aware that their trading results
have halted. They will run various computer and back testing models. The
simplest way for retail traders to accomplish the same result is to halt their
trading and shift from live trading to paper trading.
While it is not a secret that the market can move up, down, or sideways, it appears to elude retail traders that they don't always need to be
trading. They can be short, long, or fiat the market. Being fiat the market
is a valid position. While you may not be making money, you are also not
losing money. This special fiat time can be spent paper trading or demo
trading online.
Demo trading has the ability to help you practice the proper trading
techniques and build your confidence. Many traders abandon their demo
trading once they open a real account, and this is the exact opposite of
their professional counterparts. By maintaining both concurrently you will
be able to catch yourself when you are making mistakes, move over to your
demo trading account, improve your trading, and switch right back over to
real trading without breaking stride.
As long as you stay a student of the markets it becomes difficult to get
caught in the trap that the money you are working with is in control of your
actions. The money becomes a tool to your needs that you neither care too
little nor too much about. You are working toward your end goals without
the frantic desire to be right, just profitable. Successful hunting requires
that we practice shooting at targets just as often, if not more often, than
we shoot at actual ganle.

Trading with the Right Amount of Capital
As a trader you are fighting with whether or not you are trading with the

right amount of capital that can help you achieve your goals. The stark
naked truth is that you are not trading with enough capital. The majority of
retail traders should not be utilizing all of the leverage available to them in
futures and forex trading. In forex trading the leverage can be as high 500
to 1. This is far beyond what the average retail trader should be working
with when he gets started. When it comes to futures trading you can be
trading as high as 50 to 1.
These high levels of trading leverage are a leading contributor to a
retail trader's rapid demise. It is difficult to tum down the leverage but
a sense of balance must be achieved. For traders who are afraid that
they will lose their money, they are trading at leverage far and above

14

DESIGNING THE TRADE

what they can handle. This is a dangerous position to be in. It makes
your mistakes a lot more critical. When you lose, you lose big, while
at the same time making it difficult for you to get your trades right because you are fixated on the fact that you might lose all or most of your
money.
For those who care too little for the capital they are trading with, the
huge fluctuations in their account's capital have to be managed. The easiest
way to find a balance is to come up with a strategy to adjust the leverage
when you are trading as a way to reflect your actual trading streak and to
help you retain your profits as you trade along.
There are different ideal account amounts bandied about in the trading
world. They range from 5 to 10 percent of your overall investments to as
little as a few hundred dollars. The old adage used to be that you should
trade with enough capital that when you go to bed at night you can sleep,
but not sleep well. If you can't sleep at all you are trading with too much
money; if you can sleep like a baby you are trading with too little.
On the surface this advice seems to be a little vague, but it is still quite
appropriate. There are many factors that go into what makes trading comfortable for you. If you have too much money on the line you will find yourself at a trading disadvantage; if you have too little you find yourself at a
trading disadvantage.
Finding a balance between the two requires that you understand how
much the actual value of the futures and forex contracts are and add the
necessary capital to your account that will not wipe you out in one trade,
but will also not diminish the capital returns you were going for when you
entered the markets.
There is no magic number. You can cut your leverage in half by doubling the amount of capital committed to your trade or you can put up all of
the money for the contract. No matter how you do it, realize that the leverage that you are able to use is not set in stone, and that is the maximum
leverage available. Manipulate the leverage to your liking.

Psychology
Understanding why you do what you do as well as how you will treat your
operating capital is important. Just as important is understanding what is
going on behind the scenes of your mind. There are emotions of fear and
greed to overcome. They can make you operate and act in ways you don't
really want to. They can bounce you around in a reactionary state, forcing
you to go from a bad choice to an even worse choice. Controlling these
two emotions is difficult and the only way to really do it is to be aware of
them when they arise and to have a plan on how you will trade regardless
of them.
