
112

c04.indd 112

1/13/09 10:01:42 AM

Indication of Things to Come—Economic Indicators

(within the Household Survey) also constitutes a major, marketmoving statistic.
• Retail sales—Another very important economic indicator, the
monthly Retail sales report releases data for the previous month
on the value of merchandise sold to end consumers by a representative sampling of retailers. Retail sales data includes the total
retail sales in dollars, with the percentage change from the prior
month. It also includes the total retail sales excluding automobile sales (“ex-autos”). This is because auto sales tend to skew
the total sales figure in a way that would render it somewhat
misleading. Retail sales data provides traders with a broad measure of sales activity, and therefore, an accurate reflection of the
economy’s health as a whole. It can also give strong indications
of potential inflation, interest rate change, and possibly even
recession. Therefore, this economic indicator is one that foreign
exchange traders should pay special attention to.
• Consumer Price Index (CPI)—Because the monthly CPI is a
benchmark inflation indicator, it is one of the most anticipated
releases by the foreign exchange trading community. The CPI
takes a basket of common, daily-use consumer products and
compares price levels from previous years. Two metrics comprise the CPI statistics—Core CPI (minus food and energy)
and chain-weighted CPI. Core CPI is more anticipated by
traders than chain-weighted CPI. Because CPI is probably the
best set of statistics for indicating inflation, it can be effective in
giving hints as to future potential interest rate changes by the
Fed. For this reason alone, CPI is extremely worth watching by
foreign exchange traders.
113

c04.indd 113

1/13/09 10:01:42 AM

Fundamental Analysis

• Producer Price Index (PPI)—From a foreign exchange trading perspective, the primary role of the monthly PPI, which
is released before the CPI every month, is essentially as a predictor of the all-important CPI inflation-indicator. Whereas
the CPI is an index of consumer prices, the PPI is an index of
producer, or wholesale, prices. Since consumer prices and producer prices are closely interrelated, the PPI and CPI are generally close reflections of each other. Within the PPI, core PPI
(minus food and energy) is the most followed statistic. Because
inflation and interest rates are so important to the value of the
U.S. dollar—and the CPI is perhaps the most accurate indicator of inflation available—the PPI is also an important economic indicator because it is, in turn, an accurate predictor of
the CPI.
• Durable goods—The Durable Goods Report is a monthly
report that provides data on new orders placed with domestic
manufacturers for delivery of durable goods. These are defined
as factory hard goods with a useful life of at least three years,
and generally include higher-priced products such as automobiles, appliances, industrial machinery, computers, and the like.
The Durable Goods Report is one of the economic indicators
that paint a picture of the U.S. manufacturing sector, which is
a vital aspect of the economy. Therefore, the report also reflects
general business demand and confidence within the entire
economy. For these reasons, this indicator can certainly move
the currency markets, especially if the numbers deviate significantly from the expected consensus numbers (more on consensus will be discussed later in this chapter).

114

c04.indd 114

1/13/09 10:01:42 AM

Indication of Things to Come—Economic Indicators

• Industrial production—The Industrial Production Report is
a monthly measure of the percentage change in manufacturing and factory production. Like the Durable Goods Report,
the Industrial Production Report is important because it provides information on the vital manufacturing sector. Significant
changes in this sector can signal changes in the entire economy,
including economic growth, inflation, and recession. Therefore,
this economic indicator contains useful data for the foreign
exchange trader.
• Purchasing Managers Index (PMI)—The Institute for Supply
Management (ISM), a nonprofit group, maintains the PMI and
issues monthly releases based upon this index. The PMI is a
composite index of the manufacturing situation that includes:
new orders, production level, employment, supplier delivery
times, and inventories. Data for this index, which is essentially
a sentiment indicator for the national manufacturing sector,
are obtained through surveys of purchasing managers. Like the
Durable Goods Report and the Industrial Production Report,
PMI releases are important to the foreign exchange market because they provide a good measure of the manufacturing sector, which is an integral component of U.S. economic
health.
• Employment Cost Index (ECI)—The ECI is a quarterly report
released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).This report measures changes in payroll compensation costs for nonfarm industries, as well as state and local governments (but excludes federal
government). Like the CPI, the ECI is used mainly for its role as
an inflation indicator. Because of this, and the fact that the Fed

115

c04.indd 115

1/13/09 10:01:42 AM

Fundamental Analysis

uses it to help decide monetary policy, the ECI is a useful economic indicator for foreign exchange traders to watch.
• Housing starts/existing home sales—Together, Housing Starts
(New Residential Construction Report) and the Existing
Home Sales Report provide a solid picture of the U.S. housing situation. Housing starts is issued monthly by the U.S.
Census Bureau. Through surveys of homebuilders, it collects
data primarily with regard to the percentage change in housing
starts (new homes on which construction of the foundation
has begun) and building permits. Housing starts is often used
as an indicator of where the economy falls within the current business cycle. The Existing Home Sales Report, on the
other hand, is a monthly release by the National Association
of Realtors that measures the number of existing homes that
were closed on (sold) in the previous month, along with average sales prices. Like Housing Starts, the Existing Home Sales
Report also provides business cycle indications. When taken as
a whole, these two reports accurately reflect the state of the
U.S. housing market. This, in turn, can provide strong guidance
for the U.S. dollar during times when the housing situation is
negatively affecting the entire economy.
• Trade balance—The monthly Trade Balance Report is important to foreign exchange traders because it has become an
indicator of U.S. economic health, as well as U.S. economic
standing in relation to foreign economies. The nominal trade
deficit data, which represents the difference in monetary value
between exports and imports, is probably the most watched
and anticipated aspect of the Trade Balance Report. Data from
116

c04.indd 116

1/13/09 10:01:42 AM

Indication of Things to Come—Economic Indicators

this report can have an impact on the foreign exchange markets in several ways. One of these ways has to do with changing supply and demand for a currency (in this case, the U.S.
dollar). If there is a decreasing U.S. trade deficit, countries
importing more U.S. products must convert their funds to U.S.
dollars, thereby increasing the general demand for dollars and
making the dollar appreciate. If, on the other hand, there is an
increasing U.S. trade deficit, with the U.S. buying more foreign
goods, this will necessitate the selling of dollars and buying of
more foreign currencies to pay for those foreign goods. This
generally results in a greater supply of dollars, and therefore
potential dollar depreciation. The Trade Balance Report can
certainly move the foreign exchange markets when released,
but especially if the numbers show a large change from the
previous period, or if they deviate considerably from consensus
estimates.
• Personal income and outlays—The Personal Income and Outlays Report is a monthly release by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA). Personal income is the amount of income
received by individuals from all sources, especially wages and
salaries. Personal outlays consist primarily of consumer purchases of goods and services. Components of this report include
Real Personal Income (income per capita adjusted for inflation),
Disposable Personal Income (income less tax payments), Personal
Savings Rate (Disposable Personal Income less personal outlays), and Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE). This last
component, the PCE Index, provides a measure of how much
individuals are spending, including on consumer goods and

117

c04.indd 117

1/13/09 10:01:43 AM

Fundamental Analysis

even credit card interest. Personal income data are important to
foreign exchange traders because it is a strong indicator of future
demand, and it acts as a barometer for the consumer sector. In
terms of personal outlays, or consumption, the PCE Index has
become one of the key indicators of inflation, as well as a major
component of GDP. For these reasons, foreign exchange traders would be remiss to ignore the information contained in the
Personal Income and Outlays Report.
• Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) rate decisions—
As is evident from earlier in this chapter, interest rates are a
major determinant of currency value. An FOMC rate decision is not as much of an economic data indicator as the others described in this section. Rather, it is a market-moving
announcement resulting from an all-important meeting on
interest rates, inflation, and the economy by the top Fed board
members and bank presidents in the country. The FOMC,
which currently has eight regularly scheduled meetings per
year, is a major element of the Federal Reserve System, and
it serves as the primary director of U.S. monetary policy. The
central component of this policy is the setting of target levels for the Fed Funds rate, which is the interest rate that banks
charge each other on overnight loans. Needless to say, because
of the FOMC’s influence on interest rates, its decisions can
have an enormous impact on the foreign exchange markets.
Especially when there is a large change or unexpected departure from consensus, FOMC rate decisions can immediately
move the currency markets in an extreme manner.

118

c04.indd 118

1/13/09 10:01:43 AM

Indication of Things to Come—Economic Indicators

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT

Joseph Trevisani
With all of the media news and noise that may affect the foreign
exchange markets, it can be extremely tricky to decipher which
pieces of information actually drive currency prices in a major
way. An expert in fundamental analysis, Joseph Trevisani—Chief
Market Analyst at FX Solutions (FXSolutions.com)—serves as an
invaluable guide for separating the truly important information
from the not-so-important. With around two decades of experience
as an institutional currency trader and trading desk manager at
large global banks, Trevisani appears regularly on financial news
channels and is quoted frequently by the major financial press.
In an interview with the author, Trevisani states:
“Central bank interest rates have a higher positive correlation with the value of a country’s currency than any
other factor. The country with the higher rate will generally have the more valuable currency. If British rates are
higher than American rates they will support the value
of the pound against the dollar, and vice versa. Banks in
countries with a rate advantage both pay more on deposits and attract more funds to earn the higher rate. But
for the currency markets the composition of the central
bank rate cycle is just as important as the comparison
between current rates. Central banks rarely make one
rate adjustment. Rates tend to move in cycles, a series
of rate cuts or increases over time, as the central bank
responds to changing economic conditions and attempts
to anticipate future conditions. It is the change in these
cycles, or the advent of a new cycle, that drives currency markets. When a central bank recalibrates its economic view, the currency markets tend to build-in a large

119

c04.indd 119

1/13/09 10:01:43 AM

Fundamental Analysis

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT (CONTINUED)
portion of the prospective rate cycle almost immediately.
Trading rates will adjust quickly to the new view. Central
banks play different roles within their respective economies, determined both by conception and tradition. The
European Central Bank has a specific mandate to protect against inflation—economic growth is secondary.
The American Federal Reserve’s role is to promote economic growth and jobs, as well as to watch against inflation. Almost all central banks have responsibility for the
functioning of the national financial system, though
the degree varies. A central bank’s rate policy is primarily
determined by domestic economic circumstance and not
by a desire or a need to affect the value of its currency
on the international stage.
The value of a nation’s currency is also directly
affected by the comparative strength and weakness of
a country’s economy in relation to those of its trading
partners. The stronger economy, that with the higher GDP
growth, lower inflation, greater productivity, political stability and a host of other factors will, over time, have the
stronger currency. It is these fundamental factors, in conjunction with central bank interest rate cycles, which produce the long-lasting price trends typical of the currency
markets. Some factors that affect a country’s economic
status reflect the choices of the political system. The balance between social welfare and individual competition
is one example—the openness of an economy to foreign
trade and capital is another. Other economic factors such
as labor mobility, entrepreneurship, and savings rates
are part of the social and cultural makeup of the nation.
And yet others, like oil or mineral deposits, stem from a
nation’s geographic or resource endowment. All of these

120

c04.indd 120

1/13/09 10:01:43 AM

N o N e w s I s B a d N e w s f o r N e w s Tr a d e r s

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT (CONTINUED)
factors, and many more, are monitored, assessed and
judged for their effect on economic growth and development. A change in one factor or several can affect the
productivity capacity of an economy, alter its competitiveness against its trading partners, and change the relative
value of its currency.
Exchange rates tend to focus on one aspect of a
currency—its use as a medium of exchange. The U.S.
economy is currently 22% of world GDP; it was once 50%.
Modern industrial capitalism is spreading to new and everlarger sections of the world. Since World War II the U.S.
percentage of the world economy has steadily diminished
as other national economies have grown at faster rates.
Over time that reduction has decreased the demand for
the dollar as an agent of exchange. But currencies also
act as a long term store of value. Any foreign investor in
a country is also an investor in that country’s currency.
When a central bank or private entity buys United States
Treasury Bonds or American stocks, it does so with dollars, creating demand for the U.S. currency. Until the creation of the euro there was no alternative to the dollar
as a store of value. No other country could match the
economic, technological and political power of the United
States, and these qualities made it a favorite investment
destination. The demand for the dollar as a store of value
created by investment flow added greatly to its demand
in the currency markets.”

N o News Is Bad News for News Traders
With economic news and data coming out of the United States and
other countries on an ongoing basis, foreign exchange traders who

121

c04.indd 121

1/13/09 10:01:43 AM

Fundamental Analysis

truly strive to be successful, regardless of whether they are primarily
technical or fundamental strategists, must necessarily be vigilant of
scheduled economic releases and current events. Fundamental forces
affect currency prices too thoroughly to ignore. But when traders
concentrate all of their attention on news and economic data to the
exclusion of other factors, this is called news trading.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, news trading can be difficult for a number of reasons. One notable difficulty is the speed that
is required to place trades at the right time in order to take advantage of the best price moves on a data release. These moves can take
place during or only milliseconds after the release, and traders need
to compete with countless other individuals and institutions that are
placing trades at the same time.
In addition, obtaining the news earlier than others is virtually
impossible for the average individual trader. Most traders do not
have access to the almost instantaneous news feeds that are necessary for trading the news effectively. Any lag time in receiving data
releases translates into potentially lost profits.
Furthermore, during and immediately after news releases are
among the most volatile times for the currency markets. This means
that it may be harder for trades to be filled by the broker as accurately as during quieter markets. This is due to the sheer speed of
price movement as well as the price gaps that can occur in fast
markets.
Besides the speed factor, another underlying difficulty with news
trading involves the proper interpretation of the news. Economic
data releases and other news announcements hold many nuances
that can be difficult for the average foreign exchange trader to

122

c04.indd 122

1/13/09 10:01:44 AM

N o N e w s I s B a d N e w s f o r N e w s Tr a d e r s

comprehend fully. Often, a new economic number comes out
that should obviously make the dollar go up, but instead, the dollar plummets, or vice versa. This is where the concept of consensus
comes in.
When a piece of news or data release comes out and the market
does something intuitively different or opposite of what it should
do, traders will say that the information was already “priced in”
to the market. For example, if bad news for the dollar comes out
but the dollar goes up anyway, it should mean that the market was
already expecting bad news. Maybe the news that ultimately came
out, though bad, was not as bad as traders had been expecting. When
a market expecting horrible news receives only bad news, the relatively positive nature of the bad news will often make the market go
up. In this example, the expectation of horrible news is called the
consensus.
Foreign exchange traders who trade the news must pay attention not only to the actual numbers that are released, but also to
the consensus, or what the economists and other experts are expecting. Then, trading can take place based on how far the actual numbers deviate from the consensus numbers. In this way, news trading
is based almost entirely on relative values rather than absolute values.
Often, news traders will determine their own trading threshold for
the difference between actual data and consensus data, placing long
or short trades only if the respective threshold is met or exceeded by
the actual data.
One final point regarding economic indicators and trading the
news lies in the economic data issuer’s common practice of releasing revisions. For example, if Non-Farm Payrolls data are released

123

c04.indd 123

1/13/09 10:01:44 AM

Fundamental Analysis

on the first Friday in February describing employment figures for
the month of January, what will sometimes happen is that those
January numbers will be significantly revised when the new NonFarm-Payrolls report comes out in March. If substantial enough,
this March revision has the potential to move the foreign exchange
markets even more than the original report released in February.
Therefore, the prudent news trader must necessarily pay close attention not only to consensus and actual data figures, but also to the
possibility of unexpected revisions.
As many fundamental news traders will attest, because of all the
difficulties involved in trading the news, including those described
here, it is definitely a very challenging style of trading. Those who
take the time and trouble to overcome the obstacles, though, often
find it a very rewarding one.

C hapter Summar y
Fundamental analysis is essentially the study of why markets move,
or, more specifically, what drives them to move. The primary drivers in foreign exchange, like that of other financial markets, are the
basic economic concepts of supply and demand. If there is high
demand for and/or low supply of a currency, its value should go up.
Conversely, if there is low demand for and/or high supply of a currency, its value should go down.
In turn, supply and demand are driven primarily by traders’ collective perceptions of fundamental factors. These factors include
interest rates, central bank policy, economic growth, and inflation,

124

c04.indd 124

1/13/09 10:01:44 AM

Chapter Summary

among others. Changes in these factors can have profound effects
on the currency markets.
In terms of interest rates and central bank policy, which are
instrumental determinants of currency value, central banks will
tend to increase rates (tighten) with the goal of controlling inflation.
On the other hand, these banks will seek to decrease rates (ease) in
order to help stimulate the economy. Generally speaking, the immediate effect of tightening tends toward an appreciation of the currency,
while the immediate effect of easing tends toward a depreciation of
the currency. These are only general tendencies—not rules—as many
different factors combine to dictate currency exchange rates.
Also in the realm of interest rates, carry traders can earn interest income on the interest rate differential for the currency pair they
are trading, provided the trade is in the direction of positive interest.
For example, for a carry-traded pair like AUD/JPY (where AUD has
a high interest rate and JPY has a low interest rate) a trader would
earn a positive differential for holding a long AUD/JPY position,
and would be charged as a result of a negative differential for holding a short AUD/JPY position.
Also important to the value of a currency, and what many shortterm foreign exchange traders gravitate towards, are economic data
indicators. These indicators are usually released on a monthly or
quarterly basis by government agencies or private organizations, and
they each provide a barometer reading for a certain sector or aspect
of the economy. For example, GDP is used for assessing economic
growth, CPI for providing indications of inflation, and the NonFarm Payrolls report for evaluating the employment situation.
