
13

Conclusion!

319

Okay, what about discipline and process of trading?
This is the area I first modeled. If you understand this area, you
have a real chance of success. But if you don’t understand it, you
have little chance of success.
I first started the process of finding out about good trading by
asking a lot of good traders what they did. My assumption was that
the common answers were the “real” secrets of success.
Most traders would tell me something about their methods.
After interviewing 50 traders, I had 50 different methodologies. As
a result, I concluded that methodology wasn’t that significant to
trading success. These traders all had low-risk ideas, but there were
a lot of different types of low-risk ideas and that was just one of the
keys. I’d now express that in terms of having a high positive
expectancy, with lots of opportunity and with plenty of understanding of how to use position sizing to realize that expectancy
over the long run. However, doing that requires a lot of discipline.

320

PART 3

“nderstding

the Key Parts of Your System

I’ve developed a complete course on peak performance trading,
and there is very little overlap between that course and this book.
Give us a synopsis. How about some steps people could follow
on a regular basis to be more disciplined in their trading?
. Okay, step 1 is to have a trading plan and test it. You
should know how to do most of that from the information
contained in this book. Your basic goal is to develop
confidence and a strong understanding of the concept you
are trading.
. Step 2 would be to assume total responsibility for
everything that happens to you. Even if someone runs off
with your money or a broker rips you off, assume that you
were somehow involved in creating that situation. I know
that sounds a bit strong. But if you do that, you can correct
your role in what happens. When you stop committing the
same mistakes over and over, yoti have a chance to be
successful.
. Step 3, find your weaknesses and work on them. I have
several coaches to help me as a businessperson. In
addition, I act as a coach for a number of people in our
supertrader program. And the key to that program is to
find weaknesses and eliminate them. Develop a diary of
what happens to you. Notice common emotional patterns
and make the assumption that they are you.
. The fourth step is to do some global planning. Make a list
of everything that could go wrong in your business and
determine how you will respond to that situation. That will
be the key to your success-knowing how to respond to
the unexpected. For everything you can think of that might
go wrong, develop several courses of action. Rehearse
those action plans until they become second nature to you.
This is a critical step to success.
. Step 5, on a daily basis analyze yourself. You are the most
important factor in your trading and investing. Doesn’t it
make sense to spend a little time analyzing yourself? HOW

CHAPTER

13

Conclusion!

are you feeling? What is going on in your life? The more
aware you are of these issues, the less control they will
have over your life.
. The sixth step is to determine what could go wrong in your
trading at the beginning of the day. How will you react to
that? Mentally rehearse each option until you have it down
pat. Every athlete does extensive mental rehearsal and it is
important for you to do the same.
Step 7, at the end of the day do a daily debriefing. Ask
yourself a simple question: Did I follow my rules? If the
answer is yes, then pat yourself on the back. In fact, if you
followed your rules and lost money, pat yourself on the
back twice. If the answer is no, then you must determine
why! How might you get yourself into a similar situation
in the future? When you find that similar situation, then
you must mentally rehearse the situation again and again
to make sure you know how to respond appropriately in
the future.

l

Those seven steps should have a gigantic influence on anyone’s trading.
What do you think the most important thing is that traders or
investors can do to improve their performance?
That’s an easy question, but the solution is not easy. Take total
responsibility for everything that happens to you-in the market
and in your life.
Let me give you an example from one of the marble games we
play at seminars. Let’s say the audience has $10,000 in play equity
and the audience members can risk any amount of that on each
marble that is drawn (and replaced). Let’s also say 40 percent of the
marbles are losers and one of them loses 5 to 1 (i.e., it’s a -5-R multiple). The game goes on for 100 draws so that some large losing
streaks will occur. In 100 draws, we’ll probably have 6 or 7losses in
a row at some point in time. Moreover, that losing streak might
include the 5-to-1 loss.

322

PART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

I’m a little sneaky When someone draws out a losing marble,
I ask that person to continue drawing until he or she eventually
draws a winning marble, That means that someone in the audience
will draw all of the long losing streak.
At the end of the game, usually half the audience loses money
and many of them go broke. When I ask them, “How many of you
think this person (i.e., the person who pulled the losing streak) is
responsible for your losses?” many of them raise their hands. If
they really believe that, it means that they didn’t learn anything
from the game. They went bankrupt because of poor money management, but they’d rather blame it on someone else (or something
else) such as the person who picked the losing marbles.
The most astute traders and
investors are the ones who learn this
lesson early. They are always looking to
themselves to correct mistakes. This
means they will eventually clear out the
psychological issues that prevent them
from making a lot of money As a result,
they will also continue to profit from
their mistakes.
Thus, my first advice to anyone is
to look to yourself as the source of
everything that happens in your life.
What are the common patterns and
how can you fix them? When you do
this, your chances of success go up dramatically
Great, any last words of wisdom?
I’d like to mention something about beliefs, because I think they are
so important. First, you cannot trade the markets-you can only
trade your beliefs about the market. As a result, it is important for
you to determine exactly what those beliefs are.
Second, certain key beliefs, which have nothing to do with the
market, will still determine yoursuccess in then markets. Those are
your beliefs about yourself. What do you think you are capable of

CHAPTER

13

Conclusion!

323

doing? Is trading or success important to you? How worthy of success do you believe yourself to be? Weak beliefs about yourself can
undermine trading with a great system.
At this point, I’d like to mention something that will help you
to move to the next step. We have a game on our web site at
http://www.iitm.com.
That game gives you a positive expectancy
and only emphasizes position sizing and letting your profits run.
What I’d suggest that you do is use that game as a training ground
for your trading. See if you can make money playing the game. We
give prizes for being in the top 10, and playing the game is free.
Develop a plan for getting into the top 10 without taking a lot of
risk. It’s possible. In fact, if you read the briefings, you’ll even see
an example of how to do it. It’s not that difficult, but few people can
do it.
Prove to yourself that you can do it. Games reflect behavior. If
you cannot do it in our game, then you have no chance in the market. You will also have most of the psychological issues playing the
game that you will have when you face the market. The game is an
inexpensive place to learn.
As my final words of advice, I’d suggest that you read this
book over four or five times. My experience is that people filter
things according to their belief systems. There is probably a lot of
material that you overlooked. A second reading may pick up some
new gems for you. And multiple readings will make it second
nature for you.

APPENDIX I

Recommended Readings

Balsara, Nauzer J. Money Managcnmf Strafegiessfor Futures Traders. New York:
Wiley, 1992. Good money management book, but it is more about risk control than position sizing.
Barach, Roland. Mindtraps, 2d ed. Raleigh, NC: International Institute of Trading
Mastery, 1996. Good book about the psychological biases we face in all
aspects of trading and investing. Call l-919-362-5591 for more information.
Campbell, Joseph (with Bill Meyers). The Powr $Myfk. New York: Doubleday,
1988. One of my all-time favorite books.
Chande, Tushar. Beyond Technical Analysis: How to Develop and Implement a Winning
Trading System. New York: Wiley, 1997. One of the first books to really go
beyond just emphasizing entry.
Colby, Robert W., and Meyers, Thomas A. Encyclopedia of Technical Market
Indicators. Homewood, IL: Dow-Jones Irwin, 1988. Excellent iust for its
SXp.

Connors, Laurence, and Raschke, Linda-Bradford. Street Smarts. Malibu, CA:
Gordon Publishing Group, 1995 Great book of short-term trading techniques.
Gallacher, William. Winner Take AIZ: A Top Commodity Trader Tells It Like It Is.
Chicago: Probus, 1994. One of the systems mentioned in the text comes from
this witty and straightforward book.
Gardner, David, and Gardner, Tom. The Motley Fool Investment Guide: How the Fwl
Beats Wall Streef’s Wise Men and How You Can Too. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1996. Simple investment strategies most people can follow.
Hagstrom, Robert, Jr. The Warren Bufitt Way: Inoes~ctment Strategies of the World’s
Great& Investor. New York: Wiley, 1994. Probably the best book on Buff&t’s

326

Appendix I

strategy. However, this is not Buff&t writing about his strategy, and the
author seems to have all the normal biases that most people have-it makes
it seem as if all Buff&t does is pick good stocks and hold onto them.
Kase, Cynthia. Trrading with the Odds: Using the Power of Probability to Prqfit in the
Futures Market. Chicago: Irwin, 1996. I believe there is more to this book than
even the author knows.
Kaufman, Perry. Smarter Trading: Improoing Performance in Changing Markets. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1995. Great ideas and contains another of the systems
discussed throughout this book.
Kilpatrick, Andrew. Of Permanent Value: The Story of Warren Buffett. Birmingham,
AL: AKPE, 1996. Fun reading.
LeBeau, Charles, and Lucas, David. The Technical Traders’ Guide to Computer
Analysis of ihe Futures Market. Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1992. One of the best
books ever written on systems development.
LeFevre, Edwin, Reminiscence Dfn Stock Operator. New York: Wiley, 1993. New edition of an old classic.
Lowe, Janet. Warwn Buff& Speaks: Wit and Wisdmnfrom the World’s Grecztest lnv&x
New York: Wiley, 1997. Fun reading with great wisdom.
Lowenstein, Roger. Buffeett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York:
Random House, 1995. A good book to round out your Buffett education.
Mitchell. Dick. Commonsense Betting: Betting Sfrategiesfor the Race Track. New York:
William Morrow &Company, 1995. A must for people who really want to
stretch themselves to learn position sizing.
O’Neil, William. Hou to Make Money in Stocks: A Winning System in Good Times and
Bad, 2d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995. A modem classic that includes
one of the systems reviewed in this book.
Roberts, Ken. The World? Most Powerfill Money Manual and Course. Grant’s Pass,
OR: 1995. Good course and good ideas. However, be careful if you don’t
have enough money. Call 503-955-2800 for more information.
Schwager, Jack. Market Wizards. New York: The New York Institute of Finance,
1988. A must read for any trader or investor.
Schwager, Jack. The New Market Wizards. New York: HarperCollins, 1992.
Continues the tradition, and it again is a must read. William Eckhardt’s
chapter alone is worth the price of the book.
Schwager, Jack. Schwagerm Futures: Flindamental
Analysis. New York: Wiley, 1996.
Great book for anyone who wants to understand fundamentals in the
futures market.
Schwager, Jack. Schwager 011 Futures: Technical Amlysis. New York: Wiley, 1996.
S&d background on many topics related to learning about markets.
Sloman, James. Nothing. Durham, NC: Dana Institute, 1981. Call 1-919-362-5591
for more information. A great book about flow. This has nothing to do with
trading, but I think all traders and investors should read this book.
Sloman, James. When You’w Troubled: The Healing Heart. Raleigh, NC: Mountain
Rain, 1993. Call 1-919-362-5591 for mope information. Great book about
helping yourself through life. The author calls this book hislife’s purpose,
and I tend to agree.

Recommended Readings

327

Sweeney, John. Campaign Trading: Tactics and Strategies to Exploit the Markets. New
York: Wiley, 1996. Great book that emphasizes the more important aspects
of tradmg.
Tharp. Van. The Peak Performance Coursefor Traders and Inwstors. Raleigh, NC;
International Institute of Trading Mastery, 1988-1994. Call l-919-362-5591
for more information. This is my model of the trading prmxess, presented in
such a way as to help you install the model in yourself.
Tharp, Van. Hm to Develop a Winning Trading System That Fits YOM: A 3.Day Seminar
on &ye. Raleigh, NC: International Institute of Trading Mastery, 1947. Call 1.
919-362-5591 for more information. This is our original systems seminar,
which is great information for all traders and investors.
Vine, Ralph. Portfolio Management Formulas: Mnthenmticai
Trading Methods for the
Futures, Options, and StockMarkets. New York: Wiley, 1990. Difficult reading,
but most professionals should tackle it.
Vine, Ralph. The Nm Money Managment: A Frnmrwork for Asset Allocation. New
York: Wiley, 1995. An improvement from Portfolio Managmenf Formulas and
again a book that most professionals in the field of investing and trading
should read.
Wilder, J. Wells, Jr. New Concepts in Technical Trading. Greensboro, NC: Trend
Research, 1978. One of the classics of trading and a must read.

APPENDIX

II

Key Terms Defined

Adaptive Moving Average A moving average that is either quick, or slow, to
signal a market entry depending upon the efficiency of the move in the market.
Algorithm Rules for computing, i.e., procedures for calculating mathematical
functions.
Anti-Martingale Strategy A position sizing strategy in which position size is
increased when one wins. Any position siring strategy based upon one’s equity
will be an anti-martingale strategy.
Arbitrage Taking advantage of discrepancies in price or loopholes in the system
to make consistent low-risk money. Usually involves the simultaneous purchase
and sale of related items.
Average Directional Movement (ADX) An indicator that measures how much
a market is trending. Both bullish and bearish trends are shown by positive movement.
The average over the last “X” days of the true range
Average True Range (ATR)
which is the largest of the following: (1) today’s high minus today’s low; (2)
today’s high minus yesterday’s close; or (3) today’s low minus yesterday’s close.
Backwardation Usually, future prices are above today’s cash prices. However, in
times of shortages nearby prices will rise above the price of future prices. This is
the phenomenon called “backwardation.”
Bearish The opinion that the market will be going down in the future.
Best-case example Many books show you illustrations of their key points about
the market (or indicator) that appear to perfectly predict the market. However,

328

Key

Terms Defined

329

most examples of these points are not nearly as good as the one that is selected,
which is known as a best-case example.
Bias The tendency to move in a particular direction. This could be a market bias,
but most of the biases discussed in this book were psychological biases.
Bullish The opinion that the market will be going up in the future.

Candlesticks A type of bar chart, developed by the Japanese, in which the price
range between the open and the close is either a white rectangle (if the close is
higher) or a black rectangle (if the close is lower). These charts have the advantage
of making the price movement more obvious visually.
Capitalization The amount of money in the underlying stock of a company.
Chaos Theory A theory about physical systems which suggests that one moves
from stability to chaos. This theory has recently been used to explain explosive
moves in the markets and the nonrandomness
of the markets.
Commodities Physical products that are traded at a futures exchange such as
grains, foods, meats, metals, etc.
Consolidation A pause in the market during which prices move in a limited
range and do not seem to trend.
Contract A single unit of a commodity or future. For example, a single unit or
contract of corn is 5,000 bushels.

Degree of Freedom A statistical term equal to the number of independent observations less the number of parameters to be estimated. More degrees of freedom
generally helps in describing past price movement and hurts in predicting future
price movement.
Dev-stop@ A stop loss criterion developed by Cynthia Kase which depends on
the standard deviation of price movement.
Directional Movement An indicator attributed to J. Wells Wilder which uses the
largest part of today’s range that is outside of yesterday’s range.
Disaster Stop A stop loss order to determine your worst case loss in a Position.
Discretionary Trading Trading that depends upon the instincts of the trader as
opposed to a systematic approach. The best discretionary traders are those who
develop a systematic approach and then use discretion in their exits and position
sizing to improve the performance.
Divergence A term used to describe two or more indicators failing to show confirming signals.
Diversification Investing inindependent markets to reduce the overall risk.
Drawdown
A decrease in the value of your account because of losing trades or
because of ,,PZ%Per losses” which may occur simply because of a decline in value
of open positions.

330

APPENDIX II

