
I, Next Oycte Bottom amen 100
CF.Cycle Lows Indicator:
date of the Anchor bar ie: 10/28907. The time

oa
ia: 04:16pm. The CycleSpacing is 49.

i ii

(oa

FS So RARE SEN“ RO

Figure 14.17 The Ehrlich Cycle Forecaster has identified a 49 day trad-
ing cycle in S&P 500 futures prices (see vertical lines). The ECF estimates
that the next cycle low will be formed 49 days from the last cycle low, which
would be on March 30, 1998.

F.Cycle Lows Indicator:
date of the Anchor bar is: 101006. The time
1: 04:00pm. The CycteSpacing ie 133.

a eet

Figure 14.18 — The ECF has uncovered a 133 day cycle in Boeing (see verti-
cal lines). Since the last cycle low occurred during November, 1997, the ECF
estimates that the next cycle low is due to occur 133 days later on June 3, 1998.


o/29/93 (*DWI X) Dow Industrials 03/20/98,
Weekly Bar Chart

t

7000
t
+2000
40 Week Cycle Lows Ye t +8000
t

t ¥ }4000

i ms , 37 te

Figure 14.19a The bottoms in the cycle arcs coincide with important
reaction lows in the Dow when spaced 40 weeks apart. That suggests a 40
week cycle in the Dow. The last two cycle troughs were in the spring of 1997
and the start of 1998 (see arrows).

06/19/97 (‘DWI X) Dow industrials 03/17/98

Daily Bar Chart il

ft

)
iN a h / W

1 ‘hig’ ‘ep. a ‘Nov Dee 8 Feb ee

Figure 14.19b = The daily cycle arcs reveal the presence of SO day cycle
bottoms in the Dow during the second half of 1997 and the start of 1998.
The idea is to shift the arcs until their lows coincide with a number of reac-
tion lows on the price chart.


(TR1600) Treasury Bonds 1600 03/31/98

Monthly Bar Chart a1928

'75 Month Cycle Lows

bos esas be? bsp bose wt

Figure 14.20a Beginning with the major bottom in 1981, the cycle find-
er arcs reveal that bonds have shown a tendency to form important bottoms
every 75 months (6.25 years). These numbers may shift with time, but still
provide useful trading information.

01/03/97 (TR1600) Treasury Bonds 1600 03/17/98,

424

Daily Bar Chart

421°28

11824

A126,
t

55 Day Cycle Lows 1103

30012

¥ nm

et

F
kg]

Figure 14.20b Applied to this daily chart, the cycle arcs showed a ten-
dency for bond prices to bottom every $5 trading days during this time span
(see arrows).


Time Cycles 369

SEASONAL CYCLES

All markets are affected to some extent by an annual seasonal
cycle. The seasonal cycle refers to the tendency for markets to
move in a given direction at certain times of the year. The most
obvious seasonals involve the grain markets where seasonal
lows usually occur around harvest time when supply is most
plentiful. In soybeans, for example, most seasonal tops occur
between April and June with seasonal bottoms taking place
between August and October. (See Figure 14.21.) One well
known seasonal pattern is the “February Break” where grain
and soybean prices usually drop from late December or early
January into February.

Nov Soybeans(CBOT) 15 Year Seasonal(83-97)

cp ee | : eed ce el vo he Wee tO
Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov

Figure 14.21 Soybeans usually peak in May and bottom in October.


370 Chapter 14

Although the reasons for seasonal tops and bottoms are
more obvious in the agricultural markets, virtually all markets
experience seasonal patterns. Copper, for example, shows a strong
seasonal uptrend from the January/February period with a ten-
dency to top in March or April. (See Figure 14.22.) Silver has a low
in January with higher prices into March. Gold shows a tendency
to bottom in August. Petroleum products have a tendency to peak
during October and usually don’t bottom until the end of the
winter. (See Figure 14.23.) Financial markets also have seasonal
patterns.

May Copper(CMX) 15 Year Seasonal(83-97)

100

b+ 80

+40

Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan ‘Feb Mar Apr May

Figure 14.22 Copper usually bottoms during October and February, but
peaks during the April-May period.


Time Cycles 371

Jun Crude Oil(NYM) 14 Year Seasonal(84-97)

70

Jul ) Aug : Sep. Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May

Figure 14.23 Crude oil prices peak during October and turn up during
March.

The U.S. Dollar has a tendency to bottom during January.
(See Figure 14.24.) Treasury Bond prices usually hit important
highs during January. Over the entire year, Treasury Bond prices
are usually weaker during the first half of the year and stronger
during the second half. (See Figure 14.25.) The examples of sea-
sonal charts are provided by the Moore Research Center (Moore
Research Center, 321 West 13th Avenue, Eugene, OR 97401, (800)
927-7259), which specializes in seasonal analysis of futures mar-
kets.


Jun Deutsche Mark(IMM) 15 Year Seasonal(83-97)

40

Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb~ Mar Apr May Jun

Figure 14.24 The peak in the German mark during January coincides with
a lowpoint in the U.S. dollar that usually occurs at the start of the new year.

Sep 30-Year T-Bonds(CBOT) 15 Year Seasonal(83-97)

7

20

Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun “Jul Aug Sep

Figure 14.25 Treasury Bonds prices usually peak around the new year,
and then remain weak for most of the first half. The second half of the year
is better for bond bulls.


Time Cycles 373

STOCK MARKET CYCLES

Did you know that the strongest three month span for the stock
market is November through January? February is then weaker,
but is followed by a strong March and April. After a soft June, the
market turns strong during July (the start of the traditional sum-
mer tally). The weakest month of the year is September. The
strongest month is December (ending with the well known Santa
Claus rally just after Christmas). That information, and a whole
lot more about stock market cycles, can be found in Yale Hirsch’s
annual Stock Trader’s Almanac (The Hirsch Organization, 184
Central Avenue, Old Tappen, NJ 07675).

THE JANUARY BAROMETER

According to Hirsch: “as January goes, so goes the year.” The well
known January Barometer holds that what the S&P 500 does dur-
ing January will determine what kind of year the market as a whole
will have. Another variation on that theme is the belief that the
direction of the S&P 500 during the first 5 trading days of the year
gives some hint of what’s ahead for the year. The January
Barometer shouldn't be confused with the January Effect, which is
the tendency for smaller stocks to outperform larger stocks during
January.

THE PRESIDENTIAL CYCLE

Another well known cycle that affects stock market behavior is
the 4 year cycle, also called the Presidential Cycle, because it coin-
cides with the elected term of U.S. presidents. Each of the 4 years
has a different historical return. The election year (1) is normally
strong. The postelection and midyears (2 and 3) are normally
weak. The preelection year (4) is normally strong. According to
Hirsch’s Trader’s Almanac, election years since 1904 have seen
averages gains of 224%; postelection years, gains of 72%; midterm
years, gains of 63%; and preelection years, gains of 217%. (See
Figure 14.16.)


374 Chapter 14

COMBINING CYCLES WITH
OTHER TECHNICAL TOOLS

Two of the most promising areas of overlap between cycles and
traditional technical indicators are in the use of moving averages
and oscillators. It is believed that the usefulness of both indicators
can be enhanced if the time periods used are tied to each market’s
dominant cycles, Let’s assume that a market has a dominant 20
day trading cycle. Normally, when constructing an oscillator, it’s
best to use half the length of the cycle. In this case, the oscillator
period would be 10 days. To trade a 40 day cycle, use a 20 day
oscillator. Walt Bressert discusses in his book, The Power of
Oscillator/Cycle Combinations, how cycles can be used to adjust
time spans for the Commodity Channel Index, the Relative
Strength Index, Stochastics, and Moving Average Convergence
Divergence (MACD).

Moving averages can also be tied to cycles. You could use
different moving averages to track different cycle lengths. To gen-
erate a moving average crossover system for a 40 day cycle, you
could use a 40 day moving average in conjunction with a 20 day
average (one-half of the 40 day cycle) or a 10 day average (one-
quarter of the 40 day cycle). The main problem with this
approach is determining what the dominant cycles are at a par-
ticular point in time.

MAXIMUM ENTROPY
SPECTRAL ANALYSIS

The search for the right dominant cycles in any market is com-
plicated by the belief that cycle lengths aren’t static; in other
words, they keep changing over time. What worked a month ago
may not work a month from now. In his book, MESA and Trading
Market Cycles, John Ehlers uses a statistical approach called
Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis (MESA). Ehlers explains that
one of the main advantages of MESA is its high-resolution mea-
surement of cycles with relatively small time periods, which is
crucial for shorter term trading. Ehlers also explains how cycles
can be used to optimize moving average lengths and many of the


Time Cycles 375

oscillator-type indicators we've already mentioned. Uncovering
cycles allows for the dynamic adjusting of technical indicators to
fit current market conditions. Ehlers also addresses the problem of
distinguishing between a market in a cycle mode versus one that
is in a trend mode. When a market is in a trend mode, a trend-fol-
lowing indicator like a moving average is needed to implement
trades. A cycle mode would favor the use of oscillator-type indi-
cators. Cycle measurement can help determine which mode the
market is currently in, and which type of technical indicator is
more appropriate to use for trading strategies.

CYCLE READING AND SOFTWARE

Most of the books referred to in this chapter on cycles can be
obtained through mail order firms like Traders Press (see reference
in previous chapter) or Traders’ Library, P.O. Box 2466, Ellicott
City, MD 21041, [800] 272-2855). There’s also a lot more software
to help you perform cycle analysis with your computer. The
Ehrlich Cycle Forecaster and Walt Bressert’s CycleTrader are both
available as add-on options to run with charting software provid-
ed by Omega Research. Bressert’s CycleTrader integrates the con-
cepts he describes in his book, The Power of Oscillator/Cycle
Combinations. (Bressert Marketing Group, 100 East Walton, Suite
200, Chicago, IL 60611 (312) 867-8701). More information on the
MESA computer program can be gotten from John Ehlers (Box
1801, Goleta, CA 93116 (805) 969-6478). For ongoing cycle
research and analysis, don’t forget the Foundation for the Study
of Cycles.




Trading Systems

INTRODUCTION

The computer has played an increasingly important role in the
field of technical analysis. In this chapter, we'll see how the com-
puter can make the technical trader’s task a good deal easier by
providing quick and easy access to an arsenal of technical tools
and studies that would have required an enormous amount of
work just a few years earlier. This assumes, of course, that the trad-
er knows how to use these tools, which brings us to one of the dis-
advantages of the computer.

The trader not properly schooled in the concepts that
underlie the various indicators, and who is not comfortable with
how each indicator is interpreted, may find him- or herself over-
whelmed with the vast array of computer software currently avail-
able. Even worse, the amount of impressive technical data at one’s
fingertips sometimes fosters a false sense of security and compe-
tence. Traders mistakenly assume that they are automatically bet-
ter simply because they have access to so much computer powe!.

377


378 Chapter 15

The theme emphasized in this discussion is that the comput-
er is an extremely valuable tool in the hands of a technically orient-
ed trader who has already done his or her basic homework. When we
review many of the routines available in the computer, you'll see that
a fair number of the tools and indicators are quite basic and have
already been covered in previous chapters. There are, of course, more
sophisticated tools that require more advanced charting software.

Much of the work involved in technical analysis can be
performed without the computer. Certain functions can be more
easily performed with a simple chart and ruler than with a com-
puter printout. Some types of longer range analysis don’t require
a computer. As useful as it is, the computer is only a tool. It can
make a good technical analyst even better. It won’t, however, turn
a poor technician into a good one.

Charting Software

Several of the technical routines available in charting software
have been covered in previous chapters. We'll review some of the
tools and indicators currently available. We'll then address some
additional features such as the ability to automate the various
functions chosen by the user. In addition to providing us with the
various technical studies, the computer also enables us to test var-
ious studies for profitability, which may be the most valuable fea-
ture of the program. Some software allows the user, with little or
no programming background, to construct indicators and systems.

Welles Wilder’s Directional Movement and
Parabolic Systems

We'll take a close look at a couple of Welles Wilder’s more popular
systems, the Directional Movement System and the Parabolic System.
We'll use those two systems in our discussion of the relative mer-
its of relying on mechanical trading systems. It will be demon-
strated that mechanical trend following systems only work well in
certain types of market environments. It will also be shown how a
mechanical system can be incorporated into one’s market analysis
and used simply as a confirming technical indicator.


Computers and Trading Systems 379

Too Much of a Good Thing

It may strike you that there are too many indicators from which
to choose. Instead of simplifying our lives, has the computer
only served to complicate things by giving us so much more to
look at? Charting packages offer 80 different studies that are
available to the technician. How does one possibly reach any
conclusions (and find the time to trade) with so much data to
contend with? We’ll say a few words about some work being
done in that direction.

SOME COMPUTER NEEDS

Charting software can be applied to virtually any financial mar-
ket. Most software is user-friendly, meaning that it can be easily
implemented by choosing from successive lists of available rou-
tines. The place to start is with a charting software package that
works for the computer you already own or are thinking of buy-
ing. Bear in mind that most charting software has been written for
IBM-compatible computers.

Charting packages do not provide daily market data. The
user must obtain that data elsewhere. Data can be collected auto-
matically from a data service over telephone lines (requiring a
phone modem). Charting packages provide the names of various
data vendors from which to choose. These data vendors provide
all the software and instructions needed to set up and collect the
data files.

When first starting out, the user must collect historical data
going back for at least several months to have something to work
with. After that, data should be collected daily. It is possible to
analyze “on line” data during the trading day by hooking up to a
quote service. However, in our use of daily data, we will be refer-
ring to end-of-day data, which is available after the markets close.
The final piece of equipment you might want is a printer to obtain
a copy of whatever appears on the terminal screen. CD-Rom capa-
bility is highly recommended since some software vendors pro-
vide you with several years of historical data on a CD-Rom disk to


380 Chapter 15

get you started. There are some data vendors that also provide
charting capability, which simplifies your task even more. One
such service is Telescan (5959 Corporate Drive, Suite 2000,
Houston, TX 77036, (800) 324-8246, www.telescan.com).

GROUPING TOOLS
AND INDICATORS

The following list groups some of the chart and indicator options.

¢ Basic Charts: Bar, line, point and figure, and candlesticks
¢ Chart Scales: Arithmetic and semilogarithmic

e Bar Chart: Price, volume, and open interest (for futures)
e Volume: Bars, on balance, and Demand Index

e Basic Tools: Trendlines and channels, percentage retrace-
ments, moving averages, and oscillators

¢ Moving Averages: Reference envelopes, Bollinger Bands

¢ Oscillators: Commodity Channel Index, momentum, rate of
change, MACD, Stochastic, Williams %R, RSI

e Cycles: Cycle Finder
e Fibonacci Tools: Fan lines, arcs, time zones and retracements

e Wilder: RSI, Commodity Selection Index, Directional
Movement, Parabolic, Swing Index, ADX line

USING THE TOOLS
AND INDICATORS

How does one cope with so much from which to choose? A sug-
gestion is to first use the basic tools such as price, volume, trend-
lines, percentage retracements, moving averages, and oscillators.
Notice the large number of oscillators available. Pick one or two
that you are most comfortable with and go with them. Use such
things as cycles and Fibonacci tools as secondary inputs unless
you have a special interest in those areas. Cycles can help fine


Computers and Trading Systems 381

tune moving average and oscillator lengths, but require study and
practice. For mechanical trading systems, Wilder’s Parabolic and
DMI are especially noteworthy.

WELLES WILDER’S PARABOLIC
AND DIRECTIONAL
MOVEMENT SYSTEMS

We're going to spend some time on two studies that are especially
useful. Both studies were developed by J. Welles Wilder Jr. and dis-
cussed in his book, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Three
of Wilder’s other studies included on the computer menu—
Commodity Selection Index, Relative Strength Index, and the
Swing Index—are also included in the same book.

Parabolic System (SAR)

Wilder’s Parabolic system (SAR) is a time/price reversal system
that is always in the market. The letters “SAR” stand for “stop and
reverse,” meaning that the position is reversed when the protec-
tive stop is hit. It is a trend-following system. It gets its name from
the shape assumed by the trailing stops that tend to curve like a
parabola. (See Figures 15.1-15.4. Notice that as prices trend high-
er, the rising dots below the price action (the stop and reverse
points) tend to start out slower and then accelerate with the
trend. In a downtrend, the same thing happens but in the oppo-
site direction (the dots are above the price action). The SAR num-
bers are calculated and available to the user for the following day.

Wilder built an acceleration factor into the system. Each
day the stop moves in the direction of the new trend. At first, the
movement of the stop is relatively slow to allow the trend time to
become established. As the acceleration factor increases, the SAR
begins to move faster, eventually catching up to the price action.
If the trend falters, or fails to materialize, the result is usually a stop
and reverse signal. As the accompanying charts show, the
Parabolic system works extremely well in trending markets. Notice
that while the trending portions were captured well, the system
whipsawed constantly during the sideways, nontrending periods.


2729/97 (*SPX) S&P 500 Stock Index 03/18/08
{froe0
Daily Bar Chart . ot! |! .
| ’
il! ". ! [I [" 0
Mn a
| rill! ‘0
|! I I | fs . Parabolic Stop tooo
. and Reverse Points
He ; (SAR) Lovo
be bes: 2 28 E 9 23 = "7 a 6 =

Figure 15.1 The Parabolic SARs look like dots on the chart. A buy signal
was given when the upper SAR was hit (first arrow). Notice how the SARs
accelerated upward during the rally and caught most of the uptrend. A small
whipsaw occurred to the upper right, which was quickly corrected. This sys-
tem works when a trend is present.

parewe7 (SPX) S&P 500 Stock index 03/18/88
Daily Bar Chart

1080

4000

beso

{ooo

eso

Parabolic SAR
Leoo
m1 7 7 x g 3 wo en

a

Figure 15.2 A longer range version of the previous chart shows the good
and bad aspects of Parabolics and any trend-following system. They work
during trending periods (to the left and right of the chart). But are useless
during the type of trading range that occurred from August to January.


(4/30/92 (*SPX) S&P 500 Stock Index 03/31/98

Monthly Bar Chart |

Monthly Parabolic SAR t | | |

pee TE
He +

& oe % wr we

Figure 15.3 Parabolics can be used on a monthly chart to track the pri-
mary trend. A sell signal in early 1994 was followed by a buy in late sum-
mer. Except for one whipsaw during 1996, this system has stayed positive for
almost four years.

1108/96 (DELL) Dell Computer Corp 03/20/98 |

Weekly Bar Chart | | |

$33

Fy

. , |
thf. I.
nie yl

inthe ™
ul a Weekly Parabolic SAR
' he. ;
| oly “

{
ora eee 1

~ eg bab er wey tanh Se Wo Ge Fa

Figure 15.4 Parabolics applied to weekly chart of Dell Computer. After
staying positive through most of 1997, a sell signal was given during
October. That sell signal was reversed and a buy signal given as 1997
ended.



384 Chapter 15

That demonstrates both the strength and weakness of
most trend-following systems. They work well during strong
trending periods, which Wilder himself estimates occur only
about 30% of the time. If that estimate is even close to reality,
then a trend-following system will not work for about 70% of the
time. How then does one deal with this problem?

DMI and ADX

One possible solution is to use some type of filter or a device to
determine if the market is in a trending mode. Wilder’s ADX line
rates the directional movement of the various markets on a scale
of 0 to 100. A rising ADX line means the market is trending and
a better candidate for a trend-following system. A falling ADX line
indicates a nontrending environment, which would not be suit-
able for a trend-following approach. (See Figure 15.5.)

04/21/97 (*SPX) S&P 500 Stock index 03/18/98
Daily Bar Chart 4080
1000
} aso
800
peso
+800

30
ADX
25
A

V NS VW

t
w v1 v1 Ly 5 i) i " ot

30pm PT

Figure 15.5 The ADX line measures the degree of directional movement. A
downturn from above 40 (left arrow) signaled the onset of a trading range. The
upturn from below 20 (right arrow) signaled the resumption of a trending phase.


Computers and Trading Systems 385

Because the ADX line is on a scale from 0 to 100, the trend
trader could simply trade those markets with the highest trend
ratings. Nontrending systems (oscillators, for example) could be
utilized on markets with low directional movement.

Directional Movement can be used either as a system on its
own or as a filter on the Parabolic or any other trend-following
system. Two lines are generated in the DMI study, +DI and -DI.
The first line measures positive (upward) movement and the sec-
ond number, negative (downward) movement). Figure 15.6 shows
the two lines. The darker line is + DI and the lighter line -DI. A
buy signal is given when the +DI line crosses over the - DI line
and a sell signal when it crosses below the — DI line.
