
42

the development sample, however, may turn out to be a dreadful solution for the
later sample on which genuine trades will be taken. Failure ensues, not because
optimization has found a bad solution, but because it has found a good solution to
the wrong problem!
Optimization on inadequate samples is also good at spawning solutions that
represent only mathematical artifact. As the number of data points declines to the
number of free (adjustable) parameters, most models (trading, regression, or otherwise) will attain a perfect tit to even random data. The principle involved is the
same one responsible for the fact that a line, which is a two-parameter model, can
always be drawn through any two distinct points, but cannot always be made to
intersect three arbitrary points. In statistics, this is known as the degrees-of-freedom
issue; there are as many degrees of freedom as there are data points beyond that
which can be fitted perfectly for purely mathematical reasons. Even when there are
enough data points to avoid a totally artifact-determined solution, some part of the
model fitness obtained through optimization will be of an artifact-determined
nature, a by-product of the process.
For multiple regression models, a formula is available that can be used to
estimate how much “shrinkage” would occur in the multiple correlation coefficient (a measure of model fitness) if the artifact-determined component were
removed. The shrinkage correction formula, which shows the relationship
between the number of parameters (regression coefficients) being optimized, sample size, and decreased levels of apparent fitness (correlation) in tests on new samples, is shown below in FORTRAN-style notation:

In this equation, N represents the number of data points, P the number of model
parameters, R the multiple correlation coefficient determined for the sample by the
regression (optimization) procedure, and RC the shrinkage-corrected multiple correlation coefficient. The inverse formula, one that estimates the optimizationinflated correlation (R) given the true correlation (RfJ existing in the population
from which the data were sampled, appears below:

These formulas, although legitimate only for linear regression, are not bad
for estimating how well a fully trained neural network model-which is nothing
more than a particular kind of nonhnezu regression-will generalize. When working with neural networks, let P represent the total number of connection weights
in the model. In addition, make sure that simple correlations are used when working with these formulas; if a neural network or regression package reports the
squared multiple correlation, take the square root.

43

Large Parameter Sets
An excessive number of free parameters or rules will impact an optimization effort
in a manner similar to an insufficient number of data points. As the number of elements undergoing optimization rises, a model’s ability to capitalize on idiosyncrasies in the development sample increases along with the proportion of the
model’s fitness that can be attributed to mathematical artifact. The result of optimizing a large number of variables-whether rules, parameters, or both-will be
a model that performs well on the development data, but poorly on out-of-sample
test data and in actual trading.
It is not the absolute number of free parameters that should be of concern,
but the number of parameters relative to the number of data points. The shrinkage
formula discussed in the context of small samples is also heuristically relevant
here: It illustrates how the relationship between the number of data points and the
number of parameters affects the outcome. When there are too many parameters,
given the number of data points, mathematical artifacts and capitalization on
chance (curve-fitting, in the bad sense) become reasons for failure.
No Verification
One of the better ways to get into trouble is by failing to verify model performance
using out-of-sample tests or inferential statistics. Without such tests, the spurious
solutions resulting from small samples and large parameter sets, not to mention
other less obvious causes, will go undetected. The trading system that appears to
be ideal on the development sample will be put “on-line,” and devastating losses
will follow. Developing systems without subjecting them to out-of-sample and statistical tests is like flying blind, without a safety belt, in an uninspected aircraft.
HOW TO SUCCEED WITH OPTIMIZATION
Four steps can be taken to avoid failure and increase the odds of achieving successful optimization. As a first step, optimize on the largest possible representative
sample and make sure many simulated trades are available for analysis. The second step is to keep the number of free parameters or rules small, especially in relation to sample size. A third step involves running tests on out-of-sample data, that
is, data not used or even seen during the optimization process. As a fourth and final
step, it may be worthwhile to statistically assess the results.
Large, Representative Samples
As suggested earlier, failure is often a consequence of presenting an optimizer with
the wrong problem to solve. Conversely, success is likely when the optimizer is

44

presented with the right problem. The conclusion is that trading models should be
optimized on data from the near future, the data that will actually be traded; do that
and watch the profits roll in. The catch is where to find tomorrow’s data today.
Since the future has not yet happened, it is impossible to present the optimizer with precisely the problem that needs to be solved. Consequently, it is necessary to attempt the next-best alternative: to present the optimizer with a broader
problem, the solution to which should be as applicable as possible to the actual,
but impossible-to-solve, problem. One way to accomplish this is with a data sample that, even though not drawn from the future, embodies many characteristics
that might appear in future samples. Such a data sample should include bull and
bear markets, trending and nontrending periods, and even crashes. In addition, the
data in the sample should be as recent as possible so that it will reflect current patterns of market behavior. This is what is meant by a representative sample.
As well as representative, the sample should be large. Large samples make it
harder for optimizers to uncover spurious or artifact-determined solutions.
Shrinkage, the expected decline in performance on unoptimized data, is reduced
when large samples are employed in the optimization process.
Sometimes, however, a trade-off must be made between the sample’s size
and the extent to which it is representative. As one goes farther back in history to
bolster a sample, the data may become less representative of current market conditions. In some instances, there is a clear transition point beyond which the data
become much less representative: For example, the S&P 500 futures began trading in 1983, effecting a structural change in the general market. Trade-offs become
much less of an issue when working with intraday data on short time frames,
where tens of thousands or even hundreds of thousands of bars of data can be gathered without going back beyond the recent past.
Finally, when running simulations and optimizations, pay attention to the
number of trades a system takes. Like large data samples, it is highly desirable that
simulations and tests involve numerous trades. Chance or artifact can easily be
responsible for any profits produced by a system that takes only a few trades,
regardless of the number of data points used in the test!
Few Rules and Parameters
To achieve success, limit the number of free rules and parameters, especially when
working with small data samples. For a given sample size, the fewer the rules or
parameters to optimize, the greater the likelihood that a trading system will maintain its performance in out-of-sample tests and real-time trading. Although several dozen parameters may be acceptable when working with several thousand
trades taken on 100,000 l-minute bars (about 1 year for the S&P 500 futures),
even two or three parameters may be excessive when developing a system using a
few years of end-of-day data. If a particular model requires many parameters, then

significant effort should be put into assembling a mammoth sample (the legendary
Gann supposedly went back over 1,000 years in his study of wheat prices). An
alternative that sometimes works is optimizing a trading model on a whole portfolio, using the same rules and parameters across all markets-a technique used
extensively in this book.
Verification

of

Results

After optimizing the rules and parameters of a trading system to obtain good
behavior on the development or in-sample data, but before risking any real money,
it is essential to verify the system’s performance in some manner. Verification of
system performance is important because it gives the trader a chance to veto faime and embrace success: Systems that fail the test of verification can be discarded, ones that pass can be traded with confidence. Verification is the single most
critical step on the road to success with optimization or, in fact, with any other
method of discovering a trading model that really works.
To ensure success, verify any trading solution using out-of-sample tests or
inferential statistics, preferably both. Discard any solution that fails to be profitable
in an out-of-sample test: It is likely to fail again when the rubber hits the road.
Compute inferential statistics on all tests, both in-sample and out-of-sample. These
statistics reveal the probability that the performance observed in a sample reflects
something real that will hold up in other samples and in real-time trading. Inferential
statistics work by making probability inferences based on the distribution of profitability in a system’s trades or returns. Be sure to use statistics that are corrected for
multiple tests when analyzing in-sample optimization results. Out-of-sample tests
should be analyzed with standard, uncorrected statistics. Such statistics appear in
some of the performance reports that are displayed in the chapter on simulators. The
use of statistics to evaluate trading systems is covered in depth in the following chapter. Develop a working knowledge of statistics; it will make you a better trader.
Some suggest checking a model for sensitivity to small changes in parameter values. A model highly tolerant of such changes is more “robust” than a model
not as tolerant, it is said. Do not pay too much attention to these claims. In truth,
parameter tolerance cannot be relied upon as a gauge of model robustness. Many
extremely robust models are highly sensitive to the values of certain parameters.
The only true arbiters of system robustness are statistical and, especially, out-ofsample tests.
ALTERNATIVES

TO

TRADITIONAL

OPTIMIZATION

There are two major alternatives to traditional optimization: walk-forward optimization and self-adaptive systems. Both of these techniques have the advantage
that any tests carried out are, from start to finish, effectively out-of-sample.

46

Examine the performance data, run some inferential statistics, plot the equity
curve, and the system is ready to be traded. Everything is clean and mathematically unimpeachable. Corrections for shrinkage or multiple tests, worries over
excessive curve-fitting, and many of the other concerns that plague traditional
optimization methodologies can be forgotten. Moreover, with today’s modem
computer technology, walk-forward and self-adaptive models are practical and not
even difficult to implement.
The principle behind walk-forward optimization (also known as walk-forward testing) is to emulate the steps involved in actually trading a system that
requires periodic optimization. It works like this: Optimize the system on the data
points 1 through M. Then simulate trading on data points M + I through M + K.
Reoptimize the system on data points K + 1 through K + M. Then simulate trading on points (K + M) + 1 through (K + M) + K. Advance through the data series
in this fashion until no more data points are left to analyze. As should be evident,
the system is optimized on a sample of historical data and then traded. After some
period of time, the system is reoptimized and trading is resumed. The sequence of
events guarantees that the data on which trades take place is always in the future
relative to the optimization process; all trades occur on what is, essentially, out-ofsample data. In walk-forward testing, M is the look-back or optimization window
and K the reoptimization interval.
Self-adaptive systems work in a similar manner, except that the optimization
or adaptive process is part of the system, rather than the test environment. As each
bar or data point comes along, a self-adaptive system updates its internal state (its
parameters or rules) and then makes decisions concerning actions required on the
next bar or data point. When the next bar arrives, the decided-upon actions are carried out and the process repeats. Internal updates, which are how the system learns
about or adapts to the market, need not occur on every single bar. They can be performed at fixed intervals or whenever deemed necessary by the model.
The trader planning to work with self-adapting systems will need a powerful, component-based development platform that employs a strong language, such
as Cf f, Object Pascal, or Visual Basic, and that provides good access to thirdparty libraries and software components. Components are designed to be incorporated into user-written software, including the special-purpose software that
constitutes an adaptive system. The more components that are available, the less
work there is to do. At the very least, a trader venturing into self-adaptive systems
should have at hand genetic optimizer and trading simulator components that can
be easily embedded within a trading model. Adaptive systems will be demonstrated in later chapters, showing how this technique works in practice.
There is no doubt that walk-forward optimization and adaptive systems will
become more popular over time as the markets become more efficient and difficult to trade, and as commercial software packages become available that place
these techniques within reach of the average trader.

CHAPTER 3

optimizers and OQtimizatio”

47

OPTIMIZER TOOLS AND INFORMATION
Aerodynamics, electronics, chemistry, biochemistry, planning, and business are
just a few of the fields in which optimization plays a role. Because optimization is
of interest to so many problem-solving areas, research goes on everywhere, information is abundant, and optimization tools proliferate. Where can this information
be found? What tools and products are available?
Brute force optimizers are usually buried in software packages aimed primarily at tasks other than optimization; they are usually not available on their own.
In the world of trading, products like TradeStation and SuperCharts from Omega
Research (800-292.3453),
Excalibur from Futures Truth (828-697-0273), and
MetaStock from Equis International (800-882-3040) have built-in brute force optimizers. If you write your own software, brute force optimization is so trivial to
implement using in-line progranuning code that the use of special libraries or
components is superfluous. Products and code able to carry out brute force optimization may also serve well for user-guided optimization.
Although sometimes appearing as built-in tools in specialized programs,
genetic optimizers are more often distributed in the form of class libraries or software components, add-ons to various application packages, or stand-alone research
instruments. As an example of a class library written with the component paradigm
in mind, consider OptEvolve, the C+ + genetic optimizer from Scientific Consultant
Services (516-696-3333): This general-purpose genetic optimizer implements several algorithms, including differential evolution, and is sold in the form of highly
portable C+ + code that can be used in UNIXiLINUX, DOS, and Windows environments. TS-Evolve, available from Ruggiero Associates (800-21 l-9785) gives
users of TradeStation the ability to perform full-blown genetic optimizations. The
Evolver, which can be purchased from Palisade Corporation (800.432.7475) is a
general-purpose genetic optimizer for Microsoft’s Excel spreadsheet; it comes with
a dynamic link library (DLL) that can provide genetic optimization services to user
programs written in any language able to call DLL functions. GENESIS, a standalone instrument aimed at the research community, was written by John Grefenstette
of the Naval Research Laboratory; the product is available in the form of generic C
source code. While genetic optimizers can occasionally be found in modeling tools
for chemists and in other specialized products, they do not yet form a native part of
popular software packages designed for traders.
Information about genetic optimization is readily available. Genetic algorithms are discussed in many books, magazines, and journals and on Internet
newsgroups. A good overview of the field of genetic optimization can be found in
the Handbook of Generic Algorithms (Davis, 1991). Price and Storm (1997)
described an algorithm for “differential evolution,” which has been shown to be an
exceptionally powerful technique for optimization problems involving real-valued
parameters. Genetic algorithms are currently the focus of many academic journals

and conference proceedings. Lively discussions on all aspects of genetic optimization take place in several Internet newsgroups of which compaigenetic is the
most noteworthy.
A basic exposition of simulated annealing can be found in Numericnl
Recipes in C (Press et al., 1992), as can C functions implementing optimizers for
both combinatorial and real-valued problems. Neural, Novel & Hybrid Algorithms
for Time Series Prediction (Masters, 1995) also discusses annealing-based optimization and contains relevant C+ + code on the included CD-ROM. Like genetic optimization, simulated annealing is the focus of many research studies,
conference presentations, journal articles, and Internet newsgroup discussions.
Algorithms and code for conjugate gradient and variable metric optimization, two fairly sophisticated analytic methods, can be found in Numerical Recipes
in C (Press et al., 1992) and Numerical Recipes (Press et al., 1986). Masters (1995)
provides an assortment of analytic optimization procedures in C+ + (on the CDROM that comes with his book), as well as a good discussion of the subject.
Additional procedures for analytic optimization are available in the IMSL and the
NAG library (from Visual Numerics, Inc., and Numerical Algorithms Group,
respectively) and in the optimization toolbox for MATLAB (a general-purpose
mathematical package from The MathWorks, 508-647-7000, that has gamed popularity in the financial engineering community). Finally, Microsoft’s Excel spreadsheet contains a built-in analytic optimizer-the Solver-that employs conjugate
gradient or Newtonian methods.
As a source of general information about optimization applied to trading system development, consult Design, Testing and Optimization qf Trading Systems by
Robert Pardo (1992). Among other things, this book shows the reader how to optimize profitably, how to avoid undesirable curve-fitting, and how to carry out walkforward tests.

WHICH OPTIMIZER IS FOR YOU?
At the very least, you should have available an optimizer that is designed to make
both brute force and user-guided optimization easy to carry out. Such an optimizer is already at hand if you use either TradeStation or Excalibur for system development tasks. On the other hand, if you develop your systems in Excel, Visual
Basic, C+ +, or Delphi, you will have to create your own brute force optimizer.
As demonstrated earlier, a brute force optimizer is simple to implement. For many
problems, brute force or user-guided optimization is the best approach.
If your system development efforts require something beyond brute force, a
genetic optimizer is a great second choice. Armed with both brute force and genetic optimizers, you will be able to solve virtually any problem imaginable. In our
own efforts, we hardly ever reach for any other kind of optimization tool!
TradeStation users will probably want TS-Evolve from Ruggiero Associates. The

Evolver product from Palisade Corporation is a good choice for Excel and Visual
Basic users. If you develop systems in C+ + or Delphi, select the C+ + Genetic
Optimizer from Scientific Consultant Services, Inc. A genetic optimizer is the
Swiss Army knife of the optimizer world: Even problems more efficiently solved
using such other techniques as analytic optimization will yield, albeit more slowly,
to a good genetic optimizer.
Finally, if you want to explore analytic optimization or simulated annealing,
we suggest Numerical Recipes in C (Press et al., 1992) and Masters (1995) as
good sources of both information and code. Excel users can try out the built-in
Solver tool.

C H A P T E R

4

Statistics

M any trading system developers have little familiarity with inferential statistics.
This is a rather perplexing state of affairs since statistics are essential to assessing
the behavior of trading systems. How, for example, can one judge whether an
apparent edge in the trades produced by a system is real or an artifact of sampling
or chance? Think of it-the next sample may not merely be another test, but an
actual trading exercise. If the system’s “edge” was due to chance, trading capital
could quickly be depleted. Consider optimization: Has the system been tweaked
into great profitability, or has the developer only succeeded in the nasty art of
curve-fitting? We have encountered many system developers who refuse to use
any optimization strategy whatsoever because of their irrational fear of curve-fitting, not knowing that the right statistics can help detect such phenomena. In short,
inferential statistics can help a trader evaluate the likelihood that a system is capturing a real inefficiency and will perform as profitably in the future as it has in
the past. In this book, we have presented the results of statistical analyses whenever doing so seemed useful and appropriate.
Among the kinds of inferential statistics that are most useful to traders are
t-tests, correlational statistics, and such nonparametric statistics as the runs test.
T-rests are useful for determining the probability that the mean or sum of any
series of independent values (derived from a sampling process) is greater or less
than some other such mean, is a fixed number, or falls within a certain band. For
example, t-tests can reveal the probability that the total profits from a series of
trades, each with its individual profitAoss figure, could be greater than some threshold as a result of chance or sampling. These tests are also useful for evaluating sanpies of returns, e.g., the daily or monthly returns of a portfolio over a period of
years. Finally, t-tests can help to set the boundaries of likely future performance
51
