
Alternative Views and Forecastability of Returns
These conclusions came against a backdrop of public interest at the time
in speculative bubbles encouraged by the strong bull market in the United
3 Fama (1964: table 10 and p. 70).

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

243

States: real stock prices more than quadrupled in the sixteen years from 1948
to 1964. John Kenneth Galbraith’s best-selling 1954 book The Great Crash:
1929 vividly described the follies of the boom of the 1920s and subsequent
collapse, concluding that “the chances for a recurrence of a speculative orgy
are rather good.”4
His book was followed up by another popular work, Charles Poor
Kindleberger’s Manias, Panics and Crashes (1978), which used a similar method,
providing an account of human events laced with descriptions of human
foolishness. Neither author, writing many years before the behavioral finance
revolution, made much use of academic research in psychology or sociology,
and so their work came across to some as insubstantial. While both Galbraith
and Kindleberger were respected academics, and the stories in their books
were often compelling, many felt that their books did not have the scientific
credibility of the careful data analysis that was widely taken to support market
efficiency—though they were indeed provocative.
Ultimately, reconciling the apparently conflicting views is a matter of constructing the right statistical tests. It turns out that the apparently impressive
evidence for market efficiency was not unimpeachable.

Expected Present Value Models and Excess Volatility
The simplest version of the efficient markets model—which maintains that
stock price movements can be interpreted entirely as reflecting information
about future payouts of dividends, and hence that there is never a good or a
bad time to enter the market—has, ever since the efficient markets revolution
began, maintained a powerful hold on scholarly imaginations as a worthy
approximation to more complex models. This form sets price equal to the
expectation, conditional on publicly available information at the time of the
present value, of future dividends, discounted at a constant rate through time:
3

Dt + k

k =0

(1 + r)k +1

Pt = E t /

.

(1)

One way to test this efficient markets model is to regress the return
between t and t + 1, t = 1, . . . , n onto information variables known at time
t, It , t = 1, . . . , n. Often, these tests can be described approximately as tests
of the “random walk hypothesis,” that price changes are purely random and
unforecastable. One accepts the efficient markets model if the coefficients of
the information variables used to forecast future returns or price changes are
not significantly different from zero. Moreover, even if the model is rejected,
4 Galbraith (1954: 194).

244

APPENDIX

if the predicted proportion of variance in returns is small, one concludes that
the model is a good approximation to reality.
These tests, and various analogues of them, are the kinds of tests of market efficiency that abounded in the literature. But the power of such tests of
perpetual unforecastability of returns against an alternative that represents
the world as driven entirely by temporary fads and fashions—with no funda­
mental reason for any change in prices—can be very low, since plausible
alternatives of this kind also imply that only a tiny fraction of month-to-month
returns is forecastable (Shiller 1984, 1989; ­Summers 1986).
Many tests of market efficiency use daily observations of prices, and because
the observations come so frequently, there may be thousands of observations,
even if the span of the data is only a few decades. There is a tendency for many
people to think that hundreds of observations must be a lot of data, but it is
not necessarily a lot of data from the standpoint of distinguishing an efficient
markets model from a relevant alternative.
We might, for example, be trying to determine whether some price time
series data is a random walk as against the alternative of a continuous-time
first-order autoregressive process.5 In the former, whether prices are too high
or too low has no ability to predict future changes. In the latter, when prices
are too high relative to the mean, they should tend eventually to fall (a sort of
bursting of the bubble, though not a sudden catastrophic one). But tests may
have very little power to distinguish the two models, if the autoregressive
parameter is close enough to one, even with a large number of observations,
even with day-to-day or minute-to-minute observations. With a fixed span of
data, increasing the frequency of observation, even to the limit of continuous
observation, does not bring power to one (Shiller and Perron 1985, Phillips
and Perron 1988).
The Scientific Background for the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economics (Economic
Sciences Prize Committee of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2013)
emphasized the results of this year’s laureates as confirming that there is
better forecastability (in terms of R-squared) of speculative asset returns for
longer time horizons. This accords with long-standing advice that investors
should be patient, that they cannot expect to see solid returns over short time
intervals. But this is just the opposite of what one would expect in weather
forecasting, where experts can forecast tomorrow’s temperature fairly well
but certainly cannot forecast accurately a year into the future.
It is easy to see why short-term forecastability of price changes in investable assets should in some sense be unlikely: if investment returns were
substantially forecastable from day to day, it would be too easy to get rich in
5 In continuous time, we are speaking of distinguishing a Wiener process from an OrnsteinUhlenbeck process.

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

245

a year or so by trading on these forecasts, and we know it cannot be easy to
make a lot of money trading. This notion was formalized in a continuous-time
framework by Sims (1984), who defined “instantaneous unpredictability” of a
speculative asset price by the requirement that the R-squared of the prediction
from time t to time t + s goes to zero as s goes to zero. He showed under certain regularity conditions that if prices are not instantaneously unpredictable,
then simple rapid-trading schemes could achieve unbounded profits, which
of course cannot match reality.
Taking into account these primal reasons to doubt that returns are forecastable over short horizons, we cannot find the low R-squared in many
tests of short-run market efficiency either surprising or interesting. The
tests tell us only the obvious, and do not tell us about the rationality of
markets beyond the fact that people are not missing easy opportunities to
get rich very fast.
I proposed that an alternative class of tests, based on the estimated volatility of returns—tests for “excess ­volatility”—would have more power against
the important alternatives to efficient markets theory: first for the bond
market, rejecting the expectations model of the term structure of interest
rates with U.S. and UK data (Shiller 1979), and then rejecting the simplest
efficient markets model for the U.S. stock market (Shiller 1981a).6 Independent
work by Kenneth Singleton (1980) used a variance bounds test to reject the
expectations model of the term structure of interest rates with U.S. data, and
Stephen LeRoy and Richard Porter (1981) rejected the simple efficient markets
theory for the U.S. stock market. Variance bounds tests were also used to test
consumption-­discount-based efficient markets models (Shiller 1982, Hansen
and Jagannathan 1991). Efficient markets models also imply bounds on the
covariance between asset prices (Beltratti and Shiller 1993).
These tests may be more powerful than regression tests of the basic efficient
markets notions against important alternatives. It is true that under the conventional assumptions of the regression model, the usual t-test for the coefficient
of a forecasting variable in a regression with excess return as the dependent
variable has well-known optimality properties.7 But testing market efficiency
by regressing excess returns on information variables makes no use of the
terminal condition that requires that all movements in prices need to be justified by information about subsequent movements in fundamentals. I showed
(1981b) that if we broaden the maintained hypothesis for this condition, then
6 The volatility tests were partly inspired by the work Jeremy Siegel and I did (Shiller and
Siegel 1977) involving calculation of ex post rational price series.
7 Regression tests have pitfalls as well, as when ratios involving price are used in regressions
explaining future change in price, creating an endogenous variables problem; see Campbell
and Shiller (1989).

246

APPENDIX

a regression test is not optimal. In fact, under certain extreme assumptions
about data alignment, a simple variance ratio test, instead of a regression test,
may be uniformly most powerful.8
Another kind of test of market efficiency is the event study, which is an
analysis of the effects of a specified event (such as a stock split) on the price of
an asset in the days before and after the event, taking many different examples
of a kind of event and showing the average price performance. It is analogous
to a test of the significance of coefficients in a regression of a panel of time
series of daily returns of many stocks on a dummy variable representing the
day of a certain kind of event, and on dummies representing the days after
the event became public. The test of market efficiency is a test for significance
of the coefficients of the dummies corresponding to days after the event. The
first event study in the academic literature has been taken to be Dolley (1933),
but, as the Scientific Background for the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economics notes,
it was not until the impressive 1969 paper by Eugene Fama, Lawrence Fisher,
Michael Jensen, and Richard Roll that it was demonstrated that, conditioning
on an event, one tends to see a lack of any consistent and important further
price response after the event is public knowledge. Dolley, in his 1933 article,
was immersed in all the details of stock splits and of course did not mention
efficient markets theory. Fama, Fisher, Jensen, and Roll instead showed evidence for this newly developed and expanded theory, evidence that could be
seen visually impressively in a plot of stock returns before and after the event.
But, again, the efficient markets tests, which are essentially the same as
regression tests, do not have the power to tell us whether there are also bubbles
affecting prices, or even whether the major component of stock price movements comes from bubbles.
The variance bounds test rejections of market efficiency could not be
dismissed as correct but unimportant, as were the inefficiencies that the
efficient markets literature had discovered, for they suggested that most of
the variability of the aggregate stock market was not explainable as related
to information about future fundamentals.
Critics of the variance bounds tests became abundant, and I endeavored
at first to answer some of them, responding to Marsh and Merton (1986) and
Kleidon (1986) (Shiller 1986, 1988). But the volume of the literature expanded
beyond my abilities to respond, and significantly changed its direction as well.
Sometimes the disagreements turned abstract and seemed to raise deep issues

8 John Cochrane, in his review of my volatility tests (1991, 1992), stressed a sense in which
there is an equivalence of volatility tests and regression tests. But this is about the equivalence
of null hypotheses, not equivalence of test power. Cochrane later followed this up with a
paper (2007) recognizing the importance of the terminal condition; see also Lewellen (2004)
and Campbell and Yogo (2006).

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

247

about epistemology or the philosophy of logic.9 I must leave the outcome of
this debate to a broader professional consensus.
I collected my papers on the subject and summarized the literatures in my
book Market Volatility (1989), at which point I largely abandoned my econometric work on excess volatility. Others continued this line of work, and much
more has happened since.

Visual Portrayals of Excess Volatility
and of the Stock Market as Forecaster
Just as event studies visually convinced many readers of some merits of efficient markets theory by presenting event study plots, showing stock prices
before and after an event, so too other simple plots seem to have been convincing, in a different way, that stock markets are really not so efficient.
Figure A.1 is an updated version of one that I showed in my 1981a paper, a
third of a century ago, of the real level of the stock market since 1871, as well as
the behavior through time of the actual present value of future real dividends
discounted at a constant rate. The real stock price series is one published by
Standard & Poor’s, called the S&P Composite (after 1957 the S&P 500), deflated
by the U.S. Consumer Price Index.
The earlier version of this plot turned out to be the centerpiece of that paper,
judging from the attention that it drew. Sometimes a simple plot seems to be
more disturbing than a formal analysis. Looking at the data is like seeing a
photojournalist’s account of a historical event rather than reading a chronology: it is more immediate and invites intuitive comparisons.
To produce this figure, the present value of dividends for each date 1871–
2013 was computed from the actual subsequent real dividends using a constant
real discount rate r = 7.6% per year, equal to the historical average real return
on the market since 1871. For this figure, I was able to make use of the actual
dividends, as published by Standard & Poor’s since 1926, and extended back
to 1871 by Alfred Cowles (1939) as I described in my book (1989). We did not
know dividends after 1979 when I published the original version of this figure,
and at this writing we do not know dividends after 2013.
For this lecture, in 2013, as I did in 1981, I made some simple assumptions
about the as-yet-unseen future dividends, beyond 2013. This time I employed
a conventional dividend discount model, the Gordon Model, using the most
recent 2013 S&P 500 real dividend as a base for forecasts of dividends after
2013, showing two alternative assumptions about dividends after 2013. In
one, I assumed that real dividends will grow forever from the last observed
dividend, in 2013, at the same average growth rate as over the most recent
9 Some examples include Flavin (1983), Buiter (1987), and Cochrane (1991).

248

APPENDIX

5000

Price: P and P*

Data used in original 1981 publication

Perfect foresight price P*
endpoint based on last
ten years’ dividend growth

Actual stock price P
500

Perfect foresight price P*
endpoint based on last
thirty years’ dividend growth

50
1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

2040

Figure A.1
Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index with Two Present Values
with Constant Discount Rate of Subsequent Real Dividends
Accruing to the Index, 1871–2013
The two present values differ in their assumption about dividend growth
after 2013.

ten years, 5.1% per year, which gives a 2013 value of 1,292 for P *. In another,
the calculations are the same, but the growth rate of dividends after 2013 is
taken as the geometric average growth rate over the last thirty years, 2.5% a
year. This gives a 2013 value of 669 for P *. Both of these may be contrasted
with real market values of the S&P 500 index over the year 2013 ranging from
1,494 to 1,802.10
Should we take the latest ten years’ real dividend growth as a guide to
the future, rather than the last thirty years or some other interval? The tenyear data are more recent, but ten years is a short time historically speaking,
10 Jeremy Siegel (2005, 2008) has made the point that since the dividend payout rate for earnings

has been trending down since World War II, dividend growth should be higher in the future
than it was. If companies reinvest earnings rather than pay them out, they should have more
dividends to pay in the future. The validity of this theory is not without doubters. Arnott
and Asness (2003) point out that perhaps lower dividend payouts may reflect managers’
decisions in the face of evidence they have that earnings growth will be lower.

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

249

and the years 2003 to 2013 were unusual, starting with the aftermath of the
2001 recession, and encompassing the biggest financial crisis, and government stimulus packages, since the Great Depression. Reasonable people will
certainly find reasons to differ. Worse than that, there is no objective way
to forecast dividends out for decades, which is why I showed both here, as
a crude indication of uncertainty today about future dividends, and why it
is hard to imagine that the market somehow “knows” the correct optimal
forecast.
The point of showing the two different P * series is that, clearly, there is
substantial uncertainty about the present value of dividends after 2013, but
there is not so much variability from year to year, as seen today, about the
present value of subsequent dividends for earlier years. For earlier years,
say before 1980, 2013 is so far in the future, and is discounted so heavily,
that over a wide range of possible 2013 dividend values there is not much
difference in P *.
The striking fact is that by either assumption the present value of dividends
(on the log scale used in the figure) looks pretty much like a steady expo­
nential growth line, while the stock market oscillates a great deal around it.
I asked this question in 1981: If, as efficient markets theory asserts, the actual
price is the optimal forecast as of any date of the present value as of that date,
why is the stock market so volatile?
Different people have different reactions to this figure, but a common
response is that the efficient markets model Pt = E t (P t*) looks implausible here.
Why is price jumping around so much if the value it is tracking is just such a
simple trend? It is not that Pt should always look smoother through time than
P t*, for it is consistent with the model that there can be sudden shifts in price
when there is important new information about subtle changes in trend. But
it would seem that important new information should emerge only rarely,
given the smooth nature of dividends.
To see the problem for efficient markets here, imagine that the series labeled
P t* is not price but air temperature, and that Pt is a meteorologist’s forecast
of the temperature for that day t. We might be inclined to label this weather
forecaster as insane. Even though in the stock market there isn’t immediate
feedback to forecasters about forecast errors, still they should avoid adjusting
forecasts up and down frequently, unless there is actual new information, and
clearly there wasn’t, not information about something that actually happened
in stock market history.
One very basic thing that this figure reveals is that the model that people
essentially know the future, a model that is often suggested as an approximation, is wildly wrong in all periods. Sometimes people have suggested that
the low stock prices seen in the Great Depression of the 1930s were justified
because people rationally saw the damage to future real dividends caused

250

APPENDIX

by the Depression. But, in fact, at the worst of the stock market depression, in
1932, subsequent dividends just weren’t low enough for long enough to depress
* by much at all. Nothing has ever deflected real dividends for very long
P 1932
from a long-run growth trend of a couple percent a year.
In my original paper (1981a), I detrended the data—as is shown in a
reproduction of that plot in the Scientific Background document, posted
on the Nobel Foundation website—thinking that it is reasonable to assume
that people know the trend. Under that assumption, the efficient markets
model implies that the variance around trend should be less for P than for
P *, which is plainly not the case in Figure A.1. But many critics of my paper
reacted negatively to the assumption that the trend is essentially known.
Generally, these criticisms held that there was always some reason to think
that the path of dividends might eventually depart markedly from its historical
growth path, that investors were evaluating constant new information about
that possibility, and that they were rational to do so even if the dividend
growth path never deviated far for long from a trend. This assumes that all the
fluctuations result from genuine information about those “black swan” outlier
events that might have happened during a period of more than a century but
just didn’t happen. Some of the criticism had to do with the possibility that
the dividend series might have a unit root, and so the apparent smooth trend
was just a chance outcome, one that might not be continued into the future.11
The uncertainty about the present value of dividends after 2013 as shown
in Figure A.1 does highlight an important problem. At every point in history
there must have been some such uncertainty about future dividends. There
are always factors or prominent theories that creative minds can invoke that
would suggest a higher or lower rate of growth of dividends in the future.
For example, can we tell an efficient markets story about why the stock
market was so low in the Great Depression? The present value of actual
future dividends was not particularly low in the Depression, but maybe
people thought that they would be low, given the extant theories of the time.
Or maybe they thought that the government would eventually nationalize
the stock market without compensation. One might say that it would not be
manifestly irrational, not crazy, to believe such stories. But why, then, do these
stories come and go through time, causing the fluctuations in the market?
11 Unit root problems pose potentially serious problems for financial econometrics; see
Campbell and Shiller (1987, 1988a); Shiller and Beltratti (1992); Torous, Valkanov, and Yan
(2004); Campbell and Yogo (2006); and Cochrane (2007). Campbell and I (1988c) proposed
log-differencing to recast excess volatility tests in more robust terms. Fama and French (1988)
and Poterba and Summers (1988) showed tests of simple efficient markets models based on
ratios of variance of returns of different horizons. West (1988) showed an inequality in terms
of variances of innovations in price and present values, which strengthened the evidence for
excess volatility.
