
Table 1.1 Berkshire’s Corporate Performance versus the S&P 500
Annual Percentage Change

Year

In Per-Share
Book Value of
Berkshire
(1)

In S&P 500
with Dividends
Included
(2)

Relative
Results
(1)–(2)

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981

23.8
20.3
11.0
19.0
16.2
12.0
16.4
21.7
4.7
5.5
21.9
59.3
31.9
24.0
35.7
19.3
31.4

10.0
(11.7)
30.9
11.0
(8.4)
3.9
14.6
18.9
(14.8)
(26.4)
37.2
23.6
(7.4)
6.4
18.2
32.3
(5.0)

13.8
32.0
(19.9)
8.0
24.6
8.1
1.8
2.8
19.5
31.9
(15.3)
35.7
39.3
17.6
17.5
(13.0)
36.4

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 2003 Annual Report.
Notes: Data are for calendar years with these exceptions: 1965 and 1966, year ended 9/30; 1967, 15 months
ended 12/31.
Starting in 1979, accounting rules required insurance companies to value the equity securities they hold
at market rather than at the lower of cost or market, which was previusly the requirement. In this table, Berkshire’s results through 1978 have been restated to conform to the changed rules. In all other respects, the results are calculated using the numbers originally reported.
The S&P 500 numbers are pre-tax whereas the Berkshire numbers are after-tax. If a corporation such as
Berkshire were simply to have owned the S&P 500 and accrued the appropriate taxes, its results would have
lagged the S&P 500 in years when that index showed a positive return, but would have exceeded the S&P in
years when the index showed a negative return. Over the years, the tax costs would have caused the aggregate lag to be substantial.

(continued)

5

Table 1.1 Continued
Annual Percentage Change

Year

In Per-Share
Book Value of
Berkshire
(1)

In S&P 500
with Dividends
Included
(2)

Relative
Results
(1)–(2)

1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

40.0
32.3
13.6
48.2
26.1
19.5
20.1
44.4
7.4
39.6
20.3
14.3
13.9
43.1
31.8
34.1
48.3
.5
6.5
(6.2)
10.0
21.0

21.4
22.4
6.1
31.6
18.6
5.1
16.6
31.7
(3.1)
30.5
7.6
10.1
1.3
37.6
23.0
33.4
28.6
21.0
(9.1)
(11.9)
(22.1)
28.7

18.6
9.9
7.5
16.6
7.5
14.4
3.5
12.7
10.5
9.1
12.7
4.2
12.6
5.5
8.8
.7
19.7
(20.5)
15.6
5.7
32.1
(7.7)

10.4

11.8

Average Annual Gain—
1965–2003
22.2
Overall Gain—
1964–2003
259,485

6

4,743

T h e W o r l d ’s G r e a t e s t I n v e s t o r

7

On a year-by-year basis, Berkshire’s returns have at times been
volatile; changes in the stock market and thus the underlying stocks that
Berkshire owns create wide swings in per share value (see Table 1.1).
To appreciate the volatility, compare the results for 1998 with 1999.
In 1998, Berkshire’s value increased more than 48 percent. Then, in
1999, Berkshire’s increase dropped to a paltry 0.5 percent, yet the S&P
500 increased 21 percent. Two factors were involved: Berkshire’s results
can be traced to poor return on consumer nondurables (Coca-Cola and
Gillette), while the S&P increase was fueled by the outstanding performance of technology stocks, which Berkshire does not own.
Speaking with the candor for which he is famous, Buffett admitted
in the 1999 annual report that “truly large superiorities over the [S&P]
index are a thing of the past.”3 He predicted, however, that over time
Berkshire’s performance would be “modestly” better than the S&P. And
for the next three years, this turned out to be the case. Then in 2003,
even though Berkshire had a terrific year—book value up 21 percent—
the S&P did even better.

B U F F E T T T O D AY
Over the most recent years, starting in the late 1990s, Buffett has been
less active in the stock market than he was in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Many people have noticed this lack of activity and have wondered
whether it signaled that the market had hit its top. Others have theorized that the lack of new major purchases of common stocks simply
means that the type of stocks Buffett likes to purchase are no longer
selling at attractive prices.
We know it is Buffett’s preference to “buy certainties at a discount.” “Certainties” are defined by the predictability of a company’s
economics. The more predicable a company’s economics, the more certainty we might have about its valuation. When we look down the list
of stocks that Buffett owns as well as the wholly owned companies inside Berkshire, we are struck by the high degree of predictability ref lected there. The “discount” part of the statement obviously refers to
the stock price.
Knowing that Buffett likes to buy highly predictable economics at
prices below the intrinsic value of the business, we can conclude that his

8

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

buyer’s strike ref lects the lack of choices in this arena. I am pretty sure
that if Coca-Cola, Gillette, or other similar businesses were today selling
at fifty cents on the dollar, Buffett would add more shares to Berkshire’s
portfolio.
We also know Buffett’s discipline of operating only within his “circle of competence.” Think of this circle of competence as the cumulative
history of your experience. If someone had successfully operated a certain
business within a certain industry for a decade or more, we would say
that person had achieved a high level of competence for the task at hand.
However, if someone else had only a few years’ experience operating a
new business, we could reasonably question that person’s level of competence. Perhaps in Buffett’s rational mind, the sum total of his business
experience in studying and operating the businesses in Berkshire’s portfolio sets the bar of competence so high that it would be difficult to
achieve a similar level of insight into a new industry.
So perhaps Buffett faces a dilemma. Within his circle of competence, the types of stocks he likes to purchase are not currently selling at
discounted prices. At the same time, outside his circle of competence,
faster-growing businesses are being born in new industries that have yet
to achieve the high level of economic certainty Buffett requires. If this
analysis is correct, it explains why there have been no new large buys of
common stocks in the past few years.
We would be foolish indeed to assume that because the menu of
stocks available for purchase has been reduced, Warren Buffett is left
without investment options. Certainly he has been active in the fixedincome market, including taking a significant position in high-yield
bonds in 2002. He is alert for the periodic arbitrage opportunity as well,
but considering the amount of capital Buffett needs to deploy to make
meaningful returns, the arbitrage markets are perhaps not as fruitful as
they once were.
But Berkshire Hathaway shareholders should not feel they are being
deprived of opportunities. Too often, shareholders forget one of the
most important owner-related business principles Buffett outlines each
year in the annual report. The fourth principle states, “Our preference
would be able to reach our goal [of maximizing Berkshire’s average annual rate of gain in intrinsic value] by directly owning a diversified
group of businesses that generate cash and consistently earn aboveaverage returns on capital. Our second choice is to own parts of similar

T h e W o r l d ’s G r e a t e s t I n v e s t o r

9

businesses attained primarily through the purchases of marketable common stocks.”
In Berkshire’s early years, owning common stocks made the most
sense economically. Now, as common stock prices have risen dramatically and the purchasing power of Berkshire’s retained earnings has
mushroomed, the strategy of buying whole businesses, which is Buffett’s
stated preference, has come to the forefront.
There is a personal factor as well. We know that Buffett greatly enjoys his relationships with his operating managers and takes a great deal
of pride in Berkshire’s collection of operating businesses. Conversely,
the angst he has endured by being a shareholder of publicly traded companies, with the issues of executive compensation and questionable
capital reinvestment strategies that accompany ownership, may make
being a shareholder less appealing for Buffett today than it used to be.
If the economics are not compelling, why would Buffett choose to endure the corporate governance fiascos associated with being a major
shareholder?
The only activity Buffett involves himself in with Berkshire’s operating businesses is setting executive compensation and allocating the profits. Inside Berkshire’s world, these decisions are highly rational. Outside
in the stock market, management decisions on executive compensation
and capital reallocation do not always ref lect rationality.
What does this mean for individual investors? Because Buffett is not
actively involved in the stock market, should they automatically pull
back as well? Buffett’s alternative strategy is to buy businesses outright,
an option that is out of reach for most investors. So how should they
proceed?
There appear to be two obvious choices. One is to make an investment in Berkshire Hathaway and so participate in the economics of
these outstanding businesses. The second choice is to take the Buffett
approach to investing, expand your circle of competence by studying
intently the business models of the companies participating in the New
Economy landscape, and march ahead.
I believe that the fundamental principles that have so long guided
Buffett’s decisions are uncompromised, and they still carry opportunities for careful investors to outperform the S&P 500. The purpose of
this book is to present those principles in a way that thoughtful investors can understand and use.

2
The Education of
Warren Buffett

V

ery few people can come close to Warren Buffett’s investment
record, and no one can top it. Through four decades of market
ups and downs, he has continued on a steady course with unmatched success. What he does is not f lashy, even at times very much
out of favor, and yet over and over, he has prevailed over others whose
exploits gave them temporary, f lash-in-the-pan stardom. He watches,
smiles, and continues on his way.
How did Buffett come to his investment philosophy? Who inf luenced his thinking, and how has he integrated their teachings into action? To put the question another way, how is it that this particular
genius turned out so differently?
Warren Buffett’s approach to investing is uniquely his own, yet it
rests on the bedrock of philosophies absorbed from four powerful figures: Benjamin Graham, Philip Fisher, John Burr Williams, and Charles
Munger. Together, they are responsible for Buffett’s financial education,
both formal and informal. The first three are educators in the classic
sense, and the last is Buffett’s partner, alter ego, and pal. All have had a
major inf luence on Buffett’s thinking; they have much to offer modernday investors as well.
11

12

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

BENJAMIN GRAHAM
Graham is considered the dean of financial analysis. He was awarded
that distinction because “before him there was no [financial analysis]
profession and after him they began to call it that.”1 Graham’s two most
celebrated works are Security Analysis, coauthored with David Dodd,
and originally published in 1934; and The Intelligent Investor, originally published in 1949.
Security Analysis appeared just a few years after the 1929 stock
market crash and in the depths of the nation’s worst depression. While
other academicians sought to explain this economic phenomenon,
Graham helped people regain their financial footing and proceed with a
profitable course of action.
Graham began his career on Wall Street as a messenger at the brokerage firm of Newburger, Henderson & Loeb, posting bond and stock
prices on a blackboard for $12 a week. From messenger, he rose to
writing research reports and soon was awarded a partnership in the
firm. By 1919, he was earning an annual salary of $600,000; he was
twenty-five years old.
In 1926, Graham formed an investment partnership with Jerome
Newman. It was this partnership that hired Buffett some thirty years
later. Graham-Newman survived the 1929 crash, the Great Depression,
World War II, and the Korean War before it dissolved in 1956.
From 1928 through 1956, while at Graham-Newman, Graham
taught night courses in finance at Columbia. Few people know that
Graham was financially ruined by the 1929 crash. For the second time in
his life—the first being when his father died, leaving the family financially unprotected—Graham set about rebuilding his fortune. The haven
of academia allowed him the opportunity for ref lection and reevaluation.
With the counsel of David Dodd, also a professor at Columbia, Graham
produced what became the classic treatise on conservative investing: Security Analysis. Between them, Graham and Dodd had over fifteen years
of investment experience. It took them four years to complete the book.
The essence of Security Analysis is that a well-chosen diversified
portfolio of common stocks, based on reasonable prices, can be a sound
investment. Step by careful step, Graham helps the investor see the logic
of his approach.

The Education of Warren Buffett

13

The first problem that Graham had to contend with was the lack of a
universal definition for investment that would distinguish it from speculation. Considering the complexities of the issue, Graham proposed his
own definition. “An investment operation is one which, upon thorough
analysis, promises safety of principal and a satisfactory return. Operations
not meeting these requirements are speculative.”2
What did he mean by “thorough analysis”? Just this: “the careful
study of available facts with the attempt to draw conclusions therefrom
based on established principles and sound logic.”3
The next part of Graham’s definition is critical: A true investment
must have two qualities—some degree of safety of principal and a satisfactory rate of return. Safety, he cautions, is not absolute; unusual or
improbable occurrences can put even a safe bond into default. Rather,
investors should look for something that would be considered safe from
loss under reasonable conditions.
Satisfactory return—the second necessity—includes not only income but also price appreciation. Graham notes that “satisfactory” is a
subjective term. Return can be any amount, however low, as long as the
investor acts with intelligence and adheres to the full definition of
investment.
Had it not been for the bond market’s poor performance, Graham’s
definition of investing might have been overlooked. But when, between
1929 and 1932, the Dow Jones Bond Average declined from 97.70 to
65.78, bonds could no longer be mindlessly labeled pure investments.
Like stocks, not only did bonds lose considerable value but many issuers
went bankrupt. What was needed, therefore, was a process that could
distinguish the investment characteristics of both stocks and bonds from
their speculative counterparts.
Graham reduced the concept of sound investing to a motto he
called the “margin of safety.” With this motto, he sought to unite all
securities, stocks, and bonds in a singular approach to investing.
In essence, a margin of safety exists when securities are selling—for
whatever reason—at less than their real value. The notion of buying
undervalued securities regardless of market levels was a novel idea in the
1930s and 1940s. Graham’s goal was to outline such a strategy.
In Graham’s view, establishing a margin-of-safety concept for bonds
was not too difficult. It wasn’t necessary, he said, to accurately determine

14

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

the company’s future income, but only to note the difference between
earnings and fixed charges. If that margin was large enough, the investor
would be protected from an unexpected decline in the company’s income. If, for example, an analyst reviewed the operating history of a
company and discovered that, on average, for the past five years the company was able to earn annually five times its fixed charges, then that
company’s bonds possessed a margin of safety.
The real test was Graham’s ability to adapt the concept for common
stocks. He reasoned that if the spread between the price of a stock and
the intrinsic value of a company was large enough, the margin-of-safety
concept could be used to select stocks.
For this strategy to work systematically, Graham admitted, investors
needed a way to identify undervalued stocks. And that meant they
needed a technique for determining a company’s intrinsic value. Graham’s definition of intrinsic value, as it appeared in Security Analysis,
was “that value which is determined by the facts.” These facts included
a company’s assets, its earnings and dividends, and any future definite
prospects.
Graham acknowledged that the single most important factor in determining a company’s value was its future earnings power, a calculation
that is bound to be imprecise. Simply stated, a company’s intrinsic value
could be found by estimating the earnings of the company and multiplying the earnings by an appropriate capitalization factor. The company’s
stability of earnings, assets, dividend policy, and financial health inf luenced this capitalization factor, or multiplier.
Graham asked us to accept that intrinsic value is an elusive concept.
It is distinct from the market’s quotation price. Originally, intrinsic
value was thought to be the same as a company’s book value, or the sum
of its real assets minus obligations. This notion led to the early belief that
intrinsic value was definite. However, analysts came to know that the
value of a company was not only its net real assets but also the value of
the earnings that these assets produced. Graham proposed that it was not
essential to determine a company’s exact intrinsic value; instead, investors should accept an approximate measure or range of value. Even an
approximate value, compared against the selling price, would be sufficient to gauge margin of safety.
There are two rules of investing, said Graham. The first rule is don’t
lose. The second rule is don’t forget rule number one. This “don’t lose”

The Education of Warren Buffett

15

philosophy steered Graham toward two approaches for selecting common
stocks that, when applied, adhered to the margin of safety. The first approach was buying a company for less than two-thirds of its net asset
value, and the second was focusing on stocks with low price-to-earnings
(P/E) ratios.
Buying a stock for a price that is less than two-thirds of its net assets
fit neatly into Graham’s sense of the present and satisfied his desire for
some mathematical expectation. Graham gave no weight to a company’s
plant, property, and equipment. Furthermore, he deducted all the company’s short- and long-term liabilities. What remained would be the net
current assets. If the stock price was below this per share value, Graham
reasoned that a margin of safety existed and a purchase was warranted.
Graham considered this to be a foolproof method of investing, but
he acknowledged that waiting for a market correction before making an
investment might be unreasonable. He set out to design a second approach to buying stocks. He focused on stocks that were down in price
and that sold at a low P/E ratio. Additionally, the company must have
some net asset value; it must owe less than its worth.
Over the years, many other investors have searched for similar shortcuts for determining intrinsic value. Low P/E ratios—Graham’s first
technique—was a general favorite. We have learned, however, that making decisions on P/E ratios alone is not enough to ensure profitable
returns. Today, most investors rely on John Burr Williams’s classic definition of value, described later in this chapter: The value of any investment is the discounted present value of its future cash f low.

The basic ideas of investing are to look at stocks as businesses,
use market f luctuations to your advantage, and seek a margin
of safety. That’s what Ben Graham taught us. A hundred years
from now they will still be the cornerstones of investing.4
WARREN BUFFETT, 1994

Both of Graham’s approaches—buying a stock for less than twothirds of net asset value and buying stocks with low P/E multiples—had
a common characteristic. The stocks that Graham selected based on

16

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

these methods were deeply out of favor with the market. Some macroor microevent caused the market to price these stocks below their value.
Graham felt strongly that these stocks, priced “unjustifiably low,” were
attractive purchases.
Graham’s conviction rested on certain assumptions. First, he believed that the market frequently mispriced stocks, usually because of the
human emotions of fear and greed. At the height of optimism, greed
moved stocks beyond their intrinsic value, creating an overpriced market. At other times, fear moved prices below intrinsic value, creating an
undervalued market. His second assumption was based on the statistical
phenomenon known as “reversion to the mean,” although he did not use
that term. More eloquently, he quoted the poet Horace: “Many shall be
restored that now are fallen, and many shall fall that now are in honor.”
However stated, by statistician or poet, Graham believed that an investor
could profit from the corrective forces of an inefficient market.

PHILIP FISHER
While Graham was writing Security Analysis, Philip Fisher was beginning his career as an investment counselor. After graduating from Stanford’s Graduate School of Business Administration, Fisher began work as
an analyst at the Anglo London & Paris National Bank in San Francisco.
In less than two years, he was made head of the bank’s statistical department. It was from this perch that he witnessed the 1929 stock market
crash. After a brief and unproductive career with a local brokerage
house, Fisher decided to start his own investment counseling firm. On
March 1, 1931, Fisher & Company began soliciting clients.
Starting an investment counseling firm in the early 1930s might have
appeared foolhardy, but Fisher figured he had two advantages. First, any
investors who had any money left after the crash were probably very unhappy with their existing broker. Second, in the midst of the Great Depression, businesspeople had plenty of time to sit and talk with Fisher.
At Stanford, one of Fisher’s business classes had required him to accompany his professor on periodic visits to companies in the San Francisco area. The professor would get the business managers to talk about
their operations, and often helped them solve an immediate problem.
Driving back to Stanford, Fisher and his professor would recap what they
