
Types of configurations
Just like patterns (see Chapter 9), when you spot a special small-bar configuration, you’re looking for either trend confirmation or a signal that the trend
is at risk of ending. Here are two types of configurations:
✓ Continuation patterns: The trend is continuing. The direction and pace
of the trend are about the same as they were before. Relax. The more
confirmation you can get, the safer you feel. You see hard evidence
of the trend continuing, such as a preponderance of higher highs and
higher lows marking bullish sentiment on the part of the trading crowd.
✓ Reversal patterns: The trend is switching direction. When the trend
shifts from down to up or up to down, the configuration of the bar components and their placement across a series of price bars often shout,
“The trend is changing!” from the rooftop. Listen up. If you have a position in the security, a reversal pattern tells you to exit. If you hold on to
the position anyway, your risk of loss is much higher.
A reversal pattern is not only a warning to exit when you’re invested
in the security, it’s also advance notice that a good entry place may be
coming up. For example, when a downtrend ends, you may see one of the
very specific reversal patterns that is a reliable precursor to a buy signal.

www.pdfdummies.com

115

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

116 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Trading range
In every instance of special bars in this chapter, the size of the daily high-low
range is a key factor. The daily trading range is the difference between the
high and the low of the day. You can also say that the range defines the emotional extremes of the day:
✓ If you have a bar with a small range in a sea of larger bars, the market
is indecisive. Indecisiveness isn’t the same thing as indifference.
Indecisiveness can be dangerous — nobody wanted to buy at a higher
high, so perhaps buyers are getting tired of that security at current
prices. A change in sentiment may be brewing, such as deceleration in a
price rise that precedes the end of the trend.
✓ When it’s one very large bar in a sea of smaller ones, pay attention.
Something happened. Traders are willing to pay a lot more for a rising
security, or they want to dump a falling one so badly that they’ll accept
an abnormally low price.
Note that if you include gaps, covered later in this chapter, the true range of
a series of small-range bars suddenly gets a lot bigger.

Identifying Common Special Bars
Special bars almost always mean the same thing, and in turn you can focus
on a few of the common special bars with confidence in their reliability. In
this section, you can get a feel for these common special bars, pictured in
Figure 7-1, and figure out how to identify them with ease. Look carefully at
Figure 7-1, because this section refers to it often.

Figure 7-1:
Common
special
bars.

A

B

C

www.pdfdummies.com

D

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
Use logic and common sense when you’re looking at special bars. You are
trying to understand what buyers and sellers might be thinking — which I
cover in Chapter 6 and in this chapter — so keep it simple. Don’t think that
you’ve found a zebra when you’re looking at a horse.

Closing on a high note
It’s wildly bullish when the price closes at the high over several days. A
series of closes at the high — and its downtrending counterpart, closes at
the low — indicate that the existing trend is likely to continue. In Figure 7-1,
Configuration A illustrates closes at the high. The price has closed at the high
of the day for three days running, and the third bar is much longer than the
others, which means the high-low range is wider than the previous two days.
So, what’s happening?
The first two bars show the close at the high at about the same level. On the
second bar, the low of the day was lower than the low the day before, meaning that sellers came out of the woodwork. But the bulls fought back, buying
more and more, so that the close was still at the high, trumping the lower
low. Day three delivers a whopping gain — and a third close at the high. By
now you may be ready to bet the ranch on this configuration.
Your instincts are right, with one caution: A big gain is often followed by profittaking by active traders. Three days isn’t enough to call this configuration a
trend, so traders call it a move. It doesn’t matter whether the closes-at-high
occur at the start of a trend or while the trend is in progress — a fat gain
always inspires some traders to take profit. Profit-taking doesn’t change a
trend, but can dent performance the next day. You may see a lower high or a
lower close.
You can use your imagination (or turn the book upside down) to envision the
parallel configuration on Configuration A of Figure 7-1 — closes at the low. As
you may expect, a series of closes at the low imply that a downtrend is forming or worsening.

Spending the day inside
Configuration B in Figure 7-1 shows the inside day. An inside day refers to a
price bar that meets two criteria:
✓ The high is lower than the previous day’s high.
✓ The low is higher than the previous day’s low.

www.pdfdummies.com

117

118 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Testing folklore
An inside day signals that the market is having
second thoughts about a security. Some analysts say that an inside day is always a continuation bar. Others, notably candlestick chartists
(see Chapter 8), see an inside day (named a
harami) as a warning of a possible trend reversal. Which interpretation is correct?

half the time the inside day was followed the
next day by a lower low. Actually, there was a
tendency to continue the existing trend on the
day after the inside day — a higher high in an
uptrend and a lower low in a downtrend — but
it was so small as to be right on the edge of the
margin of error.

No one can give you a definitive answer.
Trading Systems Analysis Group (TSAG) examined the data of 60 equities over four years —
over 60,000 price bars — and found 2,000
instances of inside days. About half the time
in an existing uptrend, the bar after an inside
day delivered a higher high (a continuation) and
about half the time it didn’t. For existing downtrends, the percentage was the same — about

The inside day is still useful to signal that sentiment may be ready to change. Also, keep in
mind that the TSAG study is limited to the exact
question asked — what happened the next
day? This doesn’t address what happened two
days later, or three days. View the inside day
as a signal alerting you to watch for a breakout, however minor, without telling you the
direction.

An inside day is a bar “inside” the previous day’s high-low range. It reflects
indecision. Buyers didn’t feel strongly enough about this security to buy
more. Sellers weren’t particularly inspired to sell, either. The inside day
doesn’t suggest what’s going to happen the following day. But it does warn
that the market is starting to reconsider what it feels about this security.

Getting outside for the day
Check out Configuration C in Figure 7-1, which is the outside day. On an outside day, the high-low range of the bar is outside the range of the preceding
bar. The open and close ticks can appear anywhere on the outside day bar,
but two variations stand out:
✓ The open is at the low, and the close is at the high. This configuration
suggests that something new has happened to inspire bullish buying
right up to the end of the day.
✓ The open is at the high, and close is at the low. You can deduce the
opposite supply-demand setup here. Sentiment turned bearish and sellers overwhelmed buyers, right to the end of the day.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
Although the size of an outside day bar gets your attention, its appearance
alone doesn’t tell you much. After considering where the open and close are
located on the bar, take a look at what else is going on in the market, especially the configuration of the preceding bars. Here is what you can see:
✓ No trend exists. The outside day alerts you to a possible trend beginning.
✓ A trend is in place. The outside day may suggest a reversal or a continuation, depending on where the open and close are and which direction
the security is trending. The outside day has a higher high by definition,
but a higher close as well implies continuation in an uptrend and reversal in a downtrend, especially if the close is exactly at the high. Similarly,
the outside day has a lower low by definition, so it confirms continuation in a downtrend, especially if the close is at the low.

Finding the close at the open
Configuration D in Figure 7-1 shows a series of bars where the close is at or
near the open. As you can guess, a close at or near the open reflects indecision among market participants. Trader opinion is divided as to whether this
bar generally signifies a continuation or reversal pattern. Consider it a clue to
look at what else is going on, such as trading volume.
However, in specific instances, the interpretive process gets a bit more
definite: When the open and close are at (or almost at) the same price, and
they’re at the high or low of the day, you have a greater chance of determining
whether the trend will continue or reverse. Which way the cookie crumbles
depends on what was happening before:
✓ In an uptrend: If the open and close are near the high, look for the
uptrend to accelerate (continuation with gusto). If they are near the low,
look for a reversal.
✓ In a downtrend: If the open and close are near the low, expect more of
the same. If they are near the high, think about a reversal.

Decoding Spikes
While the inside day and the outside day I depict in Figure 7-1 have high-low
ranges noticeably different from the preceding bars, they don’t make your
hair stand on end. Sometimes, though, the market delivers an exceptionally
big bar with a wildly out-of-whack high or low. Figure 7-2 shows two of these
uncommon price bars, called spikes.

www.pdfdummies.com

119

120 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
A spike is a bar that encompasses a much wider high-low range than the bars
immediately preceding it. Do spikes matter? Yes, although sometimes they’re
just randomly generated by rumors and market silliness.

SPIKE LOW

KEY
REVERSAL
Figure 7-2:
Uncommon
special
bars.

EXIT AT
SPIKE LOW

In some cases, a spike turns out to be an anomaly. The top example in
Figure 7-2 shows such a case. The spike low suggests that some people panicked and were selling so much and at such a frantic pace that buyers got a
bargain at abnormally low prices. But panic was misplaced. The next day, the
price resumed its uptrend and its same “normal” high-low range. The spike
was just an oddity — a random move. Maybe the panicked sellers believed a
rumor that the buyers didn’t hear or knew was false. Or perhaps the sellers
were deliberately trying to break a support line, as I describe in Chapter 10.
The bottom spike example in Figure 7-2 is, in contrast, an important bar
named a key reversal because on the next few days, the price proceeded to
make lower highs and lower lows — this bar marks a trend reversal. Key
reversals can be ordinary bars and aren’t always spikes, but when you see a
spike, always ask yourself whether it qualifies as a reversal.
As the spike is occurring, you don’t know where the low is going to come
until after the bar is completed, and obviously you can’t exit the trade until
then (in other words, in the next trading session). You still don’t know what
bars will ensue, but you can make note of the spike low after it forms and

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
keep it in mind as a benchmark for a stop, even if the bars that follow the
spike retrace some of the down move, as they do in Figure 7-2. You seldom
know whether a spike is random or meaningful on the day that it happens.
Only hindsight can tell you that.
Though hindsight has the final say on the meaning of a spike, you can still use
spikes for the following immediate analytical purposes:
✓ Investigate the environment. Sometimes you do know when a spike is a
key reversal, because you can determine what shock caused it and use
your judgment in interpreting that the news or event is sound.
✓ Trust the close. As a general rule, you’re safe assuming that the close is
the most important part of the bar because it sums up the sentiment for
the day. To see the usefulness of the close, take a look at the two examples in Figure 7-2:
• Continuation spike: In the top chart showing a spike low, the close
is near the high. The wider high-low range and the lower low are
a worry, to be sure, but the position of the close near the high
trumps those worries.
• Key reversal day: The bottom chart in Figure 7-2 shows three components to worry about — not only the wide high-low range but
also the lower low and close near the low.
A key reversal bar is also called a swing bar, although not all swing bars are
spikes. A swing bar is any bar that is the final and lowest low in a series of lower
lows or the final and highest high in a series of higher highs, as in the bottom
chart in Figure 7-2. You can see a spike bar at the end of the day after the close,
but you can’t identify it as a swing bar until after two additional closes.
A conservative trading tactic is to order your broker to sell the security if the
price falls below the low of the spike day over the next two or three days. This
method is plain old crowd following. Everybody can see the same spike low
and many will have sell orders at that level, and you should, too. The bar following a spike is often an inside day. Other times the following bar has a new
higher high only a few pennies above the spike high and a close lower than the
spike bar close. Neither bar is helpful. They’re simply inconclusive, and you
have to wait for additional evidence to get guidance on how to trade.

www.pdfdummies.com

121

122 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Grasping Gaps
A gap is one of the most important special bar configurations. A gap is a
major, visible discontinuity between two price bars on a chart. Because every
bar encompasses all the transactions made during a specific period, a gap
marks the absence of any transactions at the prices covered by the gap. In this
section, I give you pointers to identify gaps and how to use them.

Pinpointing a gap
The gap is a void — no supply is offered at the prices the gap encompasses.
Check out the gap in Figure 7-3. Prices had to shift upward in order for supply
and demand to meet again and for both buyers and sellers to be satisfied. On
daily charts, you can often see an opening gap when the opening price today
diverges dramatically from yesterday’s high or low, although you can also
see gaps between bars on intraday charts.

GAP
Figure 7-3:
Price gap.

You can identify a gap at the open of the bar but you can’t measure a gap
until the day’s trading is over. Then you measure it from yesterday’s high to
today’s low (for an upside gap) or from yesterday’s low to today’s high (for
a downside gap). The gap is between the bars, not between the opens and
closes. If the security opens on a gap but then the gap is filled during the day,
the gap doesn’t show up on a daily chart. The same thing is true if a security
gaps during the day on an hourly chart — the daily bar doesn’t show it.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
Gaps are usually triggered by news, like earnings or some other event,
whether true or invented (rumors). Events are the source of most key price
moves, especially gaps. Prices don’t, on the whole, move randomly — traders
have reasons, right or wrong, to buy and sell. Even the strongest trend can be
broken by a piece of fresh news contrary to the trend direction. Authentically
big news trumps the chart (nearly) every time.
That’s why gaps are such a valuable pattern — you know instantly how the
market is interpreting the news. The reason to read bars is to get an accurate
assessment of whether news is big or merely ordinary. Some news is easy
to interpret. News will start a new uptrend if it’s wildly favorable or halt an
uptrend dead in its tracks if it’s wildly unfavorable. But much of the time, you
don’t know how to interpret news — and there is so much news! — until you
see how the market treats it in the form of the bar on the chart. Traders often
get the bit between their teeth on news and this is especially clear with gaps.
Consider how a gap develops. Say that Blue Widget stock closes on Monday
at $15 per share. After the closing bell, it announces bad news — the bookkeeper embezzled several million dollars and ran off to Rio. (You’ve probably
noticed how companies always wait, if they can, until after the market closes to
deliver bad news. Presumably they hope that what looks just awful at 5 p.m.
won’t look so bad the next morning.) However, in this case, the market is
unforgiving and the next day, Blue Widget opens gap down at $10. Most
people deduce that the opening gap down implies further price drops, and
they proceed to sell — in droves.
The total gap for the day may not be $5, though. During the course of the
day, Blue Widget may trade as high as $12, making the net gap a $3 gap. If the
price of Blue Widget normally trades in a $2 high-low range, $3 is still a significant number — 50 percent higher than normal. Gaps are significant when
they’re proportionally large compared to the trading range (see the “Kicking
things off: Breakaway gaps” section in this chapter).
Gaps occur with good news, too. If Blue Widget announces a fabulous new
discovery, the opening price on the following day may be a gap up, like the
one in Figure 7-3. You may deduce from this gap that some traders (including
well-paid professional analysts) had a whole night to evaluate the news, and
they bought the stock at the open, so you should buy it, too. The gap implies
buyers anticipate the stock rising throughout the day from the opening price,
and you want to jump (if not leap) on this bandwagon.

www.pdfdummies.com

123

124 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Using primary gaps to your advantage
Gaps are, indeed, a wonderful trading opportunity if you can differentiate
between a common gap and uncommon gaps. In the following sections, I
describe the main types of gaps and how to use them.

Lacking opportunity: Common gaps
A common gap is one that appears out of nowhere for no particular reason
(no fresh news). Common gaps can occur in trending and nontrending prices.
If the price is trending, it fails to change the trend. If the price isn’t trending,
it fails to initiate a trend. Common gaps are generally insignificant.
What causes a common gap? Simple error. Common gaps often occur when
liquidity is low, meaning few players are in the market. Some trader sees a
price offered that’s a gap away from the last price posted and decides to buy.
The offer may have been a mistake, too, or the offering trader could be trying
to break a trendline or have some other hidden agenda. But because the
market doesn’t have many participants and the fresh news is minor, if there’s
any at all, the effort fizzles.
A common gap tends to have low volume on the gap day. To judge an opening
gap, consult volume. If volume is low or normal, traders aren’t jumping on the
bandwagon, and it’s probably a common gap. If volume is abnormally high,
traders are jumping on the bandwagon, and the gap will probably lead to a big
rise or fall in the coming days.
A security that normally has low volume tends to have more gaps than heavily
traded securities. A low-volume security is described as thinly traded, meaning
few market participants. Don’t try to interpret gaps in thinly traded securities.
These gaps are usually just common gaps and mean nothing at all.

Kicking things off: Breakaway gaps
A breakaway gap is an important event because it almost always marks the
start of a new trend. Not only do you get the gap and a new trend, but you also
get a major change in the appearance of the chart, such as a widening of the
normal high-low daily trading range, an increase in day-to-day volatility, and
much higher volume. All these changes occur because the breakaway gaps
draw in new traders. A breakaway gap is event driven, usually on some news
about the security itself. Figure 7-4 illustrates a breakaway gap.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns

