
Technical Analysis

25

FIGURE 1.22 Not all price breakdowns include a pullback. For this chart, after
the price broke, it didn’t pause until it lost over half its value.

after the stock had recovered some, the stock price was basically the same
as the initial public offering price from seven years earlier.
It has been mentioned a number of times that when a stock starts to
fall, it may retrace some of the fall to test the pattern from which it had
fallen. This isn’t always the case, so you won’t necessarily be able to get
into a trade if you consistently wait for a better price. A final example of a
stock’s collapse, which illustrates this point, is Figure 1.22. Once the stock
fell beneath its neckline at $33, it never looked back. The stock ultimately
bottomed at $9, months later, but those who were waiting for the price
to retest the neckline never would have had the opportunity to enter a
position.

CHARTING FOR YOURSELF
In this chapter, we have focused on examples from the past. Now let’s look
to the future and learn how to make some graphs using ProphetCharts.
Chapter 2 is going to introduce you to the program and its basic functions
so you can start to build your own chart sense with your own computer
and the stocks that interest you personally.

CHAPTER 2

Fundamentals of
Chart Creation

n this chapter, we get down to the business of actual charting. You
are going to learn about different chart types, how to size and arrange
charts, and the differences of charting different kinds of financial instruments, among many other topics.
The first task is to actually get to the charting system itself, which is
ProphetCharts. To get to ProphetCharts, you’ll need three things:

I

1. A computer with high-speed Internet access.
2. A browser equipped with Java (such as a recent version of Firefox,

Chrome, Safari, or Internet Explorer).
3. Access to ProphetCharts via the Investools Investor Toolbox (www.

investools.com) or the thinkorswim brokerage platform (www.
thinkorswim.com).
For the purposes of this book, we assume that you are starting from
scratch; that is, you have no saved chart styles, study sets, watch lists, or
any other settings. There is no harm if you do have some settings already,
but we approach this from the vantage point of having a clean slate.

ARITHMETIC VERSUS LOGARITHMIC
One of the most important properties of a chart is whether it is arithmetically scaled or logarithmically scaled. Now this may seem like a very
26

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

27

FIGURE 2.1 The arithmetic scale spaces all prices equally, which can create a
distorted view for the technical analyst.

esoteric, arcane subject, but it’s really quite important. Let’s see what this
is all about with an example.
First, Figure 2.1 shows an example of a stock that went from about six
cents up to eight dollars, a huge 133-fold increase. Note that the chart is
arithmetically scaled. Figure 2.2 shows the exact same stock in the same
time period logarithmically (also called “log”) scaled.
What are some of the differences you see? Generally speaking, the
activity in 2002 and 2003 (when the stock was cheaper) is far more pronounced than in later years. On the arithmetic graph, 2002 and 2003 seem
to be almost devoid of activity, whereas on the log graph, the stock is at its
most dynamic.
The reason for this is simple—an arithmetic graph is constructed with
the values of the y-axis (that is, the prices) equally spaced. The difference
between 50 cents and $1.00 is the same as the difference between $10 and
$10.50—or $100 and $100.50, for that matter. No matter what the price, the
bars are scaled the same way.
A log graph, however, represents percentage changes correctly. So if
you took a ruler and measured the distance from 50 cents to $1.00, it would
be the same as the distance between $100 and $200, because they are both
movements of 100 percent.
To be more direct about it, there is no reason you ever need to use an
arithmetic graph when looking at a stock chart. It can badly misrepresent

28

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 2.2 The log scale represents price movement in terms of percentage
change, which is far more appropriate for analysis.

the movement of a financial instrument (be it a stock, a future, or a mutual fund), because it treats all price movements as identical, even if they
are not.
If you were given the opportunity to own $10,000 worth of stock that
moved from 50 cents to $1.00 and an alternative opportunity to own $10,000
worth of stock that moved from $100 to $100.50, which would you rather
have? If you are economically rational, you would take the first choice because you’ll make $10,000 in profit, whereas in the second instance you’ll
make a $50 profit. But an arithmetic graph would represent these price
movements as identical, which clearly they are not.
So check the “Log” checkbox in the upper-right corner of
ProphetCharts as shown in Figure 2.3; you’ll never have to touch it again.
(Actually, the default is Log. You have to make an effort to get out of this
mode of charting!)

FIGURE 2.3 Check the log checkbox so that all your charts will use log scaling
instead of arithmetic scaling.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

29

DIFFERENT INSTRUMENTS,
DIFFERENT CHARTS
Before delving into charts, you should understand some subtle differences
that exist among different financial instruments that can be charted. Although the vast majority of the readers of this book will be charting stocks,
take a moment to understand these differences about charting various
kinds of investments:
Stocks—Data will include the open, high, low, and close of a stock for
each given day (or whatever time period is chosen)m as well as
the volume for that same time period. It is also important to note
that stocks are adjusted for splits and dividends, which means that
values for some stocks will change over time to take these events
into account. So if a given stock was $50 on a certain day, and
later that stock has a 2-for-1 split, then the price will be adjusted
to $25.
Indices—The data may be identical to stocks (open, high, low, close,
volume), but some indices do not have all of this information. Most
typically, index data will not have accompanying volume data. In
some cases, only the closing price will be available.
Mutual Funds—Only the closing price will be available, which in the
world of mutual funds is known as the Net Asset Value (NAV).
There is no volume for mutual funds. Mutual fund distributions
are taken into account, so that fund prices are adjusted for these
distributions in a similar manner as stocks that are adjusted for
splits.
Futures/Commodities—These markets contain the same price data
(open, high, low, and close) and volume data as stocks. They also
have one extra field, known as open interest, which is displayed in
the volume portion of the chart. Open interest represents the number of open contracts on a particular market and is shown as a line
in Figure 2.4.
Options—The data fields for these charts are identical to futures; you
should note, however, that both options and futures tend to have
fairly short life spans (usually just a couple of months), so the
graphs tend to look quite different from those for stocks, which
can span decades.
Forex—Here the information is only one data point per time interval,
and unlike any of the other instruments, it defines a relationship of
one thing to another. For example, the popular EUR/USD currency
pair defines the ratio of the euro to the U.S. dollar.

30

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 2.4 The black line illustrates the open interest for the commodity being
charted. It appears in the same pane as the volume bars.

Regardless of what you are charting, one other fact to understand is
that each bar (or point) represents a specific segment in time. That segment
could be as little as a single minute or as great as a year. We will go into
much more detail about these instrument types in Chapter 5.

LET’S START CHARTING
Once you are on the ProphetCharts page, go ahead and type in a symbol
(such as QQQQ) and press Enter. In a moment, the data should load, and
the chart should be displayed on your screen.
It’s valuable to understand that the data need only load once for a given
symbol. Once you have a chart on your screen, any modifications you make
to that chart—such as applying studies, putting drawn objects on it, zooming in to it, or rearranging the elements of the chart screen—do not require
another download of the data. The only time ProphetCharts has to fetch
data again is if you want to load in a new symbol or if you load in a different amount of data for the same symbol (for instance, if you load two years
of data when before you had just one).
In the lower-left corner of ProphetCharts is a button labeled Detach.
Clicking this button detaches the applet (which is a term we will consider
synonymous with ProphetCharts) from its place on the browser window
and allows you to resize it any way you like. Double-clicking the title bar
of the applet will maximize it, causing it to fill the entire screen. Because
screen real estate is helpful when charting, you may find it useful to detach
the applet any time you use ProphetCharts in order to give it the maximum
available workspace.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

31

ZOOMING FOR A BETTER VIEW
Once you have a chart on the screen, you can zoom in to look at it in more
detail. There are a couple of different ways to do this: the zoom tool and
the cursor selection.
The zoom tool is located in the lower-right corner of the screen; there
are actually two icons related to zooming (Figure 2.5), both of which look
like magnifying glasses. The one with a plus sign (+) zooms in to the chart,
whereas the one with the minus sign (–) zooms out.
Clicking on the zoom-in tool will show you the rightmost half of the
chart each time you click it. So, for example, if you are looking at two years
of daily data, clicking zoom-in once will change the chart to just one year
of data, and clicking it again will yield six months, three months, and so on.
Conversely, clicking on the zoom-out tool will produce the opposite result
(three months, six months, and so forth) until the entirety of the chart data
you originally selected is displayed.
The other method of zooming is more flexible, since it allows you to
home in on any visible part of the chart. This swipe method is simple:
1. Point to the portion of the chart where you want to begin zooming,

then click the mouse button.
2. While holding down your mouse button, drag the mouse to the point

where you want the zooming to stop (it doesn’t matter if you swipe to
the left or the right, although usually it’s more intuitive for people to
go from left to right, since that is how time progresses on the chart).
3. Release the mouse button, and the highlighted area of the chart will
instantly be displayed.
During the zooming-in process (Figure 2.6), you will see the portion
you are swiping highlighted. You can drag the mouse left or right until you
are satisfied with your selection, at which time you can release the mouse.
To revert to the original, complete chart, double-click the mouse anywhere in the chart area.

FIGURE 2.5 The zoom-in and zoom-out icons are in the lower-right corner of
ProphetCharts.

32

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 2.6 Dragging the mouse over a portion of the chart will zoom in to that
part of the graph.

DATA DETAILS
One of the most basic but useful features of ProphetCharts is the ability to
see precise information for any single point on a graph. This information is
displayed on the data line (Figure 2.7) just above the graph.
The information in the data line corresponds to wherever the cursor is
pointing on the chart (or, if the cursor is not inside the chart, it displays the
information for where the cursor was most recently in the chart). There
are one-character labels preceding each element of the data line, and here
is what they mean:
D: The date (in the example shown, November 4, 2002). If you are looking at an intraday graph, this data point includes both the date and
the time.
O: Opening price for that price bar.
H: High price for that price bar.
L: Low price for that price bar.
C: Closing (or last) price for that price bar.

FIGURE 2.7 The data line shows the price data for the one price bar where the
cursor is pointed.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

33

FIGURE 2.8 The data line for intraday graphs also shows the time of the bar
whose prices are displayed.

R: Range, which is the difference in price between the high and the
low. This can be useful information if you are seeking securities
with a large amount of volatility. The larger the R value, the more
price volatility took place during that time period.
Y: Y-value of wherever you are pointing. In other words, this reflects
the price value at the place where you are pointing. So if you are
looking at a chart and point at a part of the chart where you think
the price will fall or rise, the Y figure tells you the price at which
you are pointing.
In Figure 2.8, for example, is a data line from an intraday chart. Notice
how the time has also been added to the data. The time will represent the
starting point of the intraday bar. For example, if a particular price bar
represents the activity from 11:15 until 11:30 (a 15-minute bar), the time on
the data line would say 11:15. The data line in Figure 2.8 is from a minute
graph, so it shows that one particular minute: 2:04 P . M .
The data line isn’t shown just for price data, however. Technical studies, both overlaid (that is, appearing in the same area as the price data)
and those in separate panes have their relevant data displayed as well
(Figure 2.9). What is shown will depend on the indicator, but the concept is

FIGURE 2.9 When technical studies are displayed, the information for the segment of time where the cursor is pointed is displayed in the data line.

34

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 2.10 The Symbols menu lets you ﬁnd any stock, option, or futures
symbol.

the same: the relevant information for that study will appear for whatever
day of data to which your cursor is pointed.

SEARCHING FOR SYMBOLS
ProphetCharts provides many different kinds of financial instruments, but
you may not always remember the symbol associated with what you want
to chart. There are three helpful symbol search tools built into the program.
To get to any of these, click on the Symbols menu (Figure 2.10) at the top
of the applet.
The first selection, Symbol Search, lets you search for any equity symbol (which includes mutual funds) based on its name. You don’t have to
know the entire name of the company—just a portion is all you need to
enter. Type in as much of the name as you like, and either press Enter or
click Search. The results are shown in Figure 2.11.
Once you find the name (and symbol) you want to chart, you can either
double-click on your choice or select it (with one mouse click) and click
on the Get Chart button. The Symbol Search dialog box will remain open
in case you want to find other symbols, and you can see the resulting chart
behind it. Once you are through looking for symbols, you can click the
Close button.

OPTIONS SEARCH
If you have ever traded options, you already know that the symbols are
virtually impossible to remember. They are a combination of a root symbol
(which often has little correlation to the underlying security symbol), a
strike symbol, and an expiration symbol. Added to this complication is the
fact that it’s difficult to know what strikes and months are available for any
given stock or index.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

35

FIGURE 2.11 Entering a portion of a company’s name will yield all the company
names that have that as part of their name.

The Options Search wizard in ProphetCharts eliminates this problem.
Choose “Find Option . . .” from the Symbols menu, and the Options Wizard
appears.
The only information you need to provide is the stock symbol whose
option you want to find. Enter the symbol in the Symbol box and click the
Set button (Figure 2.12). This will cause the Options Wizard to query the

FIGURE 2.12 The Options Wizard makes it easy to locate an arcane options
symbol based on a small amount of information.

36

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

database for all expiration months and strike prices available for a particular stock.
Once this information is loaded, choose the expiration month and year
you want from the Expiration dropdown, the strike price you want from
the Strike Price dropdown, and click Get Chart.

FUTURES SEARCH
Because there are tens of thousands of stocks and funds, the Symbol
Search is based on entering as much of the name as you know. There are
only a few hundred futures markets, however, so it’s possible to take a
simpler, hierarchical approach to finding what you need.
When you click on Find Future, a dialog box appears (Figure 2.13)
that is mostly blank, except for a dropdown menu labeled “Groups.” These
groups are general categories of futures (such as “Grains” or “Currencies”)
from which you can choose.
Click on the Groups dropdown and select the group of interest to you.
Once you do, the dropdown beneath Groups is filled with the individual
markets that comprise that group. For example, if you choose Grains, markets such as Corn, Soybeans, and Wheat will appear for your selection. You
should therefore choose which market in particular is of interest to you.
When you do this, the Futures Wizard does something very helpful: it
ascertains for that market what years and months are available from the

FIGURE 2.13 The Futures Wizard guides you through the process of ﬁnding the
futures contract you want to view.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

37

FIGURE 2.14 As you select diﬀerent choices from the dropdown menus in the
Futures Wizard, the available contracts for that market will be presented to you for
selection.

database. This can be a real time-saver, since the months and years for
different markets vary widely. In Figure 2.14, for instance, Wheat has been
chosen, so all of the possible years (from 1959 forward) and months for
Wheat are loaded into the Year and Month dropdown menus, with the front
month automatically selected as a suggestion for what you might want.
At this point, you can click on Get Chart to see that particular month.
So in this example, the March 2006 Wheat contract will be displayed if you
click Get Chart. There are several other choices available to you, however:
Continuous. Futures contracts expire, and the amount of time any
given futures contract is active is typically quite short—usually just
a couple of months. So, unlike stocks, which can span decades,
most futures contracts don’t have much data and therefore aren’t
very helpful in determining broad trends. A continuous contract,
however, chains together individual contracts to create a synthetic, never-ending contract. So a continuous contract of the S&P
500 would chain together March 1987, June 1987, September 1987,
December 1987, March 1988, and so on. This gives you the opportunity to view decades of markets such as wheat, gold, and Treasury
bonds.
A nonadjusted continuous contract is one in which all the regular contracts are simply chained together without any alternation in price. However, some markets have fairly large gaps between contracts. This is often the result of a market being seasonal

38

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

(in other words, markets that are crops, not financial commodities). You can distinguish which kind of continuous contract you
want—adjusted or nonadjusted—by selecting your choice from
the dropdown menu next to the Continuous radio button.
Cash Only. Some of the futures markets have corresponding cash markets available in ProphetCharts. If you want to see the cash market
(also known as the spot market), click the Cash Only radio button.
There is no guarantee that the cash data are available, however.
But a proper symbol for it will be constructed.
Cash Overlay. Instead of seeing just the cash market, you can overlay
a futures market with its cash market in the same graph. Click the
Cash Overlay radio button to do this so you can see, for example,
how the S&P futures contract correlates to the underlying S&P 500
cash index.

STREAMING CHARTS
One of ProphetChart’s most useful features is the ability to stream data. In
other words, you can make the chart come alive with real-time quotes that
also display the chart in motion during the trading day.
To change a static chart to a streaming chart, click the Stream checkbox (as shown in Figure 2.15). When you click Stream, two things happen.
First, the chart comes to life with a dynamic price bar on the rightmost part
of the chart. So as quotes come in, the bar will grow and change to reflect
the open, high, low, and last price data for that particular bar. Once that
time period has passed, the bar becomes part of the historical chart and a
new bar begins.
The length of time represented depends on the kind of chart you are
using. If you are looking at a minute bar chart, the streaming bar will represent anywhere from one second of information (when it first begins) to
one minute of information (when it is complete). And all the bars to its left
will also represent one minute of time. So the graph will grow during the
course of the day, as the stock you are watching bobs up and down with
price activity.

FIGURE 2.15 Clicking the checkbox next to Stream will change the graph into a
streaming chart.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

39

FIGURE 2.16 The upper-left portion of ProphetCharts becomes a streaming
quote panel when the Stream box is checked.

The other thing that happens (shown in Figure 2.16) when you click
Stream is that the upper-left corner of ProphetCharts changes into a
streaming quote panel.
This panel shows you the most recent information for the security you
are charting. Each data point is clearly labeled, and the Last Trade line
shows you the time stamp for the quote being shown, which will tell you
how recent the quote is.

CHARTING DIFFERENT TIME PERIODS
ProphetCharts has access to two broadly different kinds of data: intraday
data, which can be in segments as short as one minute each, and daily data,
which is typically presented as daily bars but can also be shown in cruder
granularity (such as weekly or monthly).
When you select how much time you want to see in a chart, you have
two choices to make: the duration of the chart and the frequency. The duration (Figure 2.17) is simply how far back in time the data go. The dropdown
menu to the right of the symbol entry shows you the available durations.
For intraday, the range is from 1 day to 60 days, and for daily, the duration
can be anywhere from 1 month to all (which, although ambiguous, will
fetch all the data available in the system for that symbol).
The bottom choice on the Duration dropdown is called Custom. This
lets you select a specific date range, which doesn’t necessarily have to end
at the present. For instance, perhaps you want to chart the stock market
crash of 1987 and nothing more.
When you select Custom, a dialog box appears with two calendars displayed. The calendar on the left is for you to choose the start date, and the
calendar on the right is for the end date. For clarity, any days that are a
