More Praise for

The Warren Buffett Way, First Edition
“The Warren Buf fett Way outlines his career and presents examples of how
his investment techniques and methods evolved and the important individuals in the process. It also details the key investment decisions that produced
his unmatched record of performance. Finally, the book contains the thinking and the philosophy of an investor that consistently made money using
the tools available to every citizen no matter what their level of wealth.”
Peter S. Lynch
bestselling author, One Up On Wall Street
and Beating the Street
“Robert Hagstrom presents an in-depth examination of Warren Buffett’s
strategies, and the ‘how and why’ behind his selection of each of the major securities that have contributed to his remarkable record of success. His ‘homespun’ wisdom and philosophy are also part of this comprehensive, interesting,
and readable book.”
John C. Bogle
Chairman, The Vanguard Group
“Warren Buffett is surely the Greatest Investor of this century—not so much
because he built a great fortune with a free market as because he shared his
important thinking with us and has openly demonstrated the sagacity and
courage so vital to success. Berkshire Hathaway has been my largest, longest
investment. Warren has been my best teacher.”
Charles D. Ellis
Managing Partner, Greenwich Associates
“Warren Buffett is often characterized simply as a ‘value investor’ or a ‘Ben
Graham disciple.’ Hagstrom fills in the rest of the story with some immensely practical pointers on prospering in the market.”
Martin S. Fridson
Managing Director, Merrill Lynch
“In simple language, this book tells the rules by which the most successful
American stock investor of modern time got that way. It could be a godsend
to the legion of unhappy investors who keep f loundering because they ignore
the basics of major investment success.”
Phil Fisher
author, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits

THE

WA R R E N
BU F F E T T
WAY

THE

WA R R E N
BUF F E T T
WAY

Second Edition

ROBERT G. HAGSTROM

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2005 by Robert G. Hagstrom. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests
to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011,
fax 201-748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used
their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties
with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and
specif ically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or f itness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives
or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate.
Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of prof it or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or
other damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at
800-762-2974, outside the United States at 317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about
Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
ISBN 0-471-64811-6
Printed in the United States of America.
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Contents
Foreword to the Second Edition
Bill Miller

vii

Foreword to the First Edition
Peter S. Lynch

ix

Preface

xv

Introduction
Kenneth L. Fisher

xix

1 The World’s Greatest Investor

1

2 The Education of Warren Buffett

11

3 “Our Main Business Is Insurance”: The Early
Days of Berkshire Hathaway

29

4 Buying a Business

41

5 Investing Guidelines: Business Tenets

61

6 Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets

81

7 Investing Guidelines: Financial Tenets

109

8 Investing Guidelines: Value Tenets

121
v

vi

CONTENTS

9 Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

141

10 Managing Your Portfolio

157

11 The Psychology of Money

177

12 The Unreasonable Man

189

Afterword: Managing Money the Warren Buffett Way

199

Appendix

211

Notes

225

Acknowledgments

235

Index

239

Foreword to the
Second Edition

W

hen Robert Hagstrom first published The Warren Buf fett Way
in 1994, it quickly became a phenomenon. To date, more than
1.2 million copies have been sold. The book’s popularity is a
testimony to the accuracy of its analysis and the value of its advice.
Any time the subject is Warren Buffett, it is easy to become overwhelmed by the sheer size of the numbers. Whereas most investors
think in terms of hundreds or perhaps thousands, Buffett moves in a
world of millions and billions. But that does not mean he has nothing
to teach us. Quite the opposite. If we look at what he does and has
done, and are able to discern the underlying thinking, we can model
our decisions on his.
That is the profound contribution of Robert’s book. He closely
studied Warren Buffett’s actions, words, and decisions for a number of
years, and then set about analyzing them for common threads. For this
book, he distilled those common threads into twelve tenets, timeless
principles that guide Buffett’s investment philosophy through all circumstances and all markets. In just the same way, they can guide any
investor.
The enduring value of Robert’s work is due to this clear focus—although the book talks about investment techniques, it is fundamentally
about investment principles. And principles do not change. I can almost
vii

viii

FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION

hear Warren saying, with his wry smile, “That’s why they call them
principles.”
The past ten years have given us a vivid demonstration of that basic
truth. In those ten years, the trends of the stock market changed several
times over. We witnessed a high-f lying bubble that made many people
rich, and then a steep crash into a protracted, painful bear market before the market finally hit bottom in the spring of 2003 and started to
turn back up.
All along the way, Warren Buffett’s investment approach never
changed. He has continued to follow the same principles outlined in
this book:
• Think of buying stocks as buying fractional interests in whole
businesses.
• Construct a focused low-turnover portfolio
• Invest in only what you can understand and analyze
• Demand a margin of safety between the purchase price and the
company’s long-term value
Berkshire Hathaway investors, as usual, reap the benefits of that
steady approach. Since the recovery began in 2003, Berkshire Hathaway
stock is up about $20,000 per share, more than 30 percent, far surpassing the returns of the overall market over the comparable period.
There is a chain of thinking for value investors that begins with
Benjamin Graham, through Warren Buffett and his contemporaries, to
the next generation of practitioners such as Robert Hagstrom. Buffett,
Graham’s best-known disciple, frequently advises investors to study
Graham’s book The Intelligent Investor. I often make the same recommendation myself. And I am convinced that Robert’s work shares with
that classic book one critical quality: the advice may not make you rich,
but it is highly unlikely to make you poor. If understood and intelligently implemented, the techniques and principles presented here should
make you a better investor.
BILL MILLER
CEO, Legg Mason Capital Management

Foreword to the
First Edition

O

ne weekday evening early in 1989 I was home when the telephone rang. Our middle daughter, Annie, then eleven, was first
to the phone. She told me that Warren Buffett was calling. I was
convinced this had to be a prank. The caller started by saying, “This is
Warren Buffett from Omaha [as if I might confuse him with some other
Warren Buffett]. I just finished your book, I loved it, and I would like to
quote one of your sentences in the Berkshire annual report. I have always
wanted to do a book, but I never have gotten around to it.” He spoke
very rapidly with lots of enthusiasm and must have said forty words in
fifteen or twenty seconds, including a couple of laughs and chuckles. I
instantly agreed to his request and I think we talked for five or ten minutes. I remember he closed by saying, “If you ever visit Omaha and
don’t come by and see me, your name will be mud in Nebraska.”
Clearly not wanting my name to be mud in Nebraska, I took him
up on his offer about six months later. Warren Buffett gave me a personal tour of every square foot of the office (which did not take long, as
the whole operation could fit inside less than half of a tennis court), and
I said hello to all eleven employees. There was not a computer or a stock
quotation machine to be found.
After about an hour we went to a local restaurant where I followed
his lead and had a terrific steak and my first cherry Coke in thirty
years. We talked about jobs we had as children, baseball, and bridge, and
ix

x

FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION

exchanged stories about companies in which we had held investments
in the past. Warren discussed or answered questions about each stock
and operation that Berkshire (he never called his company Berkshire
Hathaway) owned.
Why has Warren Buffett been the best investor in history? What is
he like as an individual, a shareholder, a manager, and an owner of entire
companies? What is so unique about the Berkshire Hathaway annual report, why does he donate so much effort to it, and what can someone
learn from it? To attempt to answer those questions, I talked with him
directly, and reread the last five annual reports and his earliest reports as
chairman (the 1971 and 1972 reports each had only two pages of text).
In addition, I had discussions with nine individuals that have been actively involved with Warren Buffett in varied relationships and from different viewpoints during the past four to over thirty years: Jack Byrne,
Robert Denham, Don Keough, Carol Loomis, Tom Murphy, Charlie
Munger, Carl Reichardt, Frank Rooney, and Seth Schofield.
In terms of his personal qualities, the responses were quite consistent. Warren Buffett is, first of all, very content. He loves everything
he does, dealing with people and reading mass quantities of annual and
quarterly reports and numerous newspapers and periodicals. As an investor he has discipline, patience, f lexibility, courage, confidence, and
decisiveness. He is always searching for investments where risk is
eliminated or minimized. In addition, he is very adept at probability
and as an oddsmaker. I believe this ability comes from an inherent love
of simple math computations, his devotion and active participation in
the game of bridge, and his long experience in underwriting and accepting high levels of risk in insurance and in reinsurance. He is willing to take risks where the odds of total loss are low and upside
rewards are substantial. He lists his failures and mistakes and does not
apologize. He enjoys kidding himself and compliments his associates in
objective terms.
Warren Buffett is a great student of business and a wonderful listener, and able to determine the key elements of a company or a complex issue with high speed and precision. He can make a decision not to
invest in something in as little as two minutes and conclude that it is
time to make a major purchase in just a few days of research. He is always prepared, for as he has said in an annual report, “Noah did not start
building the Ark when it was raining.”

Foreword to the First Edition

xi

As a manager he almost never calls a division head or the chief executive of a company but is delighted at any time of the day or night for
them to call him to report something or seek counsel. After investing in
a stock or purchasing an entire operation, he becomes a cheerleader and
sounding board: “At Berkshire we don’t tell 400% hitters how to swing,”
using an analogy to baseball management.
Two examples of Warren Buffett’s willingness to learn and adapt
himself are public speaking and computer usage. In the 1950s Warren
invested $100 in a Dale Carnegie course “not to prevent my knees from
knocking when public speaking but to do public speaking while my
knees are knocking.” At the Berkshire annual meeting in front of more
than 2,000 people, Warren Buffett sits on a stage with Charlie Munger,
and, without notes, lectures and responds to questions in a fashion that
would please Will Rogers, Ben Graham, King Solomon, Phil Fisher,
David Letterman, and Billy Crystal. To be able to play more bridge,
early in 1994 Warren learned how to use a computer so he could join a
network where you can play with other individuals from their locations
all over the country. Perhaps in the near future he will begin to use
some of the hundreds of data retrieval and information services on companies that are available on computers today for investment research.
Warren Buffett stresses that the critical investment factor is determining the intrinsic value of a business and paying a fair or bargain
price. He doesn’t care what the general stock market has done recently
or will do in the future. He purchased over $1 billion of Coca-Cola in
1988 and 1989 after the stock had risen over fivefold the prior six years
and over five-hundredfold the previous sixty years. He made four times
his money in three years and plans to make a lot more the next five,
ten, and twenty years with Coke. In 1976 he purchased a very major
position in GEICO when the stock had declined from $61 to $2 and
the general perception was that the stock was definitely going to zero.
How can the average investor employ Warren Buffett’s methods?
Warren Buffett never invests in businesses he cannot understand or that
are outside his “Circle of Competence.” All investors can, over time,
obtain and intensify their “Circle of Competence” in an industry where
they are professionally involved or in some sector of business they enjoy
researching. One does not have to be correct very many times in a lifetime as Warren states that twelve investments decisions in his forty year
career have made all the difference.

xii

FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION

Risk can be reduced greatly by concentrating on only a few holdings
if it forces investors to be more careful and thorough in their research.
Normally more than 75 percent of Berkshire’s common stock holdings
are represented by only five different securities. One of the principles
demonstrated clearly several times in this book is to buy great businesses
when they are having a temporary problem or when the stock market
declines and creates bargain prices for outstanding franchises. Stop trying to predict the direction of the stock market, the economy, interest
rates, or elections, and stop wasting money on individuals that do this
for a living. Study the facts and the financial condition, value the company’s future outlook, and purchase when everything is in your favor.
Many people invest in a way similar to playing poker all night without
ever looking at their cards.
Very few investors would have had the knowledge and courage to
purchase GEICO at $2.00 or Wells Fargo or General Dynamics when
they were depressed as there were numerous learned people saying those
companies were in substantial trouble. However, Warren Buffett’s purchase of Capital Cities/ABC, Gillette, Washington Post, Affiliated Publications, Freddie Mac, or Coca-Cola (which have produced over $6
billion of profits for Berkshire Hathaway, or 60 percent of the $10 billion of shareholders’ equity) were all well-run companies with strong
histories of profitability, and were dominant business franchises.
In addition to his own shareholders, Warren Buffett uses the Berkshire annual report to help the general public become better investors.
On both sides of his family he descended from newspaper editors, and
his Aunt Alice was a public school teacher for more than thirty years.
Warren Buffett enjoys both teaching and writing about business in general and investing in particular. He taught on a volunteer basis when he
was twenty-one at the University of Nebraska in Omaha. In 1955, when
he was working in New York City, he taught an adult education course
on the stock market at Scarsdale High School. For ten years in the late
1960s and 1970s he gave a free lecture course at Creighton University.
In 1977 he served on a committee headed by Al Sommer Jr., to advise
the Securities and Exchange Commission on corporate disclosure. After
that involvement, the scale of the Berkshire annual report changed dramatically with the 1977 report written in late 1977 and early 1978. The
format became more similar to the partnership reports he produced
from 1956 to 1969.

Foreword to the First Edition

xiii

Since the early 1980s, the Berkshire annual reports have informed
shareholders of the performance of the holdings of the company and new
investments, updated the status of the insurance and the reinsurance industry, and (since 1982) have listed acquisition criteria about businesses
Berkshire would like to purchase. The report is generously laced with examples, analogies, stories, and metaphors containing the do’s and don’ts
of proper investing in stocks.
Warren Buffett has established a high standard for the future performance of Berkshire by setting an objective of growing intrinsic value
by 15 percent a year over the long term, something few people, and no
one from 1956 to 1993 besides himself, have ever done. He has stated it
will be a difficult standard to maintain due to the much larger size of
the company, but there are always opportunities around and Berkshire
keeps lots of cash ready to invest and it grows every year. His confidence is somewhat underlined by the final nine words of the June 1993
annual report on page 60: “Berkshire has not declared a cash dividend
since 1967.”
Warren Buffett has stated that he has always wanted to write a book
on investing. Hopefully that will happen some day. However, until that
event, his annual reports are filling that function in a fashion somewhat
similar to the nineteenth-century authors who wrote in serial form:
Edgar Allen Poe, William Makepeace Thackery, and Charles Dickens.
The Berkshire Hathaway annual reports from 1977 through 1993 are
seventeen chapters of that book. And also in the interim we now have
The Warren Buf fett Way, in which Robert Hagstrom outlines Buffett’s career and presents examples of how his investment technique and
methods evolved as well as the important individuals in that process.
The book also details the key investment decisions that produced Buffett’s unmatched record of performance. Finally, it contains the thinking and the philosophy of an investor that consistently made money
using the tools available to every citizen no matter their level of wealth.
PETER S. LYNCH

Preface

A

lmost exactly twenty years ago, while training to become an investment broker with Legg Mason, I received a Berkshire Hathaway annual report as part of the training materials. It was my
very first exposure to Warren Buffett.
Like most people who read Berkshire’s annual reports, I was instantly impressed with the clarity of Buffett’s writing. As a young professional during the 1980s, I found that my head was perpetually
spinning as I tried to keep up with the stock market, the economy, and
the constant buying and selling of securities. Yet, each time I read a
story about Warren Buffett or an article written by him, his rational
voice seemed to rise above the market’s chaos. It was his calming inf luence that inspired me to write this book.
The principal challenge I faced writing The Warren Buf fett Way
was to prove or disprove Buffett’s claim that “what [I] do is not beyond
anybody else’s competence.” Some critics argue that, despite his success,
Warren Buffett’s idiosyncrasies mean his investment approach cannot be
widely adopted. I disagree. Warren Buffett is idiosyncratic—it is a source
of his success—but his methodology, once understood, is applicable to
individuals and institutions alike. My goal in this book is to help investors employ the strategies that make Warren Buffett successful.
The Warren Buf fett Way describes what is, at its core, a simple approach. There are no computer programs to learn, no two-inch-thick
investment manuals to decipher. Whether you are financially able to
xv

xvi

P R E FA C E

purchase 10 percent of a company or merely a hundred shares, this book
can help you achieve profitable investment returns.
But do not judge yourself against Warren Buffett. His five decades
of simultaneously owning and investing in businesses make it improbable that you can imitate his historical investment returns. Instead, compare your ongoing results against your peer group, whether that group
includes actively managed mutual funds, an index fund, or the broader
market in general.
The original edition of this book enjoyed remarkable success, and I
am deeply gratified that so many people found it useful. The success of
The Warren Buf fett Way, however, is first and foremost a testament to
Warren Buffett. His wit and integrity have charmed millions of people
worldwide; and his intellect and investment record have, for years, mesmerized the professional investment community, me included. This unparalleled combination makes Warren Buffett the single most popular
role model in investing today.
I had never met Warren Buffett before writing this book, and I did
not consult with him while developing it. Although consultation
surely would have been a bonus, I was fortunate to be able to draw
from his extensive writings on investing that date back more than four
decades. Throughout the book, I have employed extensive quotes from
Berkshire Hathaway’s annual reports, especially the famous Chairman’s Letters. Mr. Buffett granted permission to use this copyrighted
material, but only after he had reviewed the book. This permission in
no way implies that he cooperated on the book or that he made available to me secret documents or strategies that are not already available
from his public writings.
Almost everything Buffett does is public, but it is loosely noted.
What was needed, in my opinion, and what would be valuable to investors, was a thorough examination of his thoughts and strategies
aligned with the purchases that Berkshire made over the years, all compiled in one source. And that was the starting point for the original
edition of The Warren Buf fett Way.
This revised edition, ten years later, retains that basic goal: to examine Buffett’s more recent actions for the investment lessons they hold
and to consider whether changes in the financial climate have triggered
changes in his strategies.
