
FIGURE 1.1 Bar chart

FIGURE 1.2 Candlestick chart

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

6

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 6 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Candlesticks make analysis quicker and more efficient. Since the area between the opening and closing prices is boxed and colored, it is obvious
whether the bar is bearish (black) or bullish (white). In addition, the length of
the boxed area tells us how dominant the bears or bulls were during a trading
session. You don’t have to stop and “think it through.”
Candlesticks are tremendous for signaling turning points. They help identify the sentiment of investors as price becomes overextended or tests support
and resistance levels. Their signals are often received earlier than those from traditional Western indicators or reversal patterns, which make them a strong tool
for timing entries and exits.
Although the notion of candlesticks providing primarily short-term signals may be seen as a weakness by some traders, that trait can actually be put to
good use by swing traders. Swing traders tend to take profits after short-term
price moves. Precision entries and exits can make a substantial difference to
their bottom line. Candlesticks provide short-term signals, so they are an excellent swing-trading tool. It is one of the primary ways in which I use them.

Limitations of Candlesticks
Candlesticks are not perfect. Like any technical analysis tool, they do have their
limitations and weaknesses as indicated below:
Because of their boxed construction, candlestick lines take up more space
on a chart. When a chart is tightly compressed, it may be difficult to see the detail of each candlestick line. This is not usually a major hindrance for most
chartists though. Modern charting programs offer the ability to quickly zoom
out or zoom in to see more or less data on the chart.
Most candlestick patterns provide only a short-term glance into investor
psychology. Candlestick signals that form on daily charts may be more beneficial for shorter-term trading than for longer-term investing. However, since
candlesticks can be employed on any time frame, investors may benefit from
utilizing them on weekly charts.
Candlestick patterns do not provide price targets. However, Western technical analysis does provide techniques for projecting targets, which is a strong
argument for blending the two methodologies.
Candlestick reversal patterns do not predict the duration, or magnitude, of a
price move. They simply alert chartists to a potential change in the direction of price.
With certain setups, by the time a candlestick signal is confirmed price
may be well off its low (bullish pattern) or well off its high (bearish pattern).
Therefore, an entry should not be initiated for a new long or short position
based solely on the pattern. The reward compared to the risk should always be
considered when taking any trade.

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 7 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Introduction to Candlestick Charting

7

Most candlestick advocates will agree that the benefits of candlesticks far
outweigh their limitations and weaknesses.

Getting Started with
Candlestick Charting
Choosing candlesticks as your chart type, and really implementing candlestick
analysis, are two different things entirely. Although numerous traders now prefer to view price action displayed as candlestick lines, there are still many users
who are not proficient in their interpretation. In addition, many traders fail to
take advantage of the candlestick patterns.
Some traders just feel overwhelmed by the number of patterns, along with
their unusual names, that they must commit to memory and learn to recognize.
Others may not understand the message of the emotional crowd that is evident
in the candlestick lines and patterns, and which makes them so valuable. And
still other users may not be well versed in Western technical analysis and, as a
result, fail to use candlesticks in the proper context.
Getting Started in Candlestick Charting tackles those challenges. It will
provide you a strong foundation of the following:
• The construction of the candlestick lines and how the candles can provide insights into market behavior. By using candlesticks to display
data, you should see an immediate improvement in your chart analysis
skills.
• An understanding of the psychology of investors that underlies the formation of several common reversal patterns. You’ll learn how to identify those patterns, which will help you to select higher probability
trading setups and also improve the timing of your entries and exits.
• An introduction to several key Western technical analysis concepts.
This knowledge will give you a broader view of price action in contrast
to the narrower view provided by candlesticks.
• Blending candlestick charting with Western technical analysis in order
to enhance their signals. By doing so, you’ll enjoy a higher level of success than using either Japanese candlesticks or Western technical analysis in isolation.
A common complaint that I hear from traders is that they just get overwhelmed by all there is to be learned in this business. I encourage them to remain steadfastly focused on the outcome of trading, which is to make money.
The outcome is not to fill your mind with an exhaustive amount of data. You

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

8

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 8 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

must learn to sift through what appears to be a mountain of information and
hone in on the key areas that will achieve the outcome of increasing profits and
reducing risk. That is precisely the intention of this book. That “sifting” process
has been done for you with the goal of shortening your learning curve.
In the beginning, it is better to learn a limited number of candlestick patterns, and to learn them very well, rather than trying to absorb several dozen
patterns by rote memorization. If you really dig in deep and understand the
meaning behind a pattern, and then practice identifying it using real-time
charts, that knowledge will be lasting rather than fleeting. Once you have a
strong foundation of understanding in place, you’ll find it easy to add more
candlestick patterns later if desired.
Although there is no way around putting in the time needed to learn a
new subject, there are ways to learn that can expedite the process. Getting
Started in Candlestick Charting will save you an invaluable amount of time by
putting your focus in the key areas that will have an immediate and significant
impact on your trading.
Learning a new subject, especially a technical one such as chart analysis,
takes time and practice. You may need to review this book more than once in
order to become proficient at utilizing candlestick charts. Remember that repetition is the mother of skill. The benefits you’ll reap will far outweigh the initial
outlay of time and effort.

Additional Introductory Comments
The term candlestick charting is often abbreviated to candlesticks or candles. The
terms are interchangeable and are all used throughout this book.
Mention of Western technical analysis, bar charts, or chart patterns refers
to techniques that have been used in America for many decades. Reference to
Japanese or Eastern technical analysis refers to candlestick lines and candlestick
patterns that have been used in the Far East for centuries. Whenever the term reversal pattern is used, it should be construed to mean a candlestick reversal pattern. If a Western reversal pattern is referenced, it will be clearly stated as such.
The daily chart is the most commonly viewed time frame. Most of the
discussion and chart examples in this book refer to daily charts; therefore, the
term day, session, or trading session is often used to reference a candlestick line.
(A trading session is one day of trading from the opening bell to the closing
bell.) Candlestick charting can be used on any time frame. If a time frame other
than daily is referenced, it will be clearly noted. The term bar, period, or trading
period may be used in reference to a candlestick line in such cases.
The discussion and illustrations in this book focus on U.S. stocks. Therefore, the word price is used often; for instance, to describe a price advance or a

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 9 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Introduction to Candlestick Charting

9

price decline. However, candlestick charting can be used as an analysis and timing tool in most markets. Candlesticks are commonly used in the futures markets. As long as the prices, or values, that are needed are available, a candlestick
line can be constructed. For example, the opening, high, low, and closing prices
are used to construct candle charts for stocks. Index charts, such as the Dow
Jones Industrial Average, do not have prices. Those four price points are represented by numerical values for an index.
In most charting programs, the chart can be compressed horizontally and
vertically. The level of compression may impact the look of the candlesticks. In
addition, the chart adjusts to accommodate new higher, or lower, price points.
Therefore, if you are looking back from the right edge at historical data, it may
look different than it did when it was at the right edge of the chart. Make sure
to move the chart back when analyzing candlestick lines or patterns using historical data. Most mainstream charting programs allow you to back up the
chart; however, free online services may not offer this feature.
All chart examples in this book were produced with permission by TeleChart
2007®, a registered trademark of Worden Brothers, Inc., Five Oaks Office
Park, 4905 Pine Cone Drive, Durham, NC 27707; phone (800) 776-4940 or
(919) 408-0542, www.worden.com.
For ease of instruction, the terms trader and investor may be used interchangeably to refer to persons who execute trades, either short or long term.
However, it should be noted that trading typically applies to holding shortterm positions and investing generally refers to a longer-term strategy that may
include the analysis of a company’s fundamentals. The term bulls refers to bullish market participants either holding, or considering, long positions. The
term bears refers to bearish market participants holding or considering short
positions.
The term security or securities may be used generically to refer to either equities, securities or both. The term trading instrument may be used to refer to
anything traded on the markets other than stocks, for instance: bonds, currencies, futures, and so on.
There are many chart examples included throughout the book. Their inclusion is for educational purposes only. Reference to any individual stock
should not be construed as advice to buy or sell shares of that stock.

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 10 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 11 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

2
Chapter

Constructing
Candlestick Lines
Western price bar, shown in Figure 2.1, is constructed using the open, high, low, and closing
prices of a trading session. The range from high
to low is represented by a vertical line. The length of that
vertical line shows visually how far the stock was run up,
and down, during the trading session. The opening price
of the session is shown as a short horizontal line drawn
to the left of the vertical line. The closing price is drawn
to the right.
A Japanese candlestick line is shown in Figure 2.2.
The term candlestick is often shortened to candle. Although
the candlestick line has a more striking appearance than

A

range
A price bar’s
range is the difference between
the highest and
lowest prices
reached during a
given trading
period, for
example, a daily
session.

FIGURE 2.2 Japanese
candlestick

FIGURE 2.1 Western bar

11

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

12

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 12 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 2.3 Candlestick line

the Western price bar, it is comprised of the same data. The opening, high, low,
and closing prices are plotted along a vertical line. The difference is that, rather
than showing the opening and closing prices as small horizontal lines, the area
between those two price points is boxed.
The candlestick line is so called because it actually resembles a candle. The
boxed area is referred to as the real body, or body (Figure 2.3). The thin vertical
lines drawn above and below the real body are called shadows. A shadow is
sometimes called a wick because it looks like a wick that extends out either end
of a candle.
The shadows represent the price extremes of the trading session. The vertical line above the real body, referred to as the upper shadow, represents the difference between the top of the real body and the highest price of the session. The
vertical line below the real body, referred to as the lower shadow, represents the
difference between the bottom of the real body and the lowest price of the session.
If price closes higher than it opens, the session is bullish and the candle’s
real body is white (hollow), as shown in Figure 2.4. If price closes lower than it
opens, the session is bearish and the candle’s real body is black (filled), as shown
in Figure 2.5. The terms black and bearish are used interchangeably throughout
this book, as are the terms white and bullish. Figures 2.4 and 2.5 also illustrate
how the price data of the Western bar translates to the candlestick line.

FIGURE 2.4 Bullish (white) candle

FIGURE 2.5 Bearish (black) candle

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 13 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

Constructing Candlestick Lines

13

Smart Investor Tip
Many charting programs allow the option of changing the candlestick
colors. Some traders may prefer to use colors other than black and
white. For instance, they may choose green for bullish days and red for
bearish days.

The height and color of the candlestick’s real body tells a story about the
direction, and the momentum (or lack of ), of the price move. The shadows
show how far the bulls and bears were able to drive price up and down during
the session.
In this chapter you may see mention of a certain type of candlestick pattern, for example, a doji. Any pattern mentioned here is for reference only. The
patterns will be explained thoroughly in Chapter 3.

Distinguishing between the Real Body
and the Range
The Japanese tend to put a lot of emphasis on the real body—the area between
the open and the close. In Western technical analysis, the bar’s range is often
emphasized, which is the distance from the high to the low. The difference between the range and the real body is illustrated in Figure 2.6.
In Western technical analysis, a bar with a long range from high to low
may be referred to as a wide range bar, regardless of the difference between the
opening and closing prices. However, when the Japanese refer to a long or tall
candle, they are referring to the length (height) of the real body, not the range
from high to low of the session. The Japanese have specific names for candlestick
lines that include long shadows, for example, a hammer or a long-legged doji.

FIGURE 2.6 Real body versus the range

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

14

11:55 AM

Page 14 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Even though the Japanese place a lot of emphasis on the candlestick line’s
real body, the shadows also provide pivotal insights when analyzing charts. In
the discussion of the candlestick reversal patterns in Chapter 3, a certain
shadow length is indicated for many of the formations.
Importance of the Open and the Close

amateur
hour
The ﬁrst hour
of the trading
day is referred
to by many
experienced
traders as
amateur hour.
Amateur
traders often
make kneejerk reactions
during the
opening
frenzy.

In both Eastern and Western analysis, the opening and
closing prices of each trading day receive a lot of attention and deservedly so. The daily chart is the most commonly referenced time frame and represents a full day of
trading activity. Emotions tend to run high during the
first hour of the trading day (after the market open) and
the last hour (before the market close). You’ll generally
see higher volume during those times than throughout
the remainder of the day.
There is usually a flurry of activity during the first
30 to 60 minutes of trading each day. That is the time of
day when the following occurs:

• Traders respond to company or industry news, or
global events that occurred between the prior trading day’s close and the current day’s open.
• Various U.S. government economic reports are released
on certain days each month. Many of those reports are
released prior to the market open.
• Reactions to news, events, or economic reports often provoke a strong
surge, or a gap open to the up or down side, in individual stocks and/or
market averages.
• Queued-up market orders are filled, most of which are placed by amateurs after the close of the previous session.
• Traders assess the opening activity to determine their intraday strategies.

Smart Investor Tip
Only limit orders are ﬁlled outside of normal trading hours. Therefore,
market orders that are placed after the prior day’s close or before the
current day’s open are held until the opening bell.

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

11:55 AM

Page 15 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

Constructing Candlestick Lines

15

A lot of trading activity also occurs during the last 30 to 60 minutes of the
trading day. That is the time of day when the following occurs:
• Many trading strategies, especially computerized trading systems, may
call for executing “on close” orders for entering or exiting trades.
• Many breakout strategies require that price close above resistance for a
long position, or below support for a short position. This is referred to as
waiting for confirmation. Those trades are executed late in the trading day.
• Day traders close out their accounts to cash before the close of market.
Much of that activity occurs during the last half hour of trading.
• In the futures market, margin calls are determined based on the closing
price.
• A lot of “big money” moves in or out of the markets late in the day.
The close is a very important price. In fact, many traders believe it is the
most important price of the day. The close tells us the current market value of
the stock. The close is also the price most commonly used for chart analysis, to
calculate moving averages of price, and so on.
The opening and closing prices of candles on intraday charts are not as significant as they are on the daily time frame. Intraday data, which is often called
real-time data, flows in a steady stream over the Internet throughout the day. So
with the exception of the opening price of the first intraday bar, the open of one
intraday period is usually not much different than the close of the prior period.

Smart Investor Tip
Traders who employ strategies that call for executing trades on a
closing basis usually don’t wait until the actual close of market to do
so. Waiting until the closing bell may result in the order’s not being
ﬁlled. Therefore, those who manually place their orders often do so
between approximately 3:45 PM and 4:00 PM Eastern time. Automatic
“on close” orders that are executed by computer are usually ﬁlled as
near as possible to the closing price.

Distinctive Candlestick Lines
Candlesticks not only make it easy to see the trend, but also the force behind
the move. Candlesticks with average to long real bodies highlight the strength
of the dominant party. A stock may be making higher highs and higher closes,

JWBK100-ch02.qxd

2/21/08

16

11:55 AM

Page 16 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:J

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

which would look bullish on a standard bar chart. However, if those higher
highs are no longer being made with strong bullish candles, and instead by
diminishing real bodies, or if long upper shadows are forming, the upswing may
be losing strength. The reverse is true for a downside move.
If you look across a chart’s canvas, you’ll see a variety of candle lines with
real bodies and shadows of differing lengths. Many of the candle lines will look
to be about average length. Some of the candle lines will have noticeably longer
or shorter real bodies than average, and some will have long or short shadows.
These are relative terms. What constitutes average, long, and short may vary
widely from one stock or index to another. As a general rule, you can look back
from the right edge of a chart at the data for the past few weeks and get an idea
of what these terms represent for that particular stock or index.
By themselves, the distinctive candle lines mentioned in the following
pages tell a story about the current psychology of investors. As you study the
reversal patterns outlined in Chapter 3, you’ll recognize that certain of these
distinctive candle lines are also components of reversal patterns.
Long Candles

If the real body of the candle line is extended, it is referred to as a long, or tall,
candle. It represents a significant price move for the session and leaves no doubt
of the bullish or bearish sentiment. Since extended is a subjective term, as a general rule, in order to be considered long, the length of the candle’s real body
should be about two times the length (or longer) of an average real body for
that stock or index.
A long white candle opens near the low of the session and closes near the
high, leaving little or no upper and lower shadows (Figure 2.7). It is a clear indication that the bulls were in control of the session.
One or more long bullish candles may form during an uptrend. Although the candle line itself shows a strong bullish sentiment during that particular session, its location in context with the surrounding price action may
dictate whether the uptrend continues or reverses. Consider the following two
scenarios:
1. A long white candle may form after a downtrend and signal a potential
bullish reversal. One or more long bullish candles may form as a new
uptrend emerges. It is a sign of bullish interest and strength and the
uptrend may be just getting started (bullish reversal).
2. A long white candle may form near the end of an uptrend, or after a
