
Should You Buy Foreign Stocks?
A few foreign stocks have excellent potential if they are bought at the right
time and the right place, but I don’t suggest that people spend too much

297

298 BE SMART FROM THE START
time getting substantially invested in them. The potential profit from a foreign stock should be a good bit more than that from a standout U.S. company to justify the potential additional risk. For example, investors in foreign
securities must understand and closely follow the general market of the particular country involved. Sudden changes in that country’s interest rates,
currency, or government policy could, through one unexpected action,
make your investment less attractive.
It isn’t necessary for you to search out a lot of foreign stocks when there
are more than 10,000 securities to select from in the United States. Many
worthy foreign stocks also trade in the United States, and a number had
excellent success in the past, including Research in Motion, China Mobile,
and America Movil. I owned two of them in the last bull market. All of these
stocks benefited from the worldwide wireless boom, but corrected 60% or
more in the bear market that followed this bull move. There are also some
mutual funds that excel in foreign securities.
As weak as our stock market was in 2008, many foreign markets declined
even more. Baidu, a Chinese stock leader, dropped from $429 to $100. And
the Russian market plummeted straight down from 16,291 to 3,237 once
Putin invaded and intimidated the nation of Georgia.

Avoid Penny Stocks and Low-Priced Securities
The Canadian and Denver markets list many stocks that you can buy for
only a few cents a share. I strongly advise that you avoid gambling in such
cheap merchandise, because everything sells for what it’s worth. You get
what you pay for.
These seemingly cheap securities are unduly speculative and extremely
low in quality. The risk is much higher with them than with better-quality,
higher-priced investments. The opportunity for questionable or unscrupulous promotional practices is also greater with penny stocks. I prefer not to
buy any common stock that sells for below $15 per share, and so should you.
Our extensive historical studies of 125 years of America’s super winners show
that most of them broke out of chart bases between $30 and $50 a share.

What Are Futures, and Should You Invest in Them?
Futures involve buying or selling a specific amount of a commodity, financial issue, or stock index at a specific price on a specific future date. Most
futures fall into the categories of grains, precious metals, industrial metals,
foods, meats, oils, woods, and fibers (known collectively as commodities);
financial issues; and stock indexes. The financial group includes government

Money Management

T-bills and bonds, plus foreign currencies. One of the more active stock
indexes traded is the S&P 100, better known by its ticker symbol OEX.
Large commercial concerns, such as Hershey, use the commodity market
for “hedging.” For example, Hershey might lock in a current price by temporarily purchasing cocoa beans in May for December delivery, while
arranging for a deal in the cash market.
It is probably best for most individual investors not to participate in the
futures markets. Commodity futures are extremely volatile and much more
speculative than most common stocks. It is not an arena for the inexperienced or small investor unless you want to gamble or lose money quickly.
However, once an investor has four or five years of experience and has
unquestionably proven her ability to make money in common stocks, if she
is strong of heart, she might consider investing in futures on a limited basis.
With futures, it is even more important that you be able to read and interpret charts. The chart price patterns in commodity prices are similar to
those in individual stocks. Being aware of futures charts can also help stock
investors evaluate changes in basic economic conditions in the country.
There are a relatively small number of futures that you can trade. Therefore, astute speculators can concentrate their analysis. The rules and terminology of futures trading are different, and the risk is far greater, so investors
should definitely limit the proportion of their investment funds that they
commit to futures. There are worrisome events involved in futures trading,
such as “limit down” days, where a trader is not allowed to sell and cut a loss.
Risk management (i.e., position size and cutting losses quickly) is never more
important than when trading futures. You should also never risk more than
5% of your capital in any one futures position. There is an outside chance of
getting stuck in a position that has a series of limit up or limit down days.
Futures can be treacherous and devastating; you could definitely lose it all.
I have never bought commodity futures. I do not believe you can be a
jack-of-all-trades. Learn just one field as completely as possible. There are
thousands of stocks to choose from.

Should You Buy Gold, Silver, or Diamonds?
As you might surmise, I do not normally recommend investing in metals or
precious stones.
Many of these investments have erratic histories. They were once promoted in an extremely aggressive fashion, with little protection afforded to
the small investor. In addition, the dealer’s profit markup on these investments may be excessive. Furthermore, these investments do not pay interest or dividends.

299

300 BE SMART FROM THE START
There will always be periodic, significant run-ups in gold stocks caused by
fears or panics brought about by potential problems in certain foreign countries. A few gold companies may also be in their own cycle, like Barrick Gold
was in the late 1980s and early 1990s. This type of commodity-oriented trading can be an emotional and unstable game, so I suggest care and caution.
Small investments in such equities, however, can be timely and reasonable
at certain points.

Should You Invest in Real Estate?
Yes, at the right time and in the right place. I am convinced that most people should work toward being able to own a home by building a savings
account and investing in common stocks or a growth-stock mutual fund.
Home ownership has been a goal for most Americans. The ability over the
years to obtain long-term borrowed money with only a small or reasonable
down payment has created the leverage necessary to eventually make real
estate investments possible for most Americans.
Real estate is a popular investment vehicle because it is fairly easy to understand and in certain areas can be highly profitable. About two-thirds of American families currently own their own homes. Time and leverage usually pay
off. However, this is not always the case. People can and do lose money in real
estate under many of the following realistic unfavorable conditions:
1. They make a poor initial selection by buying in an area that is slowly

deteriorating or is not growing, or the area in which they’ve owned property for some time deteriorates.
2. They buy at inflated prices after several boom years and just before

severe setbacks in the economy or in the particular geographic area in
which they own real estate. This might occur if there are major industry
layoffs or if an aircraft, auto, or steel plant that is an important mainstay
of a local community closes.
3. They get themselves personally overextended, with real estate payments

and other debts that are beyond their means, or they get into inviting but
unwise variable-rate loans that could create difficult problems later, or
they take out and live off of home equity—borrowing, rather than paying
down their mortgage over time.
4. Their source of income is suddenly reduced by the loss of a job, or by an

increase in rental vacancies should they own rental property.
5. They are hit by fires, floods, tornadoes, earthquakes, or other acts of

nature.

Money Management

People can also be hurt by well-meaning government policies and social
programs that were not soundly thought through before being implemented, promoted, managed, operated, and overseen by the government.
The subprime fiasco from 1995 to 2008 was caused by a good, well-intended
government program that over time got completely out of control, with
totally unexpected consequences that caused many of the very people the
government hoped to help to lose their homes. It also caused huge job
losses as business contracted. In the greater Los Angeles area alone, many
minority owners in San Bernardino, Riverside, and Santa Ana were dramatically hurt by foreclosures.
Basically, no one should ever buy a home unless he can come up with a
down payment of at least 5%, 10%, or 20% on his own and has a relatively
secure job. You need to earn and save toward your home-buying goal. And
avoid variable-rate loans and smooth-talking salespeople who talk you into
buying homes to “flip,” which exposes you to far more risk. And finally, don’t
take out home equity loans that can put your home in a greater risk position.
Also beware of getting into the terrible habit of using credit cards to run up
big debts. That’s a bad habit that will hurt you for years.
You can make money and develop skill by learning about and concentrating on the correct buying and selling of high-quality growth-oriented equities rather than scattering your efforts among the myriad high-risk
investment alternatives. As with all investments, do the necessary research
before you make your decision. Remember, there’s no such thing as a riskfree investment. Don’t let anyone tell you there is. If something sounds too
easy and good to be true, watch out!
To summarize so far, diversification is good, but don’t overdiversify. Concentrate on a smaller list of well-selected stocks, and let the market help you determine how long each of them should be held. Using margin may be okay if you’re
experienced, but it involves significant extra risk. Don’t sell short unless you
know exactly what you’re doing. Be sure to learn to use charts to help with your
selection and timing. Nasdaq is a good market for newer entrepreneurial companies, but options and futures have considerable risk and should be used only
if you’re very experienced, and then they should be limited to a small percentage
of your overall investments. Also be careful when investing in tax shelters and
foreign stocks.
It’s best to keep your investing simple and basic—high-quality, growth-oriented
stocks, mutual funds, or real estate. But each is a specialty, and you need to educate yourself so that you’re not dependent solely on someone else for sound
advice and investments.

301

13

• CHAPTE R •

Twenty-One Costly Common
Mistakes Most Investors Make

Knute Rockne, the famous winning Notre Dame football coach, used to say,

“Build up your weaknesses until they become your strong points.” The reason people either lose money or achieve mediocre results in the stock market is they simply make too many mistakes. It’s the same in your business,
your life, or your career. You’re held back or have reverses not because of
your strengths, but because of your mistakes or weaknesses that you do not
recognize and correct. Most people just blame somebody else. It is much
easier to have excuses and alibis than it is to examine your own behavior
realistically.
When I first wrote this book, I came across lots of people who were advising: “Concentrate on your strengths, not your weaknesses.” That sounded
logical and reasonable in many situations. But now, after 50 years of day-today experience in America’s amazing stock market, where every cycle
thrusts forward dozens of brand-new, innovative, entrepreneurial companies that keep building our nation, I can state this:
By far the greatest mistake that 98% of all investors make is never spending any real time trying to learn where they made their mistakes in buying
and selling stock and therefore what they must stop doing and start doing in
order to become highly successful. In other words, you must unlearn many
things you thought you knew that ain’t so, stop doing them, and start learning new and better rules and methods to use in the future.
The difference between successful people in any field and those who are
not so successful is that the successful person will work and do what others
are unwilling to do. Since the early 1960s, I have known or dealt with count-

302

Twenty-One Costly Common Mistakes Most Investors Make

less individual risk takers, from inexperienced beginners to smart professionals. What I’ve discovered is that it doesn’t matter whether you’re just
getting started or have many years, even decades, of investing experience.
The fact is, experience is harmful if it continuously reinforces your bad
habits. Success in the market is achieved by avoiding the classic mistakes
most investors, whether public or professional, make.
Events in recent years should tell you it’s time for you to educate yourself,
take charge and learn how to handle and take responsibility for your own
financial future: your 401(k), your mutual funds, and your stock portfolio.
These events include Bernie Madoff’s theft of billions from supposedly
intelligent people through his supersecretive operations, which were never
transparent, as he never told anyone how he was investing their money; the
public’s heavy losses from the topping stock markets of 2000 and 2008; and
the use of excess leverage by Wall Street firms that couldn’t even manage
their own money with prudence and intelligence, forcing them into bankruptcy or shotgun weddings.
You can learn to do this. Many people have learned how to use sound
rules and principles to protect and secure their financial affairs. Here are
the key mistakes you’ll need to avoid once you get serious and want better
investment results:
1. Stubbornly holding onto your losses when they are very small
and reasonable. Most investors could get out cheaply, but because they
are human, their emotions take over. You don’t want to take a loss, so you
wait and you hope, until your loss gets so large it costs you dearly. This is by
far one of the greatest mistakes nearly all investors make; they don’t understand that all common stocks can be highly speculative and can involve large
risks. Without exception, you should cut every single loss short. The rule I
have taught in classes all across the nation for 45 years is to always cut all
your losses immediately when a stock falls 7% or 8% below your purchase
price. Following this simple rule will ensure you will survive another day to
invest and capitalize on the many excellent opportunities in the future.
2. Buying on the way down in price, thus ensuring miserable
results. A declining stock seems like a real bargain because it’s cheaper than
it was a few months earlier. In late 1999, a young woman I know bought
Xerox when it dropped abruptly to a new low at $34 and seemed really
cheap. A year later, it traded at $6. Why try to catch a falling dagger? Many
people did the same thing in 2000, buying Cisco Systems at $50 on the way
down after it had been $82. It never saw $50 again, even in the 2003 to 2007
bull market. In January 2009, you could buy it for $16.
3. Averaging down in price rather than averaging up when buying. If you buy a stock at $40, then buy more at $30 and average out your

303

304 BE SMART FROM THE START
cost at $35, you are following up your losers and throwing good money after
bad. This amateur strategy can produce serious losses and weigh down your
portfolio with a few big losers.
4. Not learning to use charts and being afraid to buy stocks that
are going into new high ground off sound bases. The public generally
thinks that a stock making a new high price seems too high, but personal
feelings and opinions are emotional and far less accurate than the market
itself. The best time to buy a stock during any bull market is when the stock
initially emerges from a price consolidation or sound “basing” area of at least
seven or eight weeks. Get over wanting to buy something cheap on the way
down.
5. Never getting out of the starting gate properly because of poor
selection criteria and not knowing exactly what to look for in a successful company. You need to understand what fundamental factors are
crucial and what are simply not that important! Many investors buy fourthrate, “nothing-to-write-home-about” stocks that are not acting particularly
well; have questionable earnings, sales growth, and return on equity; and
are not the true market leaders. Others overly concentrate in highly speculative or lower-quality, risky technology securities.
6. Not having specific general market rules to tell when a correction in the market is beginning or when a market decline is most
likely over and a new uptrend is confirmed. It’s critical that you be able
to recognize market tops and major market turnarounds coming off the bottom if you want to protect your account from excessive giveback of profits
and significant losses. Likewise, you must know when the storm is over and
the market tells you to buy back in and raise your market commitments. You
can’t go by your opinions or feelings. You must have specific rules and follow them religiously.
7. Not following your buy and sell rules, causing you to make an
increased number of mistakes. The soundest rules you create are of no
help if you don’t develop the discipline to make decisions and act according
to your historically proven rules and game plan.
8. Concentrating your effort on what to buy and, once the buy
decision is made, not understanding when or under what conditions
the stock must be sold. Most investors have no rules or plan for selling
stocks, meaning that they are doing only half of the homework necessary to
succeed.
9. Failing to understand the importance of buying high-quality
companies with good institutional sponsorship and the importance
of learning how to use charts to significantly improve selection and
timing.

Twenty-One Costly Common Mistakes Most Investors Make

10. Buying more shares of low-priced stocks rather than fewer
shares of higher-priced stocks. Many people think it’s smarter to buy
round lots of 100 or 1,000 low-priced shares. This makes them feel like
they’re getting a lot more for their money. They’d be better off buying 30 or
50 shares of higher-priced, better-quality, better-performing companies.
Think in terms of dollars when you invest, not the number of shares you can
buy. Buy the best merchandise available, not the cheapest.
Many investors can’t resist $2, $5, or $10 stocks, but most stocks selling
for $10 or less are cheap for a reason. They’ve either been deficient in the
past or have something wrong with them now. Stocks are like anything else:
the best quality rarely comes at the cheapest price.
That’s not all. Low-priced stocks may cost more in commissions and
markups. And since they can drop 15% to 20% faster than most higherpriced issues can, they also carry greater risk. Most professionals and institutions normally won’t invest in $5 and $10 stocks, so these stocks do not
have a top-notch following. Penny stocks are even worse. As discussed earlier, institutional sponsorship is one of the ingredients needed to help propel a stock higher in price.
Cheap stocks also have larger spreads in terms of the percentage difference between the bid and ask price. Compare a $5 stock that trades $5 bid,
$5.25 ask with a $50 stock that trades $50 bid, $50.25 ask. On your $5 stock,
that $0.25 difference is 5% of the bid price. On your $50 stock, that $0.25
difference is a negligible 0.5%. The difference is a factor of 10. As a result,
with low-priced stocks, you tend to have much more ground to make up
from your initial buy point just to break even and overcome the spread.
11. Buying on tips, rumors, split announcements, and other news
events; stories; advisory-service recommendations; or opinions you
hear from other people or from supposed market experts on TV.
Many people are too willing to risk their hard-earned money on the basis of
what someone else says, rather than taking the time to study, learn, and
know for sure what they’re doing. As a result, they risk losing a lot of money.
Most rumors and tips you hear simply aren’t true. Even if they are true, in
many cases the stock concerned will ironically go down, not up as you
assume.
12. Selecting second-rate stocks because of dividends or low
price/earnings ratios. Dividends and P/E ratios aren’t anywhere near as
important as earnings per share growth. In many cases, the more a company
pays in dividends, the weaker it may be. It may have to pay high interest
rates to replenish the funds it is paying out in the form of dividends. Betterperforming companies typically will not pay dividends. Instead, they reinvest their capital in research and development (R&D) or other corporate

305

306 BE SMART FROM THE START
improvements. Also, keep in mind that you can lose the amount of a dividend in one or two days’ fluctuation in the price of the stock. As for P/E
ratios, a low P/E is probably low because the company’s past record is inferior. Most stocks sell for what they’re worth at any particular time.
13. Wanting to make a quick and easy buck. Wanting too much, too
fast—without doing the necessary preparation, learning the soundest methods, or acquiring the essential skills and discipline—can be your downfall.
Chances are, you’ll jump into a stock too fast and then be too slow to cut
your losses when you are wrong.
14. Buying old names you’re familiar with. Just because you used to
work for General Motors doesn’t necessarily make it a good stock to buy.
Many of the best investments will be newer names that you won’t know, but
that, with a little research, you could discover and profit from before they
become household names.
15. Not being able to recognize (and follow) good information
and advice. Friends, relatives, certain stockbrokers, and advisory services
can all be sources of bad advice. Only a small minority are successful enough
themselves to merit your consideration. Outstanding stockbrokers or advisory services are no more plentiful than outstanding doctors, lawyers, or
ballplayers. Only one out of nine baseball players who sign professional contracts ever make it to the big leagues. Most of the ballplayers coming out of
college simply are not professional caliber. Many brokerage firms have gone
out of business because they couldn’t manage their own money wisely. In
the 2000 era, some used unbelievable leverage. You never want to make
excessive use of borrowed money.
16. Cashing in small, easy-to-take profits while holding the losers.
