the series is greater than the threshold and a value of -1 at other times.
Binary Rules from Multiple Thresholds
As pointed out earlier, binary rules are derived, quite naturally, from a sin-

gle threshold because the threshold defines two mutually exclusive and
exhaustive conditions: the time series is either above or below threshold.
However, binary rules can also be derived using multiple thresholds, but
employing more than one threshold creates the possibility that the input
lOa

75
50
25

a

Rule

+i

Output_I

.

: :
:

L

FIGURE 1.3 Rule with a single fixed threshold.

!

20 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

time series can assume more than two conditions. Consequently, multiple
threshold rules require a more sophisticated logical operator than the simple inequality operator (greater-than or less-than), which suffices for single threshold rules.
When there are two or more thresholds, there are more than two possible conditions. For example, with two thresholds, an upper and lower,
there are three possible conditions for the input time series. It can be
above the upper, below the lower, or between the two thresholds. To create a binary rule in this situation, the rule is defined in terms of two mutually exclusive events. An event is defined by the time series crossing a
particular threshold in a particular direction. Thus, one event triggers one
of the rule's output values, which is maintained until a second event,
which is mutually exclusive of the first, triggers the other output value.
For example, an upward crossing of the upper threshold triggers a + 1, and
a downward crossing of the lower threshold triggers a-I.
A logical operator that implements this type of rule is referred to as a
flip-flop. The name stems from the fact that the rule's output value flips
one way, upon the occurrence of one event, and then flops the other way,
upon the occurrence of the second event. Flip-flop logic can be used with
either variable or fixed threshold rules. An example of a rule based on two
variable thresholds is the moving average band rule. See Figure 1.4. Here,
the moving average is surrounded by an upper and lower band. The bands
may be a fixed percentage above and below the moving average, or the deviation of the bands may vary based on of the recent volatility of the
times, as is the case with the Bollinger Band. 6 An output value of + 1 is triggered by an upward piercing of the upper threshold. This value is retained

Price

Rule
Output

+1

I·.....·······]

-1

L

t.... · ...... ···· .. · .... ··

.:

FIGURE 1.4 Moving average bands rule.

.................... -..

Objective Rules and Their Evaluation

21

until the lower threshold is penetrated in the downward direction, causing
the output value to change to -l.
Obviously, there are many other possibilities. The intent here has
been to illustrate some of the ways that input time series can be transformed into a tinle series of recommended market positions.
Hayes 7 adds another dimension to threshold rules with di'rectional
modes. He applies multiple thresholds to a stationary time series such as a
diffusions indicator. At a given point in time, the indicator's mode is defined by the zone it occupies and its recent direction of change (e.g., up or
down over the most recent five weeks). Each zone is defined by an upper
and lower threshold (e.g., 40 and 60). Hayes applies this to a proprietary
diffusion indicator called Big Mo. With two thresholds and two possible
directional modes (up/down), six mutually exclusive conditions are defined. A binary rule could be derived from such an analysis by assigning
one output value (e.g., +1) to one of the six conditions, and then assigning
the other output value (i.e., -1) to the other five possibilities. Hayes asserts that one of the modes, when the diffusion indicator is above 60 and
its direction is upward, is associated with stock market returns (Value
Line Composite Index) of 50 percent per armum. This condition has occurred about 20 percent of the time between 1966 and 2000. However,
when the diffusion indicator is > 60, and its recent change is negative, the
market's annualized return is zero. This condition has occurred about 16
percent of the time. D

TRt\DITIONAL RULES AND INVERSE RULES
Part Two of this book is a case study that evaluates the profitability of approximately 6,400 binary long/short rules applied to the S&P 500 Index.
Many of the rules generate market positions that are consistent with traditional principles of technical analysis. For example, under traditional TA
principles, a moving-average-cross rule is interpreted to be bullish (output
value +1) when the analyzed time series is above its moving average, and
bearish (output value of -1) when it is below the moving average. I refer
to these as traditional TA rules.
Given that the veracity oftraditional TA maybe questionable, it is desirable to test rules that are contrary to the traditional interpretation. In
other words, it is entirely possible that patterns that are traditionally assumed to predict rising prices may actually be predictive of falling
prices. Alternatively, it is possible that neither configuration has any predictive value.
This can be accomplished by creating an additional set of rules whose

22 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Price
Moving
Average

~11 l

Traditional Rule

r---ou--ouLou_ouou__jouououou--ou. • Ti me

+ 11f--1
FIGURE •. 5

~t-------- ..•

Inverse Rule
Traditional rules and inverse rules.

output is simply the opposite of a traditional TA rule. I refer to these as

inverse rules. This is illustrated in Figure 1.5. The inverse of the movingaverage-cross rule would output a value of -1 when the input time series
is above its moving average, and + 1 when the series is below its moving
average.
There is yet another reason to consider inverse rules. Many of the
rules tested in Part Two utilize input series other than the S&P 500, for example the yield differential between BAA and AAA corporate bonds. It is
not obvious how this series should be interpreted to generate signals.
Therefore, both up trends and down trends in the yield differential were
considered as possible buy signals. The details of these rules are taken up
in Chapter 8.

THE USE OF BENCHMARKS IN RULE EVALUATION
In many fields, performance is a relative matter. That is to say, it is performance relative to a benchmark that is informative rather than an absolute
level of performance. In track and field, competitors in the shot-put are
compared to a benchmark defined as best distance of that day or the best
ever recorded in the state or world. To say that someone put the shot 43
feet does not reveal the quality of performance, however if the best prior
effort had been 23 feet, 43 feet is a significant accomplishment!
This pertains to rule evaluation. Performance figures are only informative when they are compared to a relevant benchmark. The isolated

Objective Rules and Their Evaluation

23

fact that a rule earned a 10 percent rate of return in a back test is meaningless. If many other rules earned over 30 percent on the same data, 10
percent would indicate inferiority, whereas if all other rules were barely
profitable, 10 percent might indicate superiority.
What then is an appropriate benchmark for TA rule performance?
What standard must a rule beat to be considered good? There are a number of reasonable standards. This book defines that standard as the performance of a rule with no predictive power (i.e., a randomly generated
signal). This is consistent with scientific practice in other fields. In medicine, a new drug must convincingly outperform a placebo (sugar pill) to
be considered useful. Of course, rational investors might reasonably
choose a higher standard of performance but not a lesser one. Some other
benchmarks that could make sense would be the riskless rate of return,
the return of a buy-and-hold strategy, or the rate of return of the rule currently being used.
In fact, to be considered good, it is not sufficient for a rule to simply
beat the benchmark. It must beat it by a wide enough margin to exclude
the possibility that its victory was merely due to chance (good luck). It is
entirely possible for a rule with no predictive power to beat its benchmark
in a given sample of data by sheer luck. The margin of victory that is sufficient to exclude luck as a likely explanation relates to the matter of statistical significance. This is taken up in Chapters 4, 6, and 6.
Having now established that the benchmark that we will use is the return that could be earned by a rule with no predictive power, we now face
another question: How much might a rule with no predictive power earn?
At first blush, it might seem that a return of zero is a reasonable expectation. However, this is only true under a specific and rather limited set of
conditions.
In fact, the expected return of a rule with no predictive power can be
dramatically different than zero. This is so because the performance of a
rule can be profoundly affected by factors that have nothing to do with its
predictive power.
The Conjoint Effect of Position Bias and
Market Trend on Back-Test Performance

In reality, a rule's back-tested performance is comprised of two independent components. One component is attributable to the rule's predictive
power, if it has any. This is the component of interest. The second, and unwanted, component of performance is the result of two factors that have
nothing to do with the rule's predictive power: (1) the rule's long/short position bias, and (2) the market's net trend during the back-test period.
This undesirable component of performance can dramatically influence

24 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
back-test results and make rule evaluation difficult. It can cause a rule
with no predictive power to generate a positive average return or it can
cause a rule with genuine predictive power to produce a negative average
return. Unless this component of performance is removed, accurate rule
evaluation is impossible. Let's consider the two factors that drive this
component.
The first factor is a rule's long/short position bias. This refers to the
amount of time the rule spent in a + 1 output state relative to the amount
of time spent in a -1 output state during the back test. If either output
state dominated during the back test, the rule is said to have a position
bias. For example, if more time was spent in long positions, the rule has a
long position bias.
The second factor is the market's net trend or the average daily price
change of the market during the period of the back test. If the market's net
trend is other than zero, and the rule has a long or short position bias, the
rule's performance will be impacted. In other words, the undesirable component of performance will distort back-test results either by adding to or
subtracting from the component of performance that is due to the rule's
actual predictive power. If, however, the market's net trend is zero or if
the rule has no position bias, then the rule's past profitability will be
strictly due to the rule's predictive power (plus or minus random variation). This is demonstrated mathematically later.
To clarify, imagine a TA rule that has a long position bias but that we
know has no predictive power. The signals of such a rule could be simulated by a roulette wheel. To create the long position bias, a majority of
the wheel's slots would be allocated to long positions (+1). Suppose that
one hundred slots are allocated as follows; 75 are + 1 and 25 are -1. Each
day, over a period of historical data, the wheel is spun to determine if a
long or short position is to be held for that day. If the market's average
daily change during this period were greater than zero (Le., net trend upward), the rule would have a positive expected rate of return even though
the signals contain no predictive information. The rule's expected rate of
return can be computed using the formula used to calculate the expected
value of a random variable (discussed later).
Just as it is possible for a rule with no predictive power to produce a
positive rate of return, it is just as possible for a rule with predictive
power to produce a negative rate of return. This can occur if a rule has a
position bias that is contrary to the market's trend. The combined effect of
the market's trend and the rule's position bias may be sufficient to offset
any positive return attributable to the rule's predictive power. From the
preceding discussion it should be clear that the component of performance due to the interaction of position bias with market trend must be
eliminated if one is to develop a valid performance benchmark.

Objective Rules and Their Evaluation

25

At first blush, it might seem as if a rule that has a long position bias
during a rising market trend is evidence of the rule's predictive power.
However, this is not necessarily so. The rule's bullish bias could simply be
due to the way its long and short conditions are defined. If the rule's long
condition is more easily satisfied than its short condition, all other things
being equal, the rule will tend to hold long positions a greater proportion
of the time than short positions. Such a rule would receive a performance
boost when back tested over historical data with a rising market trend.
Conversely, a rule whose short condition is more easily satisfied than its
long condition would be biased toward short positions and it would get a
performance boost if simulated during a downward trending market.
The reader may be wondering how the definition of a rule can induce
a bias toward either long or short positions. This warrants some explanation. Recall that binary reversal rules, the type tested in this book, are always in either a long or short position. Given this, if a rule's long (+1)
condition is relatively easy to satisfy, then it follows that its short condition (-1) must be relatively difficult to satisfy. In other words, the condition required for the -1 output state is more restrictive, making it likely
that, over time, the rule will spend more time long than short. It is just as
possible to formulate rules where the long condition is more restrictive
than the short condition. All other things being equal, such a rule would
recommend short positions more frequently than long. It would be contrary to our purpose to allow the assessment of a rule's predictive power
to be impacted by the relative strictness or laxity of the way in which its
long and short conditions are defined.
To illustrate, consider the following rule, which has a highly restrictive short condition and, therefore, a relatively lax long condition. The
rule, which generates positions in the S&P 500 index, is based on the Dow
Jones Transportation Average. 1O Assume that a moving average with
bands set at +3 percent and -3 percent is applied to the DJTA. The rule is
to be short the S&P 500 while the DJTA is below the lower band, by definition a relatively rare condition, and long at all other times. See Figure 1.6.
Clearly, such a rule would benefit if the S&P were in an uptrend over the
back-test period.
Now let's consider the back test of two binary reversal rules which
are referred to as rule 1 and rule 2. They are tested on S&P 500 data over
the period January 1, 1976 through December 2004. During this period of
approximately 7,000 days, the S&P 500 had an average daily return of
+0.035 percent per day compounded, or +9.21897 percent annualized. Assume that rule 1 was in a long state 90 percent of the time and rule 2 was
in a long state 60 percent of the time. Also, suppose that neither rule has
predictive power-as if their output values were determined by a roulette
wheel with 100 slots. The output for rule 1 is based on a roulette wheel

26 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Price
DJTA

~

Time

Rule
Output
+_11 1----------------i-+-;------------.--------'--+-----------.. ---------- -.. -

:.;~ ....:

-

~

L..~..l

FIGURE 1.6 Rule with restrictive short condition and long position bias.

with 90 slots assigned a value of +1 and the remaining 10 assigned a value
of -1. The output for rule 2 is based on a wheel with 60 slots assigned a + 1
value and 40 a value of -1. By the Law of Large Numbers,ll it is reasonable
to expect that over the 7,000 days, rule 1 will be long very close to 90 percent of the time and rule 2 will be long approximately 60 percent of the
time. Although the rules have different long/short biases, they have equal
predictive power-none. However, their expected rates of return will be
quite different over this segment of market history.
The expected return of a rule depends upon three quantities; (1) the
proportion of time the rule spent in long positions, (2) the proportion of
time spent in short positions (1 minus the proportion of time long) and (3)
the market's average daily price change during the historical test period.
The expected return (ER) is given by the following equation.
Expected Return

ER = [p(L) x ADC] - [p(S) x ADC]
Where
p(L) - probability of long position (proportion long)
p(S) - probability of short position (proportion short)
ADC: average daily change in market traded

Based on this calculation, the expected return for rule 1 is .028 percent per day or 7.31 percent annualized. l2 The expected return for rule 2 is

Objective Rules and Their Evaluation

27

0.007 percent per day or 1.78 percent annualized. 13 This demonstrates that
the rules' historical performance misleads us in two ways. First, both
rules generate positive returns, yet we know that neither has any predictive power. Second, rule 1 appears to be superior to rule 2 even though we
know they have equal predictive power-none.
When testing actual trading rules, one way to remove the deceptive effect due to the interaction of position bias and market trend would be to
do the following: Subtract the expected return of a nonpredictive rule
with the same position bias as the rule tested from the observed return of
the tested rule. For example, assume that we did not know rules 1 and 2
had no predictive power. Simply by knowing their historical position bias,
90 percent long for rule 1 and 60 percent for rule 2, and knowing the market's average daily return over the back-test period, we would be able to
compute the expected returns for rules with no predictive power having
these position biases using the equation for the expected return already
shown. The expected returns for each rule and would then be subtracted
from each rule's observed performance. Therefore, from rule 1's backtested return, which was 7.31 percent, we would subtract 7.31 percent,
giving a result of zero. The result properly reflects rule 1's lack of predictive power. From rule 2's return of 1.78 percent, we would subtract a value
of 1.78 percent, also giving a value of zero, also revealing its lack of predictive power.
The bottom line is this: by adjusting the back-tested (observed) performance by the expected return of a rule with no predictive power having an equivalent position bias, the deceptive component of performance
can be removed. In other words, one can define the benchmark for any
rule as the expected return of a nonpredictive rule with an equivalent position bias.

A Simpler Solution to Benchmarking:
Detrending the Market Data
The procedure just described can be quite burdensome when many rules
are being tested. It would require that a separate benchmark be computed
for each rule based on its particular position bias. Fortunately there is an
easier way.
The easier method merely requires that the historical data for the
market being traded (e.g., S&P 500 Index) be detrended prior to rule testing. It is important to point out that the detrended data is used only for the
purpose of calculating daily rule returns. It is not used for signal generation if the time series of the market being traded is also being used as a
rule input series. Signals would be generated from actual market data (not
detrended).

28 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Detrending is a simple transformation, which results in a new market
data series whose average daily price change is equal to zero. As pointed
out earlier, if the market being traded has a net zero trend during the backtest period, a rule's position bias will have no distorting effect on performance. Thus, the expected return of a rule with no predictive power, the
benchmark, will be zero if its returns are computed from detrended market data. Consequently, the expected return of a rule that does have predictive power will be greater than zero when its returns are computed
from detrended data.
To perform the detrending transformation, one first determines the
average daily price change of the market being traded over the historical
test period. This average value is then subtracted from each day's price
change.
The mathematical equivalence between the two methods discussed,
(1) detrending the market data and (2) subtracting a benchmark with a
equivalent position bias, may not be immediately obvious. A detailed
mathematical proof is given in the Appendix, but if you think about it, you
will see that if the market's average daily price change during the historical testing period is equal to zero, then rules devoid of predictive power
must have an expected return of zero, regardless of their long/short position bias.
To illustrate this point, let's return to the formula for computing the expected value of a random variable. You will notice that if the average daily
price change of the market being traded is zero, it does not matter what
p(long) or p(short) are. The expected return (ER) will always be zero.
ER = [p (long) x avg. daily return] - [p (short) x avg. daily return]

For example, if the position biases were 60 percent long and 40 percent short, the expected return is zero.
0= [0.60) x OJ - [0.40 x 0] Position Bias: 60 percent long, 40 percent short

If, on the other hand, a rule does have predictive power, its expected
return on detrended data will be greater than zero. This positive return reflects the fact that the rule's long and short positions are intelligent rather
than random.

Using Logs of Daily Price Ratio Instead
of Percentages
Thus far, the returns for rules and the market being traded have been discussed in percentage terms. This was done for ease of explanation. How-
