
I NVE S T O R L E A R N I N G —AN D UN L E ARN IN G

217

a year from June 1901 to June 1921, 0.4% a year from September 1929 to
September 1949, and 1.9% a year from January 1966 to January 1986. Despite
these puny returns, the stock market still outperformed short‑term interest
rates during 1929–49 and 1966–86, because inflation brought real average
short‑term interest rates to very low levels, in fact to negative territory in
1929–49. The inflationary periods associated with World War I, World War
II, and the Vietnam War all had the effect of depleting the purchasing power
of money earning interest.
Moreover, the United States may itself be the exception rather than the
rule in terms of real returns on the stock market. Philippe Jorion and William
Goetzmann have studied the real stock market appreciation rates (excluding
dividends) for thirty‑nine countries for the period 1926–96 and found that
the median real appreciation rate was only 0.8% per year for these countries
(compared to 4.3% per year for the United States).10 Thus, if we take the experience of other countries as relevant to our own, we might expect a much poorer
performance of the stock market in the future.
The evidence that stocks will always out-perform bonds over long time
intervals simply does not exist. Moreover, even if history supported this
view, we should recognize (and at some level most people must recognize)
that the future will not necessarily be like the past. For example, it could be
that, with investors buoyed by past successes in the stock market, there is
now widespread over-investment. Companies may have hatched too many
ambitious plans and spent too much on product development and promotion;
therefore, they may not do as well as they have in the past. There was indeed
substantial over-investment in the 1990s and 2000s, and this was a major factor
in the world economic slowdowns starting in 2001 and 2007.
It could also be that some of the very technological changes that are widely
touted as reasons for optimism for existing businesses are in fact reasons their
prospects are more uncertain. New technology may diminish the advantage
enjoyed by existing companies and cause them to be replaced by upstart newer
companies. Thus, these changes could raise, not lower, the probability that
stocks will underperform in the next thirty years.
So the “fact” of the superiority of stocks over bonds is not a fact at all.
The public has not learned a fundamental truth. Instead, their attention has
shifted away from some fundamental truths. They seem not to be so attentive to at least one genuine fundamental truth about stocks: that they are
residual claims on corporate cash flow, available to stockholders only after
everyone else has been paid. Stocks are, therefore, by their very definition,
risky. Investors have also lost sight of another truth: that no one is guaran‑
teeing that stocks will do well. There is no welfare plan for people who lose
in the stock market.

218

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

The “Stocks Have Always Outperformed Bonds”
Theme in Investing Culture
By the early 1990s, I was already so struck by the ubiquity of the observation
that stocks have historically outperformed bonds that I decided to try to learn
how common the observation really was. I asked the following in a questionnaire survey of U.S. institutional investors in 1991:
Consider the following argument:
“Over the past 65 years, stocks have earned much higher returns than bonds
and there has been no 20‑year period since 1926 that bonds have outperformed
stocks. Therefore, anyone with a time horizon of 20 years or more should be
investing primarily in stocks.”
[Circle one number]
1. I agree with this statement.
2. I disagree with this statement.

Of the 172 respondents, 84% chose 1, and only 16% chose 2. This is indeed
very solid agreement on a strongly worded statement.
The question as worded did not make it clear how often the respondents had
heard that stocks have always outperformed bonds. To clarify this, in the fall of
1993, I asked institutional investors a similar but differently worded question:
Consider the following claim:
“There is no 30‑year period since 1860 in which U.S. government bonds have
outperformed stocks.” Have you heard roughly this claim (even if the details,
such as the use of 30 years, are different)?
1. Yes, often
2. Yes, once or twice
3. No

Of the 125 respondents, 52% chose “Yes, often,” 22% chose “Yes, once or twice,”
and 26% chose “No.” Thus 74% say they remember hearing this statement.
Clearly statements like this were already part of our investing culture then.
Knowledge about the long‑run historical record, knowledge that dates
back at least to 1924 and that clearly was widely remembered in 1991 or 1993,
cannot be held directly responsible for the sudden upsurge in stock prices to
record levels in the late 1990s. The knowledge was apparently in investors’
faces all along. The public confidence that any downturn in the market will be
reversed indeed gained remarkable strength in the late 1990s boom years, but
this confidence did not derive from a sudden news flash about the historical
record. As I have argued, it derives from such things as a feedback mechanism
from past price increases (discussed in Chapter 5), driven ultimately by various
precipitating factors (discussed in Chapter 4)—not from a sudden discovery
of the lessons from long‑run historical data.

I NVE S T O R L E A R N I N G —AN D UN L E ARN IN G

219

Learning about Mutual Funds, Diversification,
and Holding for the Long Run
James Glassman and Kevin Hassett, in a pair of influential Wall Street Journal
articles in 1998 and 1999, argued that “investors have become better educated
about stocks, thanks in large part to mutual funds and the media. They have
learned to hold for the long term and to see price declines as transitory—and
as buying opportunities.” Thus, Glassman and Hassett concluded that investors have learned that diversified portfolios of stocks are not risky, that stocks
are much more valuable as investments than they had formerly thought.
Therefore, investors are now willing to pay much more for stocks. Because of
this increased investor demand for stocks, the stock market will perpetually
remain at a higher level in the future.11
Glassman and Hassett followed up these articles in 1999 with a book, Dow
36,000: The New Strategy for Profiting from the Coming Rise in the Stock Market. In
it they stressed that investors have not finished learning that diversified holdings of stocks are not risky and that they will continue to bid up stock prices
in coming years as the lesson really sinks in. They wrote that “a sensible target
date for Dow 36,000 is early 2005, but it could be reached much earlier.”12 Any
reader who believed this when the book came out in 1999 would have had
to conclude that there was an opportunity to make a lot of money between
1999 and 2005, or even sooner, by investing in stocks while other investors at
large were still gradually learning about the true long-term value of stocks.
Despite the ostensible theme of the book—that stocks are so risk-free that they
should be thought of as interchangeable with government bonds—the sales
pitch for the book (as can be seen in its title) was actually that one could get
rich quick on the transition by investing in stocks in 1999, while other people
would learn later that stocks are risk-free.
We now know that Glassman and Hassett were really totally wrong in
their forecast for the market. Glassman and Hassett were, however, right
when they said that people were considering the advantages of mutual funds,
investing for the long run, and coming to believe the concept that stock price
declines are transitory. But one should not infer from this that people had
learned or were in the process of learning some essential truths. We have
already seen that stock price declines have not been that transitory, that
they can persist for decades, and thus that even long‑run investors should
see risk in stock market investments. There is also reason to believe that
much of the enthusiasm for mutual funds is a sort of investor fad that was
not caused by any real learning.
Investors show great interest in choosing the right mutual fund, and their
interest in mutual funds often takes the form of switching from one to the
next. In response to this heightened investor interest, the mutual fund industry

220

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

has spawned thousands of new funds, with a corresponding proliferation of
ads and mailings. Yet studies of mutual fund performance have found that
although there has been some tendency for mutual funds that have done well
to continue to do so, the tendency is weak and short‑lived. People appear to
believe that it is smart to pore over rankings of mutual fund performance and
constantly shift their investments to the current top performers, but in fact
they gain relatively little by doing so.13
To assess investors’ feelings that they can make money in the stock
market, and the role that mutual funds play in this process, I included in a
1996 questionnaire survey of individual investors a sequence of questions
about their confidence levels for both investing in general and investing in
mutual funds. The questions, along with the percentage responses and the
number of respondents n for each answer, were as follows:
Trying to time the stock market, to get out before it goes down and to get in
before it goes up, is:
1. 	A smart thing to try to do; I can reasonably expect to be
a success at it.		
11%
2. 	Not a smart thing to try to do; I can’t reasonably expect
to be a success at it.		
83%
3. No opinion.
5%
[n = 131]
Trying to pick individual stocks, trying to predict, for example, if and when
Ford Motor stock will go up or IBM stock will go up, is:
1. 	A smart thing to try to do; I can reasonably expect to be
a success at it.		
40%
2. 	Not a smart thing to try to do; I can’t reasonably expect
to be a success at it.		
51%
3. No opinion.
8%
[n = 131]
Trying to pick mutual funds, trying to figure out which funds have experts who
can themselves pick stocks that will go up, is:
1. 	A smart thing to try to do; I can reasonably expect to be
a success at it.		
50%
2. 	Not a smart thing to try to do; I can’t reasonably expect
to be a success at it.		
27%
3. No opinion.
23%
[n = 131]

From these results, we see that people effectively believe in the efficiency of
the aggregate market and so have given up on timing it; but they often think
that they can still pick individual stocks and (particularly) mutual funds. Only
27% say that trying to pick mutual funds that will do well is not a smart thing

I NVE S T O R L E A R N I N G —AN D UN L E ARN IN G

221

to do to, compared with 51% who say that trying to pick individual stocks
and 83% who say that trying to time the market are not smart things to do.
If one truly believed in efficient markets, then one would reply “not a smart
thing to try to do” to all these questions. If stock prices are a random walk,
then one cannot pick times to enter the market, one cannot pick individual
stocks, and one cannot pick others who will pick them.
Since there is only modest evidence that one can in fact be a success at
picking mutual funds, what investors have “learned” has little support in fact.
And in any case, should it really be easier to pick managers of mutual funds
than managers of individual companies?
It is often said that people have learned about the importance of portfolio diversification and are using mutual funds to achieve this.14 Given
well‑managed funds with low management fees, this argument makes some
sense. But many funds charge such high fees that investors might be better off
trying to achieve diversification themselves, if diversification is the primary
investment motive. Moreover, when they are investing outside a tax‑free environment, by holding stocks directly, investors can avoid capital gains taxes
on the gains the mutual fund managers realize when they sell stocks in the
funds’ portfolios, an important issue with higher‑turnover funds. Investors
can instead realize, for tax purposes, the losses on the stocks that go down.
Mutual funds clearly have their limitations.

Learning and Unlearning
The public is said to have learned that stocks always go right back up after
they go down. We have seen evidence that people do largely think this, but
that they have gotten their facts wrong. Stocks can go down and stay down
for many years. They can become overpriced and underperform for long
periods of time.
The public is said to have learned that stocks must always outperform
other investments, such as bonds, over the long run, and so long‑run investors will always do better in stocks. We have seen evidence that people do
largely think this. But again they have gotten their facts wrong. Stocks have
not always outperformed other investments over decades‑long intervals, and
there is certainly no reason to think they must in the future.
And the public is said to have learned about the wisdom of investing in
stocks via mutual funds whose management teams have proven track records.
We find that people do largely think this, and once more they are wrong.
Picking mutual funds that have done well has much smaller benefits than
investors imagine.
When the facts are wrong, it can’t be called learning. We saw in Figure 5.1
that market events associated with the 2007–9 financial crisis caused investors

222

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

