
158

159
The idea for this exercise came out of an
experience I had when I was in college. I worked as
an orderly in a hospital ward that typically had lots of elderly patients. Over the course of three years, I
spoke to hundreds of people who were near the end of their lives. I asked these people how their lives had
been, what they liked about their lives and what they regretted, if anything.
==== What did you find out? ====
I found out that falling in love at nineteen was important. I found out that the willingness to take risks into
the unknown, like leaving one's small hometown, was important. On the other hand, just simply retiring
because of age was something many of them felt was the biggest mistake of their lives.
One thing that really struck me was that not one of these people said they truly regretted anything they
had actually done-what they regretted was what they hadn't done. They regretted that they had wasted their
lives on petty pursuits. They hadn't identified their important values and then done everything they could to
fulfill them. The les
son I learned from this experience was the same one emphasized years later in NLP: If we don't live true
to our values and fulfill them, we experience disappointment and emptiness.
==== How do you know whether the goals you're pursuing are the ones that will fulfill your values? ====
It's useful to think in terms of a mission. A mission isn't something you force on yourself or construct out
of your current concerns; rather, it's something that you discover within. As John Grinder once asked, "What
do you love so much that you would pay to do it?" If you don't have strongly held values, it will be hard to
clearly define a mission, and you will have little motivation to achieve your goals. However, if your goals
support your values and you have a clear sense of mission, then your motivation will be equally strong.
==== Is strong motivation a common characteristic of traders who excel? ====
Strong motivation is a common characteristic among those who excel in any field. There are two different
types of motivation, or what NLP calls two directions of motivation: either toward what we want or away from
what we don't want.
For example, consider how people respond to waking up in the morning. When the alarm goes off. one
person might mumble to himself, "Oh no, let me sleep just a little longer," and hit the snooze button. Then
when the alarm goes off again, and he sees pictures of himself rushing to get ready for work, he thinks, ''No
big deal, I'll wear the same clothes as yesterday and skip breakfast," as he hits the snooze button another
time. When the alarm goes off a few minutes later, his brain begins showing him pictures of getting to work
late and having to explain it to his boss. He decides he'll drive to work faster and goes back to sleep again.
But when the alarm goes off the next time, his inner voice says, "You must get up!" He sees pictures of his
clients waiting impatiently and his boss yelling and screaming, threatening to fire him. When these pictures in
his mind's eye become big enough^ bright enough, close enough, and loud enough, then he says, "OK, I'll
get up." He's finally motivated.
Another person, when he hears the alarm go off in the morning,
thinks about all the great things he's going to do that day. He sees himself accomplishing new goals and
wakes up raring to go. This person is also motivated. In fact, he probably wakes up before the alarm.
The person who wouldn't get up until he saw images like his boss yelling at him has an "Away From"
motivational direction. His motivation is to get away from pain, discomfort, and negative consequences. He
probably picks friends who won't bother him. He's not likely to make a career move until he can't stand his
job anymore. He moves away from what he doesn't want. The person who can't wait to get out of bed has a
"Toward" motivational direction. He moves toward pleasure, rewards, and goals. He probably picks friends
who stimulate him. He makes career moves to reach bigger opportunities. He moves toward what he wants.
People can have both types of motivation- Away From and Toward-but most people specialize in one or the
other. They are very different ways of getting motivated, and both are useful in different situations.
==== The benefits of Toward motivation seem pretty obvious, but how would an Away From motivation be
beneficial? ====
Your question reflects a common perception. The benefits of Toward motivation are more obvious. People
who move toward goals are greatly valued in our society. You can see it in the language of the Help Wanted
ads, which liberally use terms such as "self-motivated" and "go-getter." However, the Away From direction of
motivation has gotten a bad rap. Another way of thinking about this motivation is that it is away from
problems. Many people who use Away From motivation are problem solvers. You can hear it in their
language. They'll say, "Excuse me, but we have a problem here." They see a problem and have to solve it.
Sometimes they get so involved in the problem that they may forget where they are going, but they will
solve the problem. The Toward motivated people are so motivated toward their goals that they might not
even consider what problems they might run into or what difficulties to prepare for along the way. Therefore,
both types of motivation are useful.
==== Are you implying that people with Away From motivation are likely to be as successful as those with
Toward motivation? ====
That's right. The Toward motivation may be enshrined in success magazines, but the less appreciated
Away From motivation individuals can also be very successful. A perfect example is Martin Zwieg, the famous
stock forecaster. He manages over a billion dollars in assets. His stock letter and books are among the most
respected in the industry. When Zwieg talks about strategy, he says, "DON'T fight interest rate trends. DON'T
fight market momentum." He uses Away From motivation to minimize loss. Many outstanding traders reveal
an Away From motivation when they talk about "protecting themselves" or "playing a great defense." They're
only willing to take so much pain in the market before they get out. As Paul Tudor Jones said in your

159

160
interview, "I have a short-term horizon for pain."
==== Certainly there must be some disadvantages to having an Away From motivation. ====
Sure. People who are motivated away from things often experience a lot of pain and worry before they are
motivated. If they let the stressful anxiety level get too high, it will affect their health. Stress management
classes are filled with these people. It would be more useful for them to leam to accept less pain before
taking action than to learn to manage it better. Also, the further away they get from the problem, the less
serious it appears, and hence they lose some of their motivation. As a result. Away From motivation tends to
mn hot and cold. Finally, people with Away From motivation won't necessarily know where they're going to
end up because their attention is on what they don't want, not on what they do want.
==== Do successful traders tend to have one type of motivation versus the other? ====
Very often they come in with a developed Toward motivation-toward success, toward money-that's why
they got into the markets in the first place. However, those that are primarily Toward motivated must spend
the time and energy to develop the Away From motivation required for proper money management. In my
studies of traders I've found that it's nearly impossible to be a really successful trader without the motivation
to get away from excessive risk.
==== Obviously, motivation is critical to achieving goals. Is that the only critical factor, or is there more to
it? ====
NLP research has shown that five conditions must be met in order for a goal to be achievable. First, the
goal must be stated in positive terms. It's not getting rid of something-for example, "I don't want to lose
money." Rather, it needs to be stated in positive terms-for example, "I want to protect my assets." The
second condition is that the goal needs to be yours. "They want me to trade larger," is an example of a goal
that does not meet this condition. Instead, if your goal is, "When market conditions warrant it, I'm going to
double my trading size," you're much more likely to reach that goal. Third, the goal must be specific. Nothing
ever happens in general. The more richly detailed the description of your goal-what you'll see, hear, and feel
when you get it-the better. The fourth condition adds the when, where, and with whom. The fifth condition
for achieving a goal is anticipating the effects of the goal. Is it worthwhile and desirable in itself and in its
effects? This brings us full circle to having goals we really want and that will fulfill us.
==== The very first condition you stated as critical in achieving your goal is that the goal be stated in
positive terms. Wouldn't those with Away From motivation have difficulty in fulfilling this condition? ====
The underlying motivation may be one of getting Away From something negative, but the goal can still be
stated in positive terms. For example, someone's motivation for being a successful trader might be to get
away from poverty. So the goal might be to set a personal record in profits for the coming year. An Away
From motivation and a positive goal can work together to provide thorough motivation and outstanding
results.
==== How did you first get involved in working with traders? ====
In 1987,1 was approached by Steve Bianucci, a young Treasury bond floor trader who was working with
Pete Steidlmayer's Market Logic School [Steidlmayer has since left the school] and looking to make the
transition from the floor to position trading. He wanted to know if NLP could be used to build a working model
of a great trader. I was
intrigued by his question, and it served as the catalyst for a research process that is still ongoing.
==== What kind of research? ====
Observing great traders to construct a model of trading excellence.
==== Wasn't it difficult to gain access to such traders? I have trouble imagining that many of them would
willingly agree to be the subjects of extended observation and modeling. ====
In the case of floor traders, such as Tom Baldwin [a phenomenally successful T-bond floor trader profiled
in Market Wizards], direct observation was quite easy, requiring nothing more than access to the trading
floor, which I got. In the case of Pete Steidlmayer [a highly successful futures trader and the inventor of
Market Profile-an analytical methodology that relies heavily on the study of intraday volume], he offered
classes and I was able to observe him directly. Finally, in the case of some supertraders, the observation was
one step removed- watching video tapes of their trading and listening to their talks or interviews. Jimmy
Rogers, Paul Tudor Jones, and Richard Dennis [three of the best traders of our generation, who were also
profiled in Market Wizards] fall into this last category. I later saw Dennis on a futures industry panel that you
moderated and determined my inferences about his trading strategies and emotional management style were
accurate.
==== Can you give me a typical example of a trader who came to you for help? ====
I recently worked with a man who is a good trader. However, every time he gets ahead, he ends up giving
back a good part of his profits. While I was working with him, it came out that he knew lots of traders who
made money but who, in his words, were "not wonderful human beings.'" He wanted to be successful as a
trader, but he was worried about becoming like them. His unconscious solution to the problem was to not
become too successful.
His beliefs also had a very restricting effect on his personal life. He thought that he had to put trading
first-that trading meant that he
couldn't have a personal life or a family. Using NLP to change those beliefs helped evolve that part of
himself that he had mistakenly thought was sabotaging his trading. This was a particularly gratifying
experience for me, because I saw him reclaim a part of his life that he thought he couldn't have as a trader.

160

161
He recently called me to say he had tripled his
position size to over a thousand contracts. By
resolving his inner conflict, he freed up mental power to better watch for opportunities and improve his
trading.
==== What differentiates those who excel at trading from the vast majority of traders? ====
One critical element is beliefs. In his book Peak Performers, Charles Garfield reported that the key
element these individuals share is a total belief in the likelihood of their own success. Contrast this with Dr.
Michael Lemer's research, published in his book Surplus Powerless-ness, in which he found that most people
feel that they have very little power over their lives. He based his conclusions on thousands of interviews
conducted with people from a wide cross section of occupations. This general contrast between peak
performers and the majority of the population serves equally well in explaining an essential difference
between the outstanding traders and all other market participants. The supertraders have an absolute
confidence in their ability to win-a confidence confirmed by competence in the markets. Contrast this with
most traders who lack confidence in their system or approach and the typical tendency of many traders to
blame others (their broker, floor traders, and so on) for their results.
==== Beyond confidence in their own success, what are some of the other characteristics of successful
traders? ====
Another important element is that they have a perceptual filter that they know well and that they use- By
perceptual filter I mean a methodology, an approach, or a system to understanding market behavior. For
example, Elliot! Wave analysis and classical chart analysis are types of perceptual filters. In our research, we
found that the type of perceptual filter doesn't really make much of a difference. It could be classical
chart analysis, Ganri, Elliott Waves, or Market Profile-all these methods appear to work, provided the
person knows the perceptual filter thoroughly and follows it.
==== I have an explanation as to why that may be the case. ====
I'd certainly be interested in hearing it.
==== I believe a lot of the popular methodologies are really vacuous. ====
[He laughs.] Aha! That's a pretty provocative statement. You've got my attention.
==== All these technical methods are based on price. In effect, they're all different-colored glasses for
looking at price. Proponents of RSI and Stochastics (two popular overbought/oversold indicators) would see
price patterns filtered through these price-derived series. Gann analysis enthusiasts would see the price
patterns through a Gann-based interpretation. In these cases and others, traders accumulate experience on
price patterns-albeit from different perspectives. Some of the methodologies employed, however, are
probably totally worthless. It's simply that instead of looking at prices through clear glass, traders who use
these methods are looking at prices through different-colored tints. The method, or tint shade, is a matter of
individual preference. To extend the analogy, I would compare these methods to nonprescription sunglasses:
they change the view but don't necessarily improve the vision. The bottom line is that these methods seem to
work only because the people who use them have developed some sort of intuitive experience about price.
====
That actually fits pretty well with my own view. People need to have a perceptual filter that matches the
way they think. The appropriate perceptual filter for a trader has more to do with how well it fits a trader's
mental strategy, his mode of thinking and decision making, than how well it accounts for market activity.
When a person gets to know any perceptual filter deeply, it helps develop his or her intuition. There's no
substitute for experience.
==== What other characteristics typify successful traders? ====
Another important element among traders who excel is that they have an effective trading strategy. I'm
using the word "strategy" in an NLP sense, meaning a series of internal representations, mental pictures,
words, and feelings, leading to a desired outcome: winning trades. One trader can act decisively, while
another may be paralyzed by indecision. The difference lies in their strategies.
==== I'm afraid you are lost me. In your use of the word, what typifies the strategies of successful traders?
====
An effective trading strategy will have the following characteristics. First, it will be automatic. Given a
specific situation, the trader will know what to do without second-guessing himself. Second, a good strategy
will be congment-that is, it won't create any internal conflict. Third, the strategy will incorporate Away From
motivation by including some specific risk control plans. Fourth, part of the strategy will involve imagining the
trade from the perspective of already being in the position and considering what might be wrong with the
trade before putting it on. Fifth, an effective trading strategy will provide specific evidence that will allow the
trader to evaluate the merits of a trade.
==== Are there any other characteristics common to successful traders? ====
Management of one's emotional state is critical. The truly exceptional traders can stand up to anything.
Instead of getting emotional when things don't go their way, they remain calm and act in accordance with
their approach. This state of mind may come naturally. Or some people may have ways of controlling or
dissipating their emotions. In either case, they know they want to be emotionally detached from feelings
regarding their positions. When a position is going against him, Pete Steidlmayer's attitude appears to be:
"Hmm, look at that." He observes his own positions with scientific detachment. By staying calm, outstanding
traders get the necessary feedback to determine whether or not their approach needs to be revised.
==== Is having the proper emotional state an intrinsic quality? Or can it be learned? ====

161

162
Both. Some outstanding traders just appear to
be that way-they have a natural scientific
detachment-while others have learned to exercise a military-like control over their emotions. Either approach
will work, but these traders are the exceptions. Trading actually tends to attract people who are ill suited to
the task-those who are enamored with making lots of money; people who are willing to take high risks; individuals who seek excitement or who react to the world with emotional intensity.
==== How do you teach these types of people to adopt the kind of mental state appropriate to successful
trading? ====
One thing I do is to have them actually get up, step back, and imagine seeing themselves sitting in their
chairs. I get them to calmly watch as if they were observing someone else doing the trading. I also have
them do other NLP exercises that are designed to achieve the same goal.
==== And just doing this type of simple mental exercise is sufficient to create permanent behavioral
changes? For example, are you implying that previously high-strung traders will automatically respond calmly
in crisis situations, simply by virtue of having done such mental exercises? ====
If someone is very high-strung, it means he's particularly emotional, and it may take more work to make
sure the results stick, but overall, the answer is yes. I know that it sounds hard to believe, but our brains
learn very quickly. If you change the way the brain perceives a situation, you will change the way it will
respond to that situation forever.
Of course, sometimes there are other conflicting considerations. One of my earliest clients was a very
emotional trader who had a successful system but couldn't follow it. I taught him some techniques for
emotionally detaching from the market. I watched him applying these techniques one day, and it really
worked. In just a few hours, he was up $7,000. But just as I was savoring a sense of self-satisfaction, he
turned to me and in a monotone voice said, "This is boring." I thought to myself, Uh-oh. I would like to say
that I helped him solve his problem and that he made millions of dollars and lived happily ever after. No, the
guy blew out. He knew how to go into an emotionally detached state, but he didn't like to be there.
This experience taught me that some people are in the markets because they like the excitement. Since
then, I've learned to help people who have that need for excitement to find it in other places in their lives and
to schedule it, so their brain gets the idea that this process is not about denial but about appropriate times
and means of expression.
==== Anything to add regarding traits that differentiate winning from losing traders? ====
A final critical characteristic distinguishing winning traders from losing traders relates to what I've termed
"operating metaphors." An operating metaphor determines how we view the world, and it shapes our beliefs,
actions, and life-styles. Some of the metaphors used by traders to describe the market are a woman, war,
and a game, to name a few of the more common ones. As an example of the game or puzzle-solving
metaphors, Richard Dennis says, "It's like playing a hundred chess games at once." Pete Steidlmayer says
he's "solving the markets." Paul Tudor Jones sums it up with, "It's a game, and money is a way to keep
score." Each operating metaphor will lead a trader's brain to a different set of beliefs and a different approach
to the markets, with some being more effective than others.
Contrast the metaphors I just cited with some of the operating metaphors I've typically heard around the
trading floor. "I got torn up today," makes the market into a beast of prey. "We took a hit" reflects thinking
that the market is a war and the speaker a wounded participant. Which metaphor will result in your feeling
more objective about the market-playing a game, even a high-stakes game, or defending yourself from an
attacking wild animal? The answer is obvious. The difference is in what is suggested by the metaphor. In the
game, there are winners and losers, but your survival isn't at stake, as it is with being attacked by a wild
animal. You may respond brilliantly to save yourself from the beast, but that metaphor doesn't encourage
you to learn and practice long-term strategies and tactics the way a game does. Having an operating
metaphor appropriate to your trading style is fundamental to success.
==== Can you tell who will be a successful trader and who will not? ====
Yes, based on how well they match the profiles of successful traders in regards to the areas just
discussed: beliefs, perceptual filter, strategy, emotional-state management, and operating metaphors. On a
less technical level, I can say that after years of studying traders, the best predictor of success is simply
whether the person is improving with time and experience. Many traders unconsciously acknowledge their
lack of progress by continually jumping from one system or methodology to another, never gaining true
proficiency in any. As a result, these people end up with one year of experience six times instead of six years
of experience. In contrast, the superior traders gravitate to a single approach-the specific approach is
actually not important-and become extremely adept at it.
What is NLP's view of the relationship between the conscious and unconscious minds?
The property of the conscious mind is to reflect on things, "Am I where I want to be?" "Is this a good
trade?" In other words, it's concerned with evaluation. It's not the property of the conscious mind to change
things. To offer you an analogy, when I lived in Colorado, I had a friend from the Bast visit me. One day, I
suggested that we go horseback riding. We rented horses from a stable. I don't know if you've ever rented
horses from a stable, but the horses know the paths, and they also assess the experience of the rider when
he gets on, I had a little experience;
my friend had none.
We got on our horses, and they began to trot. Off in the distance, there was a line of trees in front of us.
The closer we got to the trees, the faster the horses began to run. I knew exactly what was going on. The
horses were planning to knock us off by running through the trees and then go back to the stables and take
