
General Re for having broken the “basic rules of underwriting.” Since he had never, in the history of
Berkshire Hathaway, publicly dressed down the management of one of his companies, the effect was to
brand General Re with a red-ink scarlet letter, which remained posted on the Web site for all to see. It was
now in a precarious situation. Having publicly embarrassed Buffett in such a dramatic way, it risked
becoming the next Salomon—a business that he could never embrace, that would instead become only
another cautionary tale.
***
After the stock market crash of 1987 and then again after the collapse of Long-Term, the Federal Reserve
had slashed interest rates three times within seven weeks, priming the market pump with easy money. Now,
to prevent panic, the Fed took interest rates down to historically low levels once again. The Fed’s role was to
maintain the banking system’s liquidity. This time, however, the Fed would keep interest rates artifically low
for three years.17 Fueled by cheap money, one month after the attacks, stocks completed a full recovery,
restoring $1.38 trillion in market value. But the upheaval was far from over, and the market remained in a
nervous mood, partly due to uncertainty over the outcome of the United States and British invasion of
Afghanistan a few weeks after 9/11. Then, in November, an energy trading company called Enron stuck a pin
in the remains of the late 1990s stock-market bubble, which had shrunk but not burst. As the Justice
Department moved in, Enron melted into bankruptcy in the heat of an accounting fraud.
Enron was an extreme but not isolated situation. The excesses of the stock-market bubble and the
opportunity for executives to pillage their companies led to a whole series of accounting-fraud and securitiesviolation cases: WorldCom, Adelphia Communications, Tyco, ImClone. As 2002 began, New York Attorney
General Eliot Spitzer mounted a blitzkrieg assault against the Wall Street banks for having inflated stock
prices by touting new offerings during the Internet bubble using biased stock research.18 Valuations of stocks
and bonds began to fall apart as investors lost confidence in the numbers reported to them by managements.
Berkshire’s best opportunities always came at times of uncertainty, when others lacked the insight, resources,
and fortitude to make the right judgments and commit. “Cash combined with courage in a crisis is
priceless,” said Buffett. Now his time had come round again. Anyone of normal energy might have been
overwhelmed, but Buffett had been waiting for years for the kind of opportunities that sleeted down upon
Kiewit Plaza. Every one of his faculties seemed engaged at once. He bought a group of junk bonds, which
had become cigar butts, for Berkshire. He bought the underwear maker Fruit of the Loom, quipping, “We
cover the asses of the masses.”19 He bought Larson-Juhl, which made picture frames. Berkshire’s
MidAmerican Energy subsidiary invested in the troubled Williams Companies and bought its Kern River
Pipeline.20 Berkshire bought Garan, the maker of Garanimals children’s clothing. It picked up the Northern
Natural Gas pipeline from Dynegy, another troubled energy company.21 Within days, MidAmerican lent
more money to Williams Companies.22 It bought The Pampered Chef, which sold cookware at parties
through a sales-force of 70,000 independent “kitchen consultants.” It bought farm-equipment maker CTB
Industries and teamed with investment bank Lehman Brothers to lend $1.3 billion to struggling Reliant
Energy.
Ajit Jain quickly moved into the terrorism-insurance business, filling a sudden vacuum by insuring airlines,
Rockefeller Center, the Chrysler Building, a South American oil refinery, a North Sea oil platform, and the
Sears Tower in Chicago. Berkshire was paid to unburden the Olympics of the dubious risk that either the
Games would be canceled or the U.S. would not show up at least twice before 2012. It insured the Winter
Olympics in Salt Lake City against a terrorist attack. It insured the FIFA World Cup soccer championship
against terrorism.23 Buffett was handicapping.
Some of Berkshire’s businesses struggled in a weak economy. Buffett had always said he’d rather have a
lumpy fifteen percent return than a steady ten percent. It didn’t bother him. Most would naturally right
themselves over time. NetJets, however, was struggling, not just because of the economy but because the
premise for buying it—the uniqueness of its franchise—was looking less unique. Other people who forgot to

call the Air-aholic hotline kept setting up businesses to compete with NetJets, even though the economics of
the fractional aviation business were unattractive. Buffett now realized that it was testosterone that caused
Air-aholism. “If only women could be CEOs of companies that flew planes,” he said, “I think it would be a
lot better. It’s like sports franchises. If only women could own sports franchises, they’d sell for one-tenth
what they sell for now.” He told the shareholders that NetJets would return to profitability and would
dominate its market. He did not point out, however, that it might not earn the margin on capital he had hoped,
at least not any time soon. It was a letdown, but still a lot better than a money-losing textile mill. Besides,
NetJets was fun. He knew mountains of minutiae about how the planes were purchased, managed, scheduled,
routed, maintained, insured, piloted, crewed, and even how the pilots were trained. NetJets was cool. He did
a lot of elephant-bumping at NetJets events. He would never sell it, even if the world’s other
mega-billionaires tried to arm-wrestle him for it.
The more serious, if smaller, problem was Dexter Shoe, the modern equivalent of the textile mill. Buffett
would later say it was the worst acquisition he had ever made, quoting Bobby Bare’s country song: “I’ve
never gone to bed with an ugly woman, but I’ve sure woke up with a few.”24 He changed the management.
Frank Rooney and Jim Issler, who ran Brown Shoe Company, a more successful operation, eventually shut
down Dexter’s U.S. operations and moved them overseas.25 For every dollar they were paying workers in the
U.S., it cost a dime to hire employees to make shoes elsewhere.
“I was wrong about the economic future of that one. The people working in the town of Dexter, Maine, were
wonderful people who were very good at what they did. But even if they were twice as good as the Chinese,
the Chinese would work for a tenth as much.”
Yet even with all this money-spinning activity, Buffett felt that the most important opportunity given him in
the aftermath of 9/11 had nothing to do with business. Rather, he now had both the privilege and the
responsibility to use his pulpit to influence events and ideas. After the bubble of hubris that had enveloped
the financial community for the past several years, America had become more sober-minded, and less blind
to the corner-cutting in the name of greed that had gone on in the late 1990s. Buffett thought the time was
right for him to speak up about the rapacity of the rich and the way it was being validated by fiscal policy.
His sense of justice was particularly inflamed by a proposal that was a centerpiece of President Bush’s new
budget—a plan to gradually repeal the decades-old federal estate tax, which took for the government a slice
of the largest inheritances. Supporters of the plan referred to the estate tax as the “death tax,” which had an
ominous sound. The mantra was that death shouldn’t be a taxable event. They called the estate tax a barrier
to the ambitions of hardworking entrepreneurial people. They cited a proverbial family that would have to
sell the family farm to pay the tax when its patriarch died. Undoubtedly, there were some such families.
Buffett argued that the suffering of those few was far outweighed by the effect on everybody else.
The estate tax was technically not a death tax; it was a gift tax. Anytime someone gave a large gift of money,
he paid a gift tax.26 All gift taxes were a blockade against the return of the robber barons, who controlled so
much of the nation’s riches through gifts and inheritance in the nineteenth century that they became like a
government unto themselves—a plutocracy—a ruling class based on wealth. The estate tax, however, was
paid at a lower effective rate than the tax imposed on gifts from living persons, allowing relatively large
posthumous gifts to go untaxed. Buffett used his preacher’s pulpit to point out that of the roughly 2.3 million
Americans who died each year, fewer than fifty thousand—two percent—paid any estate tax at all. Half of
all the estate taxes paid came from fewer than four thousand people—two-tenths of one percent of those who
had died.27 These were the monumentally, colossally rich, rich on the scale of being able to own a
Gulfstream-IV, buy the new Maybachs, own a vineyard in France, and wear jewels that look like rock candy
and lemon-and-lime sourballs.
As to the question, it was their money, why shouldn’t they be able to do what they wanted with it?—why
should they “subsidize” others?—Buffett’s answer was that they owed some minimum amount to the society
that enabled them to become so rich. If they thought they did it all themselves, reincarnate them as one of
five children of a scared, starving mother in Mali and see how rich and successful they would be after being
sent to work as a slave on a cocoa plantation in Côte d’Ivoire.

If the estate tax were eliminated, he said, somebody else would have to make up the difference, since the
same amount of money would still be required to pay for running the government.
For years a supply-side theory had postulated that cutting taxes would force the government to cut expenses.
This theory had an intuitive logic; after all, if people were supposed to live within their income, why not the
government? (Of course, by 2002, the populace was busy setting up home-equity lines of credit based on
artifically cheap interest rates to avoid living within its income.) Debate over supply-side policy still boiled
after twenty years; the taxes the government was collecting usually didn’t cover its costs, and it was
borrowing to make up the difference. The theory by now looked more dubious. Killing the estate tax would
mean that the government would have to raise taxes or borrow even more money, and the interest on that
debt, along with its ultimate repayment, would eventually be passed on to everybody else in the form of
higher taxes. Buffett felt that proposing an estate-tax cut while running the federal budget at a deficit was, in
fact, the height of hypocrisy.28
The average person who would pay these higher taxes if the estate tax were repealed would never face an
estate tax. The push to repeal the estate tax was not coming from people who owned small ranches in
Oklahoma. No, the real push, Buffett said, was coming from a tiny percentage of the country’s population,
people he actually knew, people who were rich enough (often very suddenly rich enough) to own a triplex
penthouse in Manhattan, a nine-bedroom log cabin in Deer Valley, a summer house in Nantucket, and a
condo in Costa Rica. Buffett felt that politics had slithered into the hands of people who could pay
hush-puppy lobbyists from K Street to whisper in the ear of Congress and funnel political donations where
they would do the most good. He didn’t blame people for acting in their own interests; he even felt pity for
the politicians who were chained to the grindstone of endless fund-raising. It was the system that he scorned,
in which money bought power.
Shortly after President Bush’s inauguration in 2001, Buffett had gone to the LBJ Room in the Capitol
Building to speak about political campaign financing to a group of thirty-eight Senators who were part of the
Democratic Policy Committee, then followed up with appearances on ABC’s This Week and CNN’s Inside
Politics. Buffett said that the campaign finance system was corrupt. The current way of electing politicians
had echoes of nineteenth-century Tammany Hall, where votes and influence were literally for sale. The laws
were shifting in ways that enhanced the ability of the rich to get ever richer, to keep more of what they made,
and to pass more of it along to their heirs. Buffett called this “government by the wealthy, for the wealthy.”
He pointed out a growing army of hush-puppies and tax panderers whose job was to push for legislation that
benefited the interests of the rich. He said, however, that nobody lobbied for the other ninety-eight percent of
Americans. Lacking their own lobbyists, the best redress for the ninety-eight percent was to understand what
was going on and to quit voting for people who enacted laws that took taxes out of the average person’s
pockets so the rich could pay a lower share.
Paul Newman, Bill Gates Sr., George Soros, a smattering of Rockefellers, and nearly two hundred other rich
and influential people agreed and signed a petition published in the New York Times that opposed Bush’s plan
to eliminate the estate tax.29 Buffett didn’t join the petition because he thought it did not go far enough. He
thought that rich people were lucky and blessed, and they should pay taxes. “I don’t believe in dynasties,” he
said. Repealing the estate tax would be like choosing the nation’s Olympic teams from the children of past
Olympic champions, he added.30
“Wealth is just a bunch of claim checks on the activities of others in the future. You can use that wealth in
any way you want to. You can cash it in or give it away. But the idea of passing wealth from generation to
generation so that hundreds of your descendants can command the resources of other people simply
because they came from the right womb flies in the face of a meritocratic society.
“I’d have a higher tax at the higher levels of wealth. I wouldn’t mind having no tax up to a point and then a
hundred percent tax for an estate over a hundred and fifty million dollars.

“The most important thing is to ask, ‘And then what?’ If you eliminate the twenty billion dollars or so
raised by the estate tax, you’ve got to make the money up by taxing everybody else somehow. It’s amazing
how hard the American population will fight for the families of those few thousand people who pay large
estate taxes and for the whole rest of the country to pay for it out of their own pockets.
“I don’t like anything that, in effect, creates a residue of humanity. I don’t like a tax system that goes in
that direction; I don’t like an educational system that goes in that direction. I don’t like anything where the
bottom twenty percent keep getting a poorer and poorer deal.”
But the debate over estate taxes turned shrill and bitter. Buffett was portrayed as a silver-spooned populist, a
rich old crocodile who was trying to keep the next generation from bootstrapping its way to success in the
classic American entrepreneurial manner.31
“Dynastic wealth turns a meritocracy upside down,” he wrote to Senator Ken Salazar. “In effect it says that
the people who should allocate the resources of this country should be the descendants of those who excelled
in amassing resources long ago.”32
Subtly or not, the estate tax feud was informed by the issue of Buffett’s own money. Some people called rich
guys like Buffett tax-dodgers, because they had amassed their money through lightly taxed investments. But
to say that Buffett invested to dodge taxes was like saying that a baby drank its bottle to fill its diapers.
Indeed, Buffett was the first to say that the tax on investments was unfairly low. In fact, this was another of
his causes. He liked to compare his tax rate to his secretary’s, pointing out how unjust it was that she paid a
higher tax rate on her income than he did, just because most of his income came from investing.
Having already angered all the plutocrats and would-be plutocrats, but with his credibility at a peak in other
quarters, Buffett vowed to carry on the fight against repeal of the estate tax, and would spin on this subject
for years. He spoke again on another subject to the Democratic Policy Committee just days before the first
shots were fired in the Iraq War in 2003. He said that President Bush’s plan to cut taxes on dividends was
more “class welfare for the rich.” In the Washington Post, he wrote about “Dividend Voodoo,” noting again
that his tax rate was lower than Debbie Bosanek’s. The reaction from conservatives against yet another of
Buffett’s populist manifestos was swift and savage. “Millionaires are seething at Warren Buffett’s betrayal of
their class,” said one.33
That, of course, was his point. He felt that the United States of America was never meant to be a country
where people with money were a self-perpetuating “class” who constantly gathered more wealth and power
unto themselves.
The rich, however, had been getting very rich indeed as the stock market continued its resurgence after 9/11.
A dozen new hedge funds seemed to sprout every day. They were cashing in on all the leverage from the low
interest rates the Federal Reserve had provided. So many people were raking in stock options and taking fees
of two-and-twenty percent of other people’s money in private equity funds, hedge funds, and funds of funds,
that billionaires were becoming as common as raccoons around a garbage can. A lot of the quick-bucks
wealth of the new economy bothered Buffett because of the way it had been transferred in massive amounts
from investors to middlemen without producing anything in return. The average investor was still getting—of
course—the average return, but with all of these fees gouged out.
One of Buffett’s least favorite ways for the rich to get richer was through stock options—since his famous
“no” vote on the pay package at Salomon, no other board had ever asked him to serve on its compensation
committee. Coca-Cola had given Doug Daft options on 650,000 shares of its stock in 2001. Daft had
originally asked to be compensated with stock options that would pay off only if earnings increased fifteen to
twenty percent. The shareholders approved it with Buffett staring at his shoes thinking, Okay, this will never
happen. A month later, the compensation committee belatedly realized that the target was impossible and
Daft would never get paid. It backtracked and bonus-pimped for him, lowering the target to eleven to sixteen
percent.34 That was like moving the finish line in a marathon to the nineteen-mile mark. Buffett couldn’t
believe it—the shareholders had voted for twenty-six miles and would be handing out a prize after nineteen!

Another vote for the rich. So far, Daft had not impressed, and Coca-Cola’s stock had gone nowhere.
Watching trophy-sized option payments proliferate despite rising outrage, Buffett felt he had to seize the
opportunity he had been waiting for—to finally kill counterfeit stock-option accounting.
Managers loved stock options because of a quirk of accounting history that said that if companies paid their
employees with options instead of cash, they booked no cost. It was as if the stock options did not exist. In
the “real” world, a privately owned business would instantly recognize this as a bogus idea. If the butcher,
baker, and candlestick maker gave away options for shares worth, say, twenty percent of their businesses,
they would be acutely aware that they had just given away a chunk of the profits as well.
But the accounting rules had made stock options into play money. Thus, bonus-pimping on an incredible
scale had begun to occur in the late 1990s. CEOs had, on average, been paid forty-two times as much as the
average blue-collar worker in 1980. Twenty years later, that ratio had increased to more than four hundred
times.35 The top-earning CEOs got billion-dollar packages. In 2000, Sandy Weill was paid $151 million at
Citigroup, Jack Welch $125 million at GE, Larry Ellison $92 million at Oracle. Although Steve Jobs was
taking only a $1 salary at Apple for 1997 through 1999, he got a windfall $872 million stock-option grant in
2000—plus a $90 million Gulfstream jet.36
When the accountants had tried to change these rules in the early 1990s, corporate America, led by Silicon
Valley, stormed the gates of Congress, armed with lobbyists and campaign contributions, begging their
representatives to save them from the terrible new accounting rules. Until the bubble finally burst in 2002,
they had succeeded in stopping those rules dead in their tracks and had almost succeeded in murdering the
Financial Accounting Standards Board, the accounting rulemaker, to boot.
Buffett had been writing about stock options since 1993 but now felt the time was finally ripe for change. He
wrote a thundering, influential editorial in the Washington Post, “Stock Options and Common Sense.”37
“CEOs know what their option grants are worth. That’s why they fight for them,” he wrote, and repeated
the questions he had raised before.
“If options aren’t a form of compensation, what are they?
“If compensation isn’t an expense, what is it?
“And if expenses shouldn’t go into the calculation of earnings, where in the world should they go?”
At Sun Valley in July 2002, emotions ran high over stock options. Buffett’s loudly expressed view, combined
with his influence, hung ominously over the heads of the stock-option lobby. The thermometer hit triple
digits, and the sweating celebrities and corporate chiefs headed off in buses to go rafting and escape the heat.
Buffett himself went somewhere else shortly after he arrived, somewhere he needed help to face. Katharine
Graham’s condominium had been right next to Herbert Allen’s, in the Wildflower group, a spot that people
passed by often on their way to and from events. The Coca-Cola board would be convening later for a
meeting at Allen’s, since most of its members were on site. The purpose was to discuss stock options, and he
would not miss this. But first:
“I was with Bill and Melinda, and we went up to the spot where Kay fell. I wasshaking, and I couldn’t stop.
It was like I had the chills or something. And, you know, they were probably embarrassed. I really wasn’t. I
was just overcome at that point.”
Afterward, Buffett was able to perform his ongoing miracle of the bathtub memory, and carried on with
composure. The Coca-Cola board made a decision during its meeting and announced in a press release that it
would start to book the cost of its employee stock options as an expense, which was currently allowed but
not required. Nobody else did that. They used an argument like the kid who tells his parents: It didn’t happen,
but if it did I wasn’t there. And if I was there, I didn’t do it; and if I did, my friends made me. Businesses said
