
Figure 2.5 EUR/USD Price Since Launch
There are 10 more members stated to adopt the euro over the next few years.
The enlargement, which will grow the EMU's population by one-filth, is both a
27

political and an economic landmark event: Of the new entrants, all but two are
former Soviet republics, joining the EU after 15 years of restructuring. Once
assimilated, these countries will become part of the world's largest free trade zone, a
bloc of 450 million people. Consequently, the three largest accession countries,
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic—which comprise 79 percent of new
member combined GDP—are not likely in adopt the euro anytime soon. While euro
members are mandated to cap fiscal deficits at 3 percent of GDP, each of these three
countries currently runs a projected deficit at or near 6 percent. In a probable
scenario, euro entry for Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic are likely to be
delayed until 2009 at the earliest. Even smaller states whose economies at present
meet EU requirements fare a long process in replacing their national currencies.
States that already maintain a fixed euro exchange rate—Estonia and Lithuania—
could participate in the ERM earlier, but even on this relatively fast track, they would
not be able to adopt the euro until 2007.
The 1993 the Maastricht Treaty set five main convergence criteria for member
states to join the EMU.
Maastricht Treaty: Convergence Criteria
1. The country's government budget deficit could not be greater than 3 percent of
GDP.
2. The country's government debt could not be larger than 60 percent of GDP.
3. The country’s exchange rate had to be maintained within ERM hands without
any realignment for two years prior to joining.
4. The country's inflation rate could not be higher than 1.5 percent above the
average inflation rate of the three EU countries with the lowest inflation rates.
5. The country’s long-term interest rate on government bonds could not be higher
than 2 percent above the average of the comparable rates in the three countries
with the lowest inflation.

28

What Moves the Currency Market
in the Long Term?
There are two major ways to analyze financial markets: fundamental analysis
and technical analysis. Fundamental analysis is based on underlying economic
conditions, while, technical analysis uses historical prices in an effort to predict
future movements. Ever since technical analysis first surfaced, there has been an
ongoing debate as to which methodology is more successful. Short-term traders
prefer to use technical analysis, focusing their strategies primarily on price action,
while medium-term traders tend to use fundamental analysis to determine a
currency's proper valuation, as well as its probable, future valuation.
Before implementing successful trading strategies, it is important to understand
what drives the movements of currencies in the foreign exchange market. The best
strategies tend to be the ones that combine both fundamental and technical analysis.
Too often perfect technical formations have failed because of major fundamental
events. The same occurs with fundamentals; there may be sharp gyrations in price
action one day on the back of no economic news released, which suggests that the
price action is random or based on nothing more than pattern formations. Therefore,
it is very important for technical traders to be aware of the key economic data or
events that are scheduled for release and, in turn, for fundamental traders to be aware
of important technical levels on which the general market may be focusing.

Fundamental analysis
Fundamental analysis focuses on the economic, social, and political forces that
drive supply and demand. Those using fundamental analysis as a trading tool look at
various macroeconomic indicators such as growth rates, interest rates, inflation, and
unemployment. We list the most important economic releases in Chapter 10 as well
as the most market-moving pieces of data for the U.S. dollar in Chapter 4.
Fundamental analysts will combine all of this information to assess current and future
performance. This requires a great deal of work and thorough analysis, as there is no
single set of beliefs that guides fundamental analysis. Traders employing
fundamental analysis need to continually keep abreast of news and announcements
that can indicate potential changes to the economic, social, and political environment.
All traders should have some awareness of the broad economic conditions before
placing trades. This is especially important for day traders who are trying to make
trading decisions based on news events because even though Federal Reserve
monetary policy decisions are always important, if the rate move is already
completely priced into the market, then the actual reaction in the EUR/USD, say,
could be nominal.
Taking a step back, currency prices move primarily based on supply and
demand. That is, on the most fundamental level, a currency rallies because there is
demand for that currency. Regardless of whether the demand is for hedging,
speculative, or conversion purposes, true movements are based on the need for the
currency. Currency values decrease when there is excess supply. Supply and demand
should be the real determinants for predicting future movements. However, how to
29

predict supply and demand is not as simple as many would think. There are many
factors that contribute to the net supply and demand for a currency, such as capital
flows, trade flows, speculative needs, and hedging needs.
For example, the U.S. dollar was very strong (against the euro) from 1999 to the
end of 2001, a situation primarily driven by the U.S. Internet and equity market boom
and the desire for foreign investors to participate in these elevated returns. This
demand for U.S. assets required foreign investors to sell their local currencies and
purchase U.S. dollars. Since the end of 2001, when geopolitical uncertainty rose, the
United States started cutting interest rates and foreign investors began to sell U.S.
assets in search of higher yields elsewhere. This required foreign investors to sell
U.S. dollars, increasing supply and lowering the dollars value against other major
currencies. The availability of funding or interest in buying a currency is a major
factor that can impact the direction that a currency trades. It has been a primary
determinant for the U.S. dollar between 2002 and 2005. Foreign official purchases of
U.S. assets (also known as the Treasury international capital flow or TIC data) have
become one of the most important economic indicators anticipated by the markets.

Capital and Trade Flows
Capital flows and trade flows constitute a country's balance of payments, which
quantifies the amount of demand for a currency over a given period of time.
Theoretically, a balance of payments equal to zero is required for a currency to
maintain its current valuation. A negative balance of payments number indicates that
capital is leaving the economy at a more rapid rate than it is entering, and hence
theoretically the currency should fall in value.
This is particularly important in current conditions (at the lime of this book's
publication) where the United States is running a consistently large trade deficit
without sufficient foreign inflow to fund that deficit. As a result of this very problem,
the trade-weighted dollar index fell 22 percent in value between 2003 and 2005. The
Japanese yen is another good example. As one of the world's largest exporters, Japan
runs a very high trade surplus. Therefore, despite a zero interest rate policy that
prevents capital flows from increasing, the yen has a natural tendency to trade higher
based on trade flows, which is the other side of the equation. To be more specific,
here is a detailed explanation of what capital and trade flows encompass.

Capital Flows: Measuring Currency Bought
and Sold
Capital flows measure the net amount of a currency that is being purchased or
sold due to capital investments. A positive capital flow balance implies that foreign
inflows of physical or portfolio investments into a country exceed outflows. A
negative capital flow balance indicates that there are more physical or portfolio
investments bought by domestic investors than foreign investors. Let's look at these
two types of capital flows—physical flows and portfolio flows.
Physical Flows. Physical flows encompass actual foreign direct investments by
corporations such as investments in real estate, manufacturing, and local acquisitions.
All of these require that a foreign corporation sell the local currency and buy the
30

foreign currency, which leads to movements in the FX market. This is particularly
important for global corporate acquisitions that involve more cash than stock.
Physical flows are important to watch, as they represent the underlying changes
in actual physical investment activity. These flows shift in response to changes in
each country’s financial health and growth opportunities. Changes in local laws that
encourage foreign investment also serve to promote physical flows. For example, due
to China's entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO), its foreign investment
laws have been relaxed. As a result of its cheap labor and attractive revenue
opportunities (population of over 1 billion), corporations globally have flooded China
with investments. From an FX perspective, in order to fund investments in China,
foreign corporations need to sell their local currency and buy Chinese renminbi
(RMB).
Portfolio Flows. Portfolio flows involve measuring capital inflows and outflows
in equity markets and fixed income markets.
Equity Markets. As technology has enabled greater ease with respect to
transportation of capital, investing in global equity markets has become far more
feasible. Accordingly, a rallying stork market in any part of the world serves as an
ideal opportunity for all, regardless of geographic location. The result of this has
become a strong correlation between a country's equity markets and its currency: if
the equity market is rising, investment dollars generally come in to seize the
opportunity. Alternatively, frilling equity market could prompt domestic investors to
sell their shares of local publicly traded firms to capture investment opportunities
abroad.

Figure 3.1 Dow Jones Industrial Average and USD/EUR
The attraction of equity markets compared to fixed income markets has
increased across the years. Since the early 1990s, the ratio of foreign transactions in
U.S. government bonds over U.S. equities has declined from 10 to 1 to 2 to 1. As
indicated in Figure 3.1, it is evident that the Dow Jones Industrial Average had a high
correlation (of approximately 81 percent) with the U.S. dollar (against the deutsche
mark) between 1994 and 1999. In addition, from 1991 to 1999 the Dow increased
31

300 percent, while the U.S. dollar index appreciated nearly 30 percent for the same
time period. As a result, currency traders closely followed the global equity markets
in an effort to predict short-term and intermediate-term equity-based capital flows.
However, this relationship has shifted since the tech bubble burst in the United
States, as foreign investors remained relatively risk-averse, causing a lower
correlation between the performance of the U.S. equity market and the U.S. dollar.
Nevertheless, a relationship does still exist, making it important for all traders to keep
an eye on global market performances in search of intermarket opportunities.
Fixed Income Markets. Just as the equity market is correlated to exchange rate
movement, so too is the fixed income market. In times of global uncertainly, fixed
income investments can become particularly appealing, due to the inherent safety
they possess. As a result, economies boasting the most valuable fixed income
opportunities will be capable of attracting foreign investment—which will naturally
first require the purchasing of the country's respective currency.
A good gauge of fixed income capital flows are the short- and long-term yields
of international government bonds. It is useful to monitor the spread differentials
between the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note and the yields on foreign bonds.
The reason is that international investors tend to place their funds in countries with
the highest-yielding assets. If U.S. assets have one of the highest yields, this would
encourage more investments in T.S. financial instruments, hence benefiting the U.S.
dollar. Investors can also use short-term yields such as the spreads on two-year
government notes to gauge short-term flow of International funds. Aside from
government bond yields, federal funds futures can also be used to estimate movement
of U.S. funds, as they price in the expectation of future Fed interest rate policy.
Euribor futures, or futures on the Euro Interbank Offered Rate, are a barometer for
the euro region's expected future interest rates and can give an indication of euro
region future policy movements. We cover using fixed income products to trade FX
further in Chapter 9.

Trade
Imports

Flows:

Measuring

Exports

versus

Trade flows are the basis of the international transactions. Just its the investment
environment of a given economy is a prime determinant of its currency valuation,
trade flows represent a country's net trade balance. Countries that are net exporters—
meaning they export more to international clients than they import from international
producers will experience a net trade surplus. Countries that are net exporters are
more likely to have their currency rise in value, since from the perspective of
international trade, their currency is being bought more than it is sold: inclinational
clients intended in buying the exported product/service mast first buy the appropriate
currency, thus creating demand for the currency of the exporter.
Countries that are net importers—meaning they make more International
purchases than international sales experience what is known as a trade deficit, which
in turn has the potential to drive the value of the currency down. In order to engage in
international purchases, importers must sell their currency to purchase that of the
32

retailer of the good or service; accordingly, on a large scale this could have the effect
of driving the currency down. This concept is important because it is a primary
reason why many economists say that the dollar needs to continue to fall over the
next few years to slop the United States from repeatedly hitting record high trade
deficits.
To clarify this further, suppose, for example, that the U.K. economy is booming,
and that its stock market is rallying as well. Meanwhile, in the United States, a
lackluster economy is creating a shortage of investment opportunities. In such a
scenario, the natural result would be for U.S. residents to sell their dollars and buy
British pounds to take advantage of the rallying U.K. economy. This would result in
capital outflow from the United States and capital inflow for the United Kingdom.
From an exchange rate perspective, this would induce a fall in the USD coupled with
a rise in the GBP as demand for USD declines and demand for GBP increases; in
other words, the GBP/USD would rise.
For day and swing traders, a tip for keeping on top of the broader economic
picture is to figure out how economic data for a particular country stacks up.

Trading Tip: Charting Economic Surprises
A good tip for traders is to stack up economic data surprises against price action
to help explain and forecast the future movement in currencies.

Figure 3.2 Charting Economic Surprises
Figure 3.2 presents a sample of what can be done. The bar graph shows the
percentages of surprise that economic indicator have compared to consensus
forecasts, while the dark line traces price action for the period during which the data
33

was released; the white line is a simple price regression line. This charting can be
done for all of the major currency pairs, providing a visual guide to understanding
whether price action has been in line with economic fundamentals and helping to
forecast future price action. Thus data is provided on a monthly basis on
www.dailyfx.com, listed under Charting Economic Fundamentals.
According to the chart in Figure 3.2 in November 2004, there were 12 out of 15
positive economic surprises and yet the dollar sold off against the euro during the
month of December, which was the month during which the economic data was
released. Although this methodology is inexact, the analysis is simple and past charts
have yielded some extremely useful clues to future price action. Figure 3.3 shows
how the EUR/USD moved in the following month. As you can see, the EUR/USD
quickly corrected itself during the month of January, indicating that the fundamental
divergence of price action that occurred in December proved to be quite useful to
dollar longs, who harvested almost 600 pips as the euro quickly retracted a large part
of its gains in January. This method of analysis, called "variant perception", was
invented by the legendary hedge fund manager Michael Steinhardt, who produced 24
percent average rates of return for 30 consecutive years.

Figure 3.3 EUR/USD Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
While those charts rarely offer such clear-cut signals, their analytical value may
also lie in spotting and interpreting the outlier data. Very large positive and negative
surprises of particular economic statistics can often yield clues to future price action.
If you go back and look at the EUR/USD charts, you will see that the dollar plunged
between October and December. This was triggered by a widening of the current
account deficit to a record high in October 2004. Economic fundamentals matter
perhaps more in the foreign exchange market than in any other market, and charts
34

such as these could provide valuable clues to price direction. Generally, the 15 most
important economic indicators are chosen for each region and then a price regression
line is superimposed over the past 20 days of price data.

Technical Analysis
Prior to the mid-1980s, the FX market was primarily dominated by fundamental
traders. However, with the rising popularity of technical analysis and the advent of
new technologies, the influence of technical trading on the FX market has increased
significantly. The availability of high leverage has led to an increased number of
momentum or model funds, which have become important participants in the FX
market with the ability to influence currency prices.
Technical analysis focuses on the study of price movements. Technical analysis
use historical currency data to forecast the direction of future prices. The premise of
technical analysis is that all current market information is already reflected in the
price of each currency; therefore, studying price action is all that is required to make
informed trading decisions. In addition, technical analysis works under the
assumption that history tends to repeat itself.
Technical analysis is a very popular tool for short-term to medium-term traders.
It works especially well in the currency markets because short-term currency price
fluctuations are primarily driven by human emotions or market perceptions, The
primary tool in technical analysis is charts. Charts are used to identify trends and
patterns in order to find profit opportunities. The most basic concept of technical
analysis is that markets have a tendency to trend. Being able to identify trends in their
earliest stage of development is the key to technical analysis. Technical analysis
integrates price action and momentum to construct a pictorial representation of past
currency price action to predict future performance. Technical analysis tools such as
Fibonacci retracement levels, moving averages, oscillators, candlestick charts, and
Bollinger bands provide further information on the value of emotional extremes of
buyers and sellers to direct traders to levels where greed and fear are the strongest.
There are basically two types of markets, trending and range-bound; in the trade
parameters section (Chapter 7), we attempt to identify rules that would help traders
determine what type of market they are currently trading in and what sort of trading
opportunities they should be looking for.

Is Technical Analysis or Fundamental Analysis Better?
Technical versus fundamental analysis is a longtime battle, and after many years
there is still no winner or loser. Most traders abide by technical analysis because it
does not require as many hours of study. Technical analysts can follow many
currencies at one time. Fundamental analysis, in contrast, tend to specialize due to the
overwhelming amount of data in the market. Technical analysis works well because
the currency market tends to develop strong trends. Once technical analysis is
mastered, it can be applied with equal ease to any time frame or currency traded.
However, it is important to take into consideration both strategies, as
fundamentals can trigger technical movements such as breakouts or trend reversals,
while technical analysis can explain moves that fundamentals cannot, especially in
35

quiet markets, such as resistance in trends. For example, as you can see in Figure 3.4,
in the days leading up to September 11, 2001, USD/JPY had just broken out of a
triangle formation and looked poised to head higher. However, as the chart indicates,
instead of breaking higher as technicians may have expected, USD/JPY broke down
following the terrorist attacks and ended up hitting a low of 115.81 from a high of
121.88 on September 10.

Figure 3.4 USD/JPY September 11, 2001, Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)

CURRENCY FORECASTING — WHAT BOOKWORMS AND
ECONOMISTS LOOK AT
For more avid students of foreign exchange who want to learn more about
fundamental analysis and valuing currencies, this section examines the different
models of currency forecasting employed by the analysts or the major investment
banks. There are seven major models for forecasting currencies: the balance of
payments (BOP) theory, purchasing power parity (PPP), interest rate parity, the
monetary model, the real interest rate differential model, the asset market model, and
the currency substitution model.
Balance of Payments Theory
The balance of payments theory states that exchange rates should be at their
equilibrium level, which is the rate that produces a stable current account balance.
Countries with trade deficits experience a run on their foreign exchange reserves due
to the fact that exporters to that nation must sell that nation's currency in order to
