
[1986.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

201

Our conclusion is that in some cases the benefits of lower corporate taxes fall exclusively, or almost exclusively, upon the corporation and its shareholders, and that in other cases the benefits are
entirely, or almost entirely, passed through to the customer. What
determines the outcome is the strength of the corporation's business franchise and whether the profitability of the franchise is
regulated.
For example, when the franchise is strong and after-tax profits
are regulated in a relatively precise manner, as is the case with
electric utilities, changes in corporate tax rates are largely reflected
in prices, not in profits. When taxes are cut, prices will usually be
reduced in short order. When taxes are increased, prices will rise,
though often not as promptly.
A similar result occurs in a second arena-in the price-competitive industry, whose companies typically operate with very
weak business franchises. In such industries, the free market "regulates" after-tax profits in a delayed and irregular, but generally
effective, manner. The marketplace, in effect, performs much the
same function in dealing with the price-competitive industry as the
Public Utilities Commission does in dealing with electric utilities.
In these industries, therefore, tax changes eventually affect prices
more than profits.
In the case of unregulated businesses blessed with strong
franchises, however, it's a different story: the corporation and its
shareholders are then the major beneficiaries of tax cuts. These
companies benefit from a tax cut much as the electric company
would if it lacked a regulator to force down prices.
Many of our businesses, both those we own in whole and in
part, possess such franchises. Consequently, reductions in their
taxes largely end up in our pockets rather than the pockets of our
customers. While this may be impolitic to state, it is impossible to
deny. If you are tempted to believe otherwise, think for a moment
of the most able brain surgeon or lawyer in your area. Do you
really expect the fees of this expert (the local "franchise-holder" in
his or her specialty) to be reduced now that the top personal tax
rate is being cut from 50% to 28%?
Your joy at our conclusion that lower rates benefit a number
of our operating businesses and investees should be severely tempered, however, by another of our convictions: scheduled 1988 tax
rates, both individual and corporate, seem totally unrealistic to us.
These rates will very likely bestow a fiscal problem on Washington
that will prove incompatible with price stability. We believe, there-

202

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

fore, that ultimately-within, say, five years-either higher tax
rates or higher inflation rates are almost certain to materialize.
And it would not surprise us to see both.
• Corporate capital gains tax rates have been increased from
28% to 34%, effective in 1987. This change will have an important
adverse effect on Berkshire because we expect much of our gain in
business value in the future, as in the past, to arise from capital
gains. For example, our three major investment holdings-Cap
Cities, GEICO, and Washington Post-at yearend had a market
value of over $1.7 billion, close to 75% of the total net worth of
Berkshire, and yet they deliver us only about $9 million in annual
income. Instead, all three retain a very high percentage of their
earnings, which we expect to eventually deliver us capital gains.
The new law increases the rate for all gains realized in the future, including the unrealized gains that existed before the law was
enacted. At yearend, we had $1.2 billion of such unrealized gains
in our equity investments. The effect of the new law on our balance sheet will be delayed because a GAAP rule stipulates that the
deferred tax liability applicable to unrealized gains should be
stated at last year's 28% tax rate rather than the current 34% rate.
This rule is expected to change soon. The moment it does, about
$73 million will disappear from our GAAP net worth and be added
to the deferred tax account.
• Dividend and interest income received by our insurance
companies will be taxed far more heavily under the new law. First,
all corporations will be taxed on 20% of the dividends they receive
from other domestic corporations, up from 15% under the old law.
Second, there is a change concerning the residual 80% that applies
only to property/casualty companies: 15% of that residual will be
taxed if the stocks paying the dividends were purchased after August 7, 1986. A third change, again applying only to property/casualty companies, concerns tax-exempt bonds: interest on bonds
purchased by insurers after August 7, 1986 will only be 85% taxexempt.
The last two changes are very important. They mean that our
income from the investments we make in future years will be significantly lower than would have been the case under the old law.
My best guess is that these changes alone will eventually reduce the
earning power of our insurance operation by at least 10% from
what we could previously have expected.
• The new tax law also materially changes the timing of tax
payments by property/casualty insurance companies. One new rule

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

203

requires us to discount our loss reserves in our tax returns, a
change that will decrease deductions and increase taxable income.
Another rule, to be phased in over six years, requires us to include
20% of our unearned premium reserve in taxable income.
Neither rule changes the amount of the annual tax accrual in
our reports to you, but each materially accelerates the schedule of
payments. That is, taxes formerly deferred will now be frontended, a change that will significantly cut the profitability of our
business. An analogy will suggest the toll: if, upon turning 21, you
were required to immediately pay tax on all income you were due
to receive throughout your life, both your lifetime wealth and your
estate would be a small fraction of what they would be if all taxes
on your income were payable only when you died.
Attentive readers may spot an inconsistency in what we say.
Earlier, discussing companies in price-competitive industries, we
suggested that tax increases or reductions affect these companies
relatively little, but instead are largely passed along to their customers. But now we are saying that tax increases will affect profits
of Berkshire's property/casualty companies even though they operate in an intensely price-competitive industry.
The reason this industry is likely to be an exception to our
general rule is that not all major insurers will be working with identical tax equations. Important differences will exist for several reasons: a new alternative minimum tax will materially affect some
companies but not others; certain major insurers have huge loss
carry-forwards that will largely shield their income from significant
taxes for at least a few years; and the results of some large insurers
will be folded into the consolidated returns of companies with noninsurance businesses. These disparate conditions will produce
widely-varying marginal tax rates in the property/casualty industry.
That will not be the case, however, in most other price-competitive
industries, such as aluminum, autos and department stores, in
which the major players will generally contend with similar tax
equations.
The absence of a common tax calculus for property/casualty
companies means that the increased taxes falling on the industry
will probably not be passed along to customers to the degree that
they would in a typical price-competitive industry. Insurers, in
other words, will themselves bear much of the new tax burdens.
• A partial offset to these burdens is a "fresh start" adjustment that occurred on January 1, 1987 when our December 31,
1986 loss reserve figures were converted for tax purposes to the

204

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

newly-required discounted basis. (In our reports to you, however,
reserves will remain on exactly the same basis as in the past-undiscounted except in special cases such as structured settlements.)
The net effect of the "fresh start" is to give us a double deduction:
we will get a tax deduction in 1987 and future years for a portion of
our incurred-but-unpaid insurance losses that have already been
fully deducted as costs in 1986 and earlier years.
The increase in net worth that is produced by this change is
not yet reflected in our financial statements. Rather, under present
GAAP rules (which may be changed), the benefit will flow into
the earnings statement and, consequently, into net worth over the
next few years by way of reduced tax charges. We expect the total
benefit from the fresh-start adjustment to be in the $30-$40 million
range. It should be noted, however, that this is a one-time benefit,
whereas the negative impact of the other insurance-related tax
changes is not only ongoing but, in important respects, will become
more severe as time passes.
• The General Utilities Doctrine was repealed by the new tax
law. This means that in 1987 and thereafter there will be a double
tax on corporate liquidations, one at the corporate level and another at the shareholder level. In the past, the tax at the corporate
level could be avoided. If Berkshire, for example, were to be liquidated-which it most certainly won't be-shareholders would,
under the new law, receive far less from the sales of our properties
than they would have if the properties had been sold in the past,
assuming identical prices in each sale. Though this outcome is theoretical in our case, the change in the law will very materially affect
many companies. Therefore, it also affects our evaluations of prospective investments. Take, for example, producing oil and gas
businesses, selected media companies, real estate companies, etc.
that might wish to sell out. The values that their shareholders can
realize are likely to be significantly reduced simply because the
General Utilities Doctrine has been repealed-though the companies' operating economics will not have changed adversely at all.
My impression is that this important change in the law has not yet
been fully comprehended by either investors or managers.
J.

Taxation and Investment Philosophy59

Berkshire is a substantial payer of federal income taxes. In
aggregate, we will pay 1993 federal income taxes of $390 million,
59

[1993.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

205

about $200 million of that attributable to operating earnings and
$190 million to realized capital gains.60 Furthermore, our share of
the 1993 federal and foreign income taxes paid by our investees is
well over $400 million, a figure you don't see on our financial statements but that is nonetheless real. Directly and indirectly, Berkshire's 1993 federal income tax payments will be about lh of 1 % of
the total paid last year by all American corporations.
Speaking for our own shares, Charlie and I have absolutely no
complaint about these taxes. We know we work in a market-based
economy that rewards our efforts far more bountifully than it does
the efforts of others whose output is of equal or greater benefit to
society. Taxation should, and does, partially redress this inequity.
But we still remain extraordinarily well-treated.
Berkshire and its shareholders, in combination, would pay a
much smaller tax if Berkshire operated a partnership or "s" corporation, two structures often used for business activities. For a variety of reasons, that's not feasible for Berkshire to do. However,
the penalty our corporate form imposes is mitigated-though far
from eliminated-by our strategy of investing for the long term.
Charlie and I would follow a buy-and-hold policy even if we ran a
tax-exempt institution. We think it the soundest way to invest, and
it also goes down the grain of our personalities. A third reason to
favor this policy, however, is the fact that taxes are due only when
gains are realized.
Through my favorite comic strip, Li'l Abner, I got a chance
during my youth to see the benefits of delayed taxes, though I
missed the lesson at the time. Making his readers feel superior, Li'l
Abner bungled happily, but moronically, through life in Dogpatch.
At one point he became infatuated with a New York temptress,
Appassionatta Van Climax, but despaired of marrying her because
he had only a single silver dollar and she was interested solely in
millionaires. Dejected, Abner took his problem to Old Man Mose,
the font of all knowledge in Dogpatch. Said the sage: Double your
money 20 times and Appassionatta will be yours (1, 2, 4, 8 . . . .
1,048,576).
My last memory of the strip is Abner entering a roadhouse,
dropping his dollar into a slot machine, and hitting a jackpot that
spilled money all over the floor. Meticulously following Mose's advice, Abner picked up two dollars and went off to find his next

60

[For 1996, the figure was $860 million.]

206

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

double. Whereupon I dumped Abner and began reading Ben
Graham.
Mose clearly was overrated as a guru: Besides failing to anticipate Abner's slavish obedience to instructions, he also forgot about
taxes. Had Abner been subject, say, to the 35% federal tax rate
that Berkshire pays, and had he managed one double annually, he
would after 20 years only have accumulated $22,370. Indeed, had
he kept on both getting his annual doubles and paying a 35% tax
on each, he would have needed 7 ½ years more to reach the $1 million required to win Appassionatta.
But what if Abner had instead put his dollar in a single investment and held it until it doubled the same 271h times? In that case,
he would have realized about $200 million pre-tax or, after paying
a $70 million tax in the final year, about $130 million after-tax. For
that, Appassionatta would have crawled to Dogpatch. Of course,
with 27 1h years having passed, how Appassionatta would have
looked to a fellow sitting on $130 million is another question.
What this little tale tells us is that tax-paying investors will realize a far, far greater sum from a single investment that compounds internally at a given rate than from a succession of
investments compounding at the same rate. But I suspect many
Berkshire shareholders figured that out long ago.

EPILOGUE 61

We will keep most of our major holdings, regardless of how
they are priced relative to intrinsic business value. This 'til-deathdo-us-part attitude, combined with the full prices these holdings
command, means that they cannot be expected to push up Berkshire's value in the future as sharply as in the past. In other words,
our performance to date has benefited from a double-dip: (1) the
exceptional gains in intrinsic value that our portfolio companies
have achieved; (2) the additional bonus we realized as the market
appropriately "corrected" the prices of these companies, raising
their valuations in relation to those of the average business. We
will continue to benefit from good gains in business value that we
feel confident our portfolio companies will make. But our "catchup" rewards have been realized, which means we'll have to settle
for a single-dip in the future.
We face another obstacle: In a finite world, high growth rates
must self-destruct. If the base from which the growth is taking
place is tiny, this law may not operate for a time. But when the
base balloons, the party ends: A high growth rate eventually forges
its own anchor.
Carl Sagan has entertainingly described this phenomenon,
musing about the destiny of bacteria that reproduce by dividing
into two every 15 minutes. Says Sagan: "That means four
doublings an hour, and 96 doublings a day. Although a bacterium
weighs only about a trillionth of a gram, its descendants, after a day
of wild asexual abandon, will collectively weigh as much as a
mountain [ ... ] in two days, more than the sun-and before very
long, everything in the universe will be made of bacteria." Not to
worry, says Sagan: Some obstacle always impedes this kind of exponential growth. "The bugs run out of food, or they poison each
other, or they are shy about reproducing in public."
Even on bad days, Charlie Munger (Berkshire's Vice Chairman and my partner) and I do not think of Berkshire as a bacterium. Nor, to our unending sorrow, have we found a way to double
its net worth every 15 minutes. Furthermore, we are not the least
bit shy about reproducing-financially-in public. Nevertheless,
Sagan's observations apply.
A fat wallet ... is the enemy of superior investment results.
And Berkshire now has a net worth of $11.9 billion compared to
61

[Divided by hash lines: 1989; 1994; 1996 Owner's Manual.]

207

208

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

about $22 million when Charlie and I began to manage the company. Though there are as many good businesses as ever, it is useless for us to make purchases that are inconsequential in relation to
Berkshire's capital. (As Charlie regularly reminds me, "If something is not worth doing at all, it's not worth doing welL") We now
consider a security for purchase only if we believe we can deploy at
least $100 million in it. Given that minimum, Berkshire's investment universe has shrunk dramatically.
Nevertheless, we will stick with the approach that got us here
and try not to relax our standards. Ted Williams, in The Story of
My Life, explains why: "My argument is, to be a good hitter,
you've got to get a good ball to hit. It's the first rule in the book.
If I have to bite at stuff that is out of my happy zone, I'm not a .344
hitter. I might only be a .250 hitter." Charlie and I agree and will
try to wait for opportunities that are well within our own "happy
zone."
We will continue to ignore political and economic forecasts,
which are an expensive distraction for many investors and businessmen. Thirty years ago, no one could have foreseen the huge
expansion of the Vietnam War, wage and price controls, two oil
shocks, the resignation of a president, the dissolution of the Soviet
Union, a one-day drop in the Dow of 508 points, or treasury bill
yields fluctuating between 2.8% and 17.4%.
But, surprise-none of these blockbuster events made the
slightest dent in Ben Graham's investment principles. Nor did they
render unsound the negotiated purchases of fine businesses at sensible prices. Imagine the cost to us, then, if we had let a fear of
unknowns cause us to defer or alter the deployment of capital. Indeed, we have usually made our best purchases when apprehensions about some macro event were at a peak. Fear is the foe of
the faddist, but the friend of the fundamentalist.
A different set of major shocks is sure to occur in the next 30
years. We will neither try to predict these nor to profit from them.
If we can identify businesses similar to those we have purchased in
the past, external surprises will have little effect on our long-term
results.
What we promise you-along with more modest gains-is that
during your ownership of Berkshire, you will fare just as Charlie
and I do. If you suffer, we will suffer; if we prosper, so will you.
And we will not break this bond by introducing compensation arrangements that give us a greater participation in the upside than
the downside.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

209

We further promise you that our personal fortunes will remain
overwhelmingly concentrated in Berkshire shares: We will not ask
you to invest with us and then put our own money elsewhere. In
addition, Berkshire dominates both the investment portfolios of
most members of our families and of a great many friends who
belonged to partnerships that Charlie and I ran in the 1960's. We
could not be more motivated to do our best.....
We achieved our gains through the efforts of a superb corps of
operating managers who get extraordinary results from some ordinary-appearing businesses. Casey Stengel described managing a
baseball team as "getting paid for home runs other fellows hit."
That's my formula at Berkshire, also .....
It's far better to own a significant portion of the Hope diamond than 100% of a rhinestone, and the companies just mentioned easily qualify as rare gems. Best of all, we aren't limited to
simply a few of this breed, but instead possess a growing collection.
Stock prices will continue to fluctuate-sometimes sharplyand the economy will have its ups and downs. Over time, however,
we believe it is highly probable that the sort of businesses we own
will continue to increase in value at a satisfactory rate.
I think it's appropriate that I conclude with a discussion of
Berkshire's management, today and in the future. As our first
owner-related principle tells you, Charlie and I are the managing
partners of Berkshire. But we subcontract all of the heavy lifting in
this business to the managers of our subsidiaries. In fact, we delegate almost to the point of abdication: Though Berkshire has about
33,000 employees, only 12 of these are at headquarters.
Charlie and I mainly attend to capital allocation and the care
and feeding of our key managers. Most of these managers are happiest when they are left alone to run their businesses, and that is
customarily just how we leave them. That puts them in charge of
all operating decisions and of dispatching the excess cash they generate to headquarters. By sending it to us, they don't get diverted
by the various enticements that would come their way were they
responsible for deploying the cash their businesses throw off. Furthermore, Charlie and I are exposed to a much wider range of possibilities for investing these funds than any of our managers could
find in his or her own industry.
Most of our managers are independently wealthy, and it's
therefore up to us to create a climate that encourages them to
choose working with Berkshire over golfing or fishing. This leaves

210

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

us needing to treat them fairly and in the manner that we would
wish to be treated if our positions were reversed.
As for the allocation of capital, that's an activity both Charlie
and I enjoy and in which we have acquired some useful experience.
In a general sense, grey hair doesn't hurt on this playing field: You
don't need good hand-eye coordination or well-toned muscles to
push money around (thank heavens). As long as our minds continue to function effectively, Charlie and I can keep on doing our
jobs pretty much as we have in the past.
On my death, Berkshire's ownership picture will change but
not in a disruptive way: First, only about 1 % of my stock will have
to be sold to take care of bequests and taxes; second, the balance of
my stock will go to my wife, Susan, if she survives me, or to a family foundation if she doesn't. In either event, Berkshire will possess
a controlling shareholder guided by the same philosophy and
objectives that now set our course.
At that juncture, the Buffett family will not be involved in
managing the business, only in picking and overseeing the managers who do. Just who those managers will be, of course, depends
on the date of my death. But I can anticipate what the management structure will be: Essentially my job will be split into two
parts, with one executive becoming responsible for investments
and another for operations. If the acquisition of new businesses is
in prospect, the two will cooperate in making the decisions needed.
Both executives will report to a board of directors that will be responsive to the controlling shareholder, whose interests will in turn
be aligned with yours.
Were we to need the management structure I have just described on an immediate basis, my family and a few key individuals
know who I would pick to fill both posts. Both currently work for
Berkshire and are people in whom I have total confidence.
I will continue to keep my family posted on the succession issue. Since Berkshire stock will make up virtually my entire estate
and will account for a similar portion of the assets of either my wife
or the foundation for a considerable period after my death, you can
be sure that I have thought through the succession question carefully. You can be equally sure that the principles we have employed to date in running Berkshire will continue to guide the
managers who succeed me.
