
Moneyness

Relationship to Spot

In-the-money

Underlying market < strike price

At-the-money

Underlying market = strike price

Out-of-the-money

Underlying market > strike price

Key Features of Binary Option Types

13

Table 1.4 Moneyness and Spot when Selling Binaries

Moneyness

Relationship to Spot

In-the-money

Underlying market > strike price

At-the-money

Underlying market = strike price

Out-of-the-money

Underlying market < strike price

When buying a binary option, remember these relationships between
moneyness and the underlying market price.
In-the-money status for the seller is different (Table 1.4). Being ITM for
sellers means they are betting that the underlying spot price is less than the
binary option strike price. The binary contract should be seen as a floor that the
spot falls through. That is what the seller wants to see happen. Therefore
the premium for that strike price increases for those who want to trade with
the downward momentum. Remember, at Nadex the premium for selling is
$100 – bid.
The trader receives the bid price and keeps it if the settlement price stays
below the strike price.
For example, if the bid price is $85 for a binary option strike price,
it means that the binary option strike price is deep-in-the-money for
­buyers, but deep-out-of-the-money for sellers. The market thinks there is
an 85 percent probability of the spot price staying above the binary, but
only a 15 percent probability of the spot price falling below the binary. If
the market becomes bearish, the bid would decline. For example, the bid
may be at $85 and then bearish news causes the bid to go down to $50.
The trader betting on a fall of the spot would pay $100 – bid or $50, much
higher than the $15 before.
Generally, a trader who is bearish and looking to an ITM binary option
strike price would be looking at the bids being lower than $50. Following this
logic, a very optimistic bearish market would have a very low price for the
bid and asks. Ask prices of $10 for a binary option strike price is a very cheap
option because the market is giving a low probability to the binary option
settling in-the-money at expiration and paying $100. For traders looking at
OTM strategies, they are betting that the opinion pool represented by the
bid/ask range is wrong, and this kind of OTM trade provides a huge reward
of 10:1 for being on the side of surprise.
We can affirm an extremely interesting relationship in the bid and ask
price ranges between the bid and ask prices and market sentiment. Since
the binary options pay only, at maximum, $100 when the binary option

14

Trading Binary Options

trade settles in-the-money, we can interpret the bid and ask prices as a sentiment probability. In effect, if the ask price is $80, the “crowd” is assigning an
80 percent probability that the option will work out.
If the bid price is $20, the market is, in effect, assigning an 80 percent
probability that the binary option for a seller will work out. This is the exact
inverse of the buying probability. Think about this a bit further. Binary option
bid/ask pricing becomes a trader scorecard of the battle between buyers and
sellers. It’s the best real-time measure of bullish or bearish sentiment.
The challenge for the trader becomes one of knowing when to go with the
crowd or against the crowd. Expected probabilities that the underlying market
will reach or not reach a strike price are derived from bid and ask pricing. It is
definitely predictive in value, but it is certainly only a conditional probability.
This is because markets can and do change and react to new information. Ultimately, the status that is important is the value at settlement time. In the case of
binary options, we have only one of two outcomes: $100 per unit or $0 per unit.
The Role of a Market Maker

The binary option trading is not an automatic match between buyers and
sellers. There is another component to the process: the market maker. A market
maker provides the liquidity. The essential role of the market maker is in fact
to make the market. As familiarity with the binary option product increases,
more market makers will be attracted to the opportunity. But let’s get a deeper
look at how the market maker fulfills his duty. Nadex has an agreement with
Market Risk Management (MRM), which is an entity of IG Group, to price
all markets on the Nadex exchange. But there should be no doubt that Nadex
and IG are, in fact, taking the opposite position of the trader. In contrast,
Cantor, NYSE, and CBOE are true exchanges and do not take the other
side. This is a great advantage to the trader. However, the disadvantage is the
potential lack of liquidity, if market makers are few or not providing pricing
for the different binary options.
Let’s understand further the role of market making with the binary
options. John Austin, a former market maker and one of the originators of
the binary option product, describes market making from his vantage point.
He provided the following point of view:
We need to begin with the traders. One trader looks at a price and
wants to buy, while another trader looks at the same contract and
wants to sell.

Key Features of Binary Option Types

For example, the market maker makes a price at 48–51.
In a perfect world, two individual traders see the price and trade
at the same time. One thinks the price is too high and goes short in
one lot at a price of 48. The other thinks the price is too low and goes
long in one lot at a price of 51. Both traders wait until expiration,
and do not trade again, and neither does anyone else.
In this perfect world, the market maker has fulfilled his duty
(that is, he has put liquidity onto the exchange and provided a tradable price for traders who don’t want to work an order but would
rather trade right away), but has left himself with absolutely no
­exposure to the final expiration level. He has bought one lot from the
selling trader at 48 and sold one lot to the buying trader at 51, making a three-point profit for himself, regardless of where the ­market
settles. This three-point profit is his reward for posting prices and
taking risk.
In the real world, individual traders rarely choose to trade in
­opposite directions in identical sizes at the same time (if they did,
there would be no need for market makers). In the real world, the
market maker posts a price that may start at 48–51 before moving
smoothly to, say, 78–81 and then dropping suddenly to, say, 19–22
and so on. Buyers and sellers come along more or less at random,
buying or selling on the market maker’s price in different sizes at different times. When the market maker sees a whole bunch of people
buying a certain price he may tweak his price upward by a point or
two to encourage some sellers to enter the market and balance his
risk. ­Alternatively, a whole bunch of people selling a certain price
may cause the market maker to tweak his price downward by a point
or two to encourage some balancing buyers.
In practice, market makers are rarely able to balance their book
perfectly, and end up wearing a position until expiration. So on any
one expiration on any one contract, the market maker may make a
large loss or a large profit.
But averaged over many contracts, over the course of a year, the
effect of the market maker’s spread should be to make the average
price at which he buys from traders slightly lower than the average
price at which he sells to traders. That is his reward for providing
liquidity, and it is paid for by the fact that losing traders lose, over
the course of a year, slightly more than winning traders win (because
binary trading, like spot FX and all other derivatives trading, is a
zero-sum game).

15

16

Trading Binary Options

Understanding the role of market makers provides a better understanding
of the real dynamics of binary option trading and why it is possible with honed
trading skills to gain an edge in binary option trading and have ­winning bets.
The actual bid and ask prices are not just the expected probabilities of bearish and bullish traders. It would be wrong and naive to interpret the bid and
ask prices as a simple reflection of expected probabilities. The fact is that they
also reflect adjustments the market makers make to encourage participation.
The market maker wants more volume, because, over time, he will gain a
fraction of the spread.
Market makers try to be quants and use option analytics to help determine
adjustments in the bid and ask. But market making is not pure calculation.
Matt Brief, the current market maker for IG Markets on the binaries, provided the following answer to a question on the use of some advanced analysis
in regard to binary option pricing:
Question: Do you actually consider the presence of volatility smiles in
the case of currencies, and if so, do you calculate them? Related to
this, do you look at risk reversals in your model as well?
Answer: We try to keep our vols in line with the market. On the euro,
for example, the market currently has a high implied vol on the
downside (lower strikes), but on the upside (higher strikes), the
implied vol is the same, or lower, than the ATM vol. So there is no
volatility smile on the E/$ at present. We will tend to replicate this
in our prices.
We can conclude that the actual bid and asks are not pure participant
probabilities. Nor are they simply a function of some advanced formula or
calculation engine, such as Black-Scholes, and so on. They reflect, instead,
a combination of traders as well as market maker judgments and misjudgments! The fact is that market makers cannot estimate accurately the expected
value of all strike prices, particularly those at the extremes, furthest away from
the spot price. When this happens, they have to make a best guess and usually increase the ask price to protect against uncertainty. This suggests that
traders should pay closer attention to strike prices or ladders that are deepout-of-the-money, where there is lighter volume. In this out-of-the-money
price zone, the bid and asks are not always directly reflective of the crowd, nor
subject to the same quantitative rigor of trading prices associated with ATM
and ITM binary options.

Key Features of Binary Option Types

17

Are Premiums Fairly Priced?

Many traders will wonder whether the premiums (bid/asks) are fairly priced.
They do not want to pay more than they have to. Markets, when working
efficiently, should result in option premiums that are fairly valued. So let’s look
at a comparison of the bid and ask pricing at Nadex with an advanced option
calculator. Do we get similar premiums? If not, why are there differences? By
entering the key pricing information in the calculator supplied by Superderivatives, a world-class professional derivative option calculator, the result was
different from the real-time Nadex premium pricing of the AUD/USD weekly
1.065 binary contract (Table 1.4), which shows a bid of 16 and an ask of 21.5.
In contrast to the Nadex real-time pricing, the Superderivatives engine using
the same expiration date (April 15, 2011) and binary strike price for the AUD/
USD (1.6025) showed a bid/ask range of 7.75/19.75. At that same moment,
the same binary strike price on the Nadex platform showed a bid/ask of 16/21.5.
Why might there be a difference between the Nadex pricing and the
calculations of advanced option-pricing engines such as Superderivatives or
Bloomberg? The difference between what the option calculator shows and
what is traded is attributed to volume and judgments of the market makers.
The main point here is that there is no true trade price. It is, rather, a combination of supply and demand as well as the perceptions and misperceptions of
the market maker who participates in providing liquidity.
Another example verifying mispricing in the bid and ask of Nadex is an
analysis provided by the use of Mathematica’s powerful option analysis engine.
The bid/ask prices of the EUR/USD weekly binaries for a sample moment
in time (June 28 at 9:25 a.m.) was processed using Mathematica software.
According to Michael Kelly, Mathematica trainer and consultant, the results
reported that: “Considering that the first two are overpriced, the third at
1.4375 is correctly priced and that from the fourth to the last are underpriced.”
The main conclusion is that there is significant mispricing in these binary
options. The implication for the average trader is that human judgment still
dominates the binary option pricing. The bid/ask prices are simply reflections
of error-prone opinions and the expectations of traders (see Table 1.5). The
trader has the opportunity to profit from these conditions.
Table 1.5 Bid/Ask Comparative Pricing

Contract

Expiration

Bid

AUD/USD > 1.065 (3 p.m.)

15-APR-11

16

18

Trading Binary Options

Binary Option Non-Laddered Trading

In contrast to Nadex, IG, Cantor, and NYSE, most binary option trading is
done in non-laddered platforms. The trading is simpler and the choice traders make is whether the underlying market will be above or below, higher or
lower at expiration time, than the price when the trader puts on the trade.
Buying a call or put is also often the names of the trading actions. The
payoff is usually around 80 percent profit. The risk is the amount put on
the trade. A key feature of these non-laddered binaries is the inability to exit a
position. Once the position is put on, one cannot close the positions. This is
in contrast to the laddered binaries. The trader of these platforms also has
risk of receiving inaccurate prices. The fact is that binary option firms offering non-laddered options do not have price transparency. The settlement
prices for binary expirations will differ among different firms.
The challenge to the trader in these non-laddered binaries is to first reach
a breakeven performance result. Traders around the world favor the very
short-term expirations such as one minute. This is because they offer nearly
instant results and satisfaction, thereby appealing to the gambling tendencies
of those traders. Longer-term expirations above 15 minutes allow the trade to
apply technical and fundamental analysis to the position and reduce or gain
an edge as a result.

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 2

Identifying Profit Return
Potential in Binary
Option Trading

There are many reasons to participate in binary option trading. First, it is
challenging. It doesn’t matter what background or profession you may have,
binary option trading levels the playing field to all who seek to master it. This
may be disappointing to some traders who have had great success in their
own fields, only to find that the market doesn’t care at all. Whether you are a
doctor, lawyer, engineer, homemaker, truck driver, pilot, soldier, and so on,
binary option trading will demand all of your skills, as well as your emotional
intelligence. It is also exciting, as it provides quick feedback on whether your
trades are right or wrong. Yet, the dominant reason is that binary option
trading offers profitable trading opportunities at frequencies and magnitudes
rarely seen in other markets. This chapter provides a review of what the profit
potential can be in the laddered binary option trading.
Expected Probabilities

We can start from a basic description of the unique property of the laddered
binary option. It is a fixed payoff of $100 per unit. This means that at any
point in time, the value of the ask price would never be more than $100.
As a result, we can derive the important outcome that is referred to as an
expected probability. The easiest way to derive at an expected probability is
19

20

Trading Binary Options

to look at the ask price. The ask price can be seen as an approximate measure
of what the market believes is the probability of success. A $50 USD ask
price translates into an expected probability of 50 percent that the binary
will settle above the strike price associated with the binary. An $80 USD
ask price can be interpreted as an 80 percent expected probability. Whether
one is trading a weekly binary option or an intraday option, at any given
moment, the bid/ask range signals can be considered expectations of the
market. The bid and ask prices represent a kind of crowd-mind that expresses
the emotions of the market. It becomes a probability barometer measuring
market opinion. These emotions become translated into the premiums paid
for different strike prices. This aspect of the binary option market is perhaps
its most profound feature.
Whether trading the Nadex, IG, Cantor, or NYSE binaries, the trader
has a choice to follow or fade the crowd opinion. If the trader is bullish on
the market and agrees with the emotions expressed in the ladder ask prices,
he would buy a binary with an ask price of greater than 50. The larger the
ask price, the greater the opinion of the trading community is that the
price of the underlying market will be above the strike price. So, an ask
price of 80 translates into 80 percent expected probability that the price
will be above the binary strike price that is receiving the 80 ask. Conversely,
a 20 ask translates into 80 percent of the trader crowd believes that the
price will be below that associated ask price.
A good idea is to relate the expected probabilities to the degree to which
the underlying market has to move to win or lose the positions.
We can see in Table 2.1 an example of various expected probabilities
appearing, offering a range of probabilities at the start of a week. These
strike prices were taken on a Monday morning for end-of-week expirations.
A useful metric is to detect a strike price’s percentage distance from the
underlying spot market. We can see that an ask price of 81.5 converts to a
percentage distance of 1.4 percent from the underlying spot. This means the
market has to move down more than 1.4 percent from the spot. The trader
needs to decide if this is a reasonable expectation that it would not do so in
order to win.
While there is no guarantee that the expected probability will turn out to
be settling at $100, scanning the offer ask prices provides a good first approximation of market opinion. Once a scan of market expectations is done, the
next step is deciding on the direction of your binary trade. Do you want to
join the crowd or do you want to be contrarian? Do you want a high return
with a lower chance of winning versus a lower return with a high chance of

Identifying Profit Return Potential in Binary Option Trading

21

Table 2.1 Sample Distribution of Expected Probabilities from 25 to 81 Percent on
December 14, 2015, Expiring December 18, 2015

Date

Bid

Ask

Binary Option Contract (Indicative Price)

12/14/15

75

81.50

EUR/USD > 1.0825 (1.09847)

12/14/15

65

69.50

GBP/USD > 1.5075 (1.51537)

12/14/15

52.25

58.25

AUD/USD > 0.7225 (0.7243)

12/14/15

40

46.25

USD/CAD > 1.3775 (1.3738)

12/14/15

36

42.50

EUR/JPY > 133.25 (132.74)

12/14/15

18.25

25

GBP/JPY > 184.75 (183.144)

winning? A binary trade costing $20 per unit and paying off $100 results in
a 5:1 return (excluding fees).
While this is a great result for any particular trade, the ultimate test is
the profitability curve that results over time. Simple mathematics shows that
a 5:1 binary option reward/risk ratio is required to be profitable in the long
run—at least one win over every five trades. One trade, costing $20, turning
out to be a winner will result in an $80 profit. The next four trades can be
losers and the total result would be breakeven. In contrast, an $80 cost for
a binary trade indicates a market expectation of an 80 percent probability
of being a winner. One loser would result in an $80 loss, and would require
four winners in the next five trades to get to breakeven. One has to be more
than 80 percent accurate to go with a deep-in-the-money strategy, buying
$80 binary contracts. In fact, no matter what win/loss ratio a trader has, the
challenge for the trader will be to avoid having one loss risk wiping out a large
winning streak!
Winning Occurrence Analysis

Which binary option strike prices are more likely to win? Conducting an
occurrence analysis test demonstrated the attractiveness of binary option
trading as a route to profitability. During the sample week of January 10
to 14, using an algorithm search function that retrieved all offer prices, the
algorithm was instructed to find a trade that had a market probability of
80 percent for long positions, and 20 percent for short positions. Both directions had the same expected probabilities. The result was 87 trades and a 14.6
percent return for the week (see Table 2.2).

22

Trading Binary Options

Table 2.2 Same Occurrence Analysis

Strategy

Buy Binary Contracts > 80 and Sell
Contracts < 20

Number of trades

87

Capital committed for long positions

$3,121

Capital committed for shorting positions

$330

Return results

409.25

Return on weekly investment

14.66%

Even more interesting is the fact that a strategy that was buy everything
over 80 percent, resulting in a win for a $100 payout, worked very well. This
doesn’t mean that this strategy will work all the time. Markets can suddenly
shift their sentiment and have surprise reversals. Binary option traders always
using a pure strategy have to be prepared for setbacks.
In another sample test, how would a strategy focusing on deep-out-ofthe-money trading work? During the same sample period of January 10 to 14,
19 binary option strike prices were traded. Deep-out-of-the-money (less than
50 percent probability) positions were bought. If there were deep-in-themoney positions (over 75 percent probability), they were sold. They were held
not for a whole week but only one to three days. The percentage returns had
some losses, but were offset by very large gains using the combined strategy of
deep-out-of-the-money trading (Table 2.3).
In reviewing Table 2.4, we can obtain a greater sense of the distribution
of expected probabilities that the binary options markets generate during a
week. The table presents a snapshot of the probabilities at about 10 a.m. every
morning during a sample week (May 16 to 20, 2011) for different probability
ranges. For example, on Monday, there were 30 binary option contracts with
an ask price between $10 to 20. Of these 30 contracts, only one resulted
in-the-money at the Friday expiration. In contrast, for the cohort of $45 to
55 for ask prices on Monday, there were 15 contracts. Of these, nine settled
