
[104]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

any estimates, and it doesn’t even do any thinking. How
come the magic formula gets to pick stocks and I’m
telling most of you to just forget about picking individual
stocks on your own?
Well, the answer is that the magic formula doesn’t
pick individual stocks, either. It picks many stocks at one
time. Looking at a whole portfolio of stocks, it turns out
that using last year’s earnings is often a good indicator of
what earnings will look like in the future. Of course, for
individual companies, this may not be the case. But on
average, last year’s earnings will often provide a pretty
good estimate for normal earnings going forward.
That’s why, if we actually use the magic formula, we’ll
want to own 20 or 30 stocks at one time. In the magic formula’s case, we want the average (that is, the average
return for a portfolio of stocks chosen by the magic formula). Since average results for the magic formula will,
hopefully, mean extraordinary investment returns, owning
many different stocks chosen by the magic formula should
help ensure that we stay pretty close to that average.
By now, I hope I’ve convinced 99 percent of you to
just stick with the magic formula. But for those few who
still hope to develop a winning strategy for picking individual stocks, there is something that you should consider.
Even professional research analysts and money managers
have a tough time making accurate earnings predictions

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[105]

for individual companies. For these professionals, making
accurate predictions for 20 or 30 companies at the same
time is even harder. It won’t be any easier for you.
So here’s my suggestion. If you still want to buy individual stocks despite all the warnings, don’t even try to
make a lot of predictions. Limit your stock investments to
a small number of “good” companies that are available at
bargain levels. For those few investors who are capable of
estimating normal earnings several years into the future
and placing values on businesses, owning just a handful of
bargain-priced stocks is the best way to go. As a general
rule of thumb, if you are truly doing good research and
have a good understanding of the companies that you purchase, owning just five to eight stocks in different industries can safely make up at least 80 percent of your total
portfolio.*
But what if you aren’t an expert at valuing businesses
and making predictions? Isn’t there still some way you can
intelligently play the stock-picking game? While it may
not be smart to hang out in dynamite factories, so what?
Some people would rather have a blast. Well, okay. There
is a compromise strategy, and it makes sense, too. But
you’re still going to need the magic formula—there’s just
no way around that (not in this book, anyway).
*Not sure that makes sense? See the box at the end of the chapter!

[106]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Here it is. Rather than just blindly choosing stocks
that catch your fancy or blindly accepting the output of
the magic formula, how about combining both strategies?
Start with the magic formula and put together a list of
top-ranked stocks. Then choose a few of your favorites by
whatever method you want. You must, however, choose
solely from the top 50 or 100 stocks as ranked by the
magic formula.* Using this method, you should still place
at least 10 to 30 stocks in your portfolio (the lower end of
this range if you actually know something about evaluating businesses and the higher end if you are choosing
stocks based on birth signs). And that should do it.
Now for the summary:
1. Most people have no business investing in individual
stocks on their own!
2. Reread summary point number 1.
3. But if you must . . . and you can actually predict normalized earnings several years down the road, use
those estimates to figure out earnings yield and
return on capital. Then, use the principles of the
magic formula to look for good companies at bargain
prices based on your estimates of normal earnings.
*Don’t worry, we’ll learn how to easily compile a list of top-ranked stocks
later.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[107]

4. If you truly understand the business that you own
and have a high degree of confidence in your normalized earnings estimates, owning five to eight
bargain-priced stocks in different industries can be
a safe and effective investment strategy.
5. Most people have no business investing in individual
stocks on their own! (Did I already mention that?)

How can owning just five to eight stocks possibly be
a safe strategy? Think of it this way.* You’re a successful local businessman who has just sold off his
business for $1 million. You want to invest that money
wisely so that you can safely earn a good return over
time. You have the opportunity to reinvest the proceeds from the sale of your business by buying an
ownership stake in some of the other businesses in
town. You have some understanding of about 30 of
those businesses, and your plan is to invest in companies that you understand well, that have a good
future, and that are available at a reasonable price.
For those companies about which you feel most
confident in your ability to make predictions, you
project what normal earnings should be several years
*To borrow an analogy from one of the world’s greatest investors.

[108]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

down the road. You also look for companies that you
believe will be able to continue in business for many
years and for companies that should have the ability
to grow their earnings over time. Then you calculate
earnings yield and return on capital based on your
estimates for each of those companies. Of course,
your goal is to find good businesses that can be purchased at bargain prices. On the basis of your analysis, you select your five favorites and invest $200,000
in each.
Does that sound like risky behavior? It would be
if you had no idea how to read financial statements or
evaluate individual businesses. But if you do have that
ability, is buying a stake in your five favorite businesses enough? Would owning a stake in your eight
favorites be better? I think most people, especially
those who view stocks as long-term ownership stakes
in actual businesses, would think that spreading that
$1 million among investment stakes in five to eight
bargain-priced businesses in varying industries would
qualify as prudent behavior.
At least, that’s the view I take with my investment
portfolio. The more confidence I have in each one of
my stock picks, the fewer companies I need to own in

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[109]

my portfolio to feel comfortable. Most investors view
stocks and the construction of stock portfolios differently, however.
Somehow, when ownership interests are divided
into shares that bounce around with Mr. Market’s
moods, individuals and professionals start to think
about and measure risk in strange ways. When shortterm thinking and overly complicated statistics get
involved, owning many companies that you know very
little about starts to sound safer than owning stakes in
five to eight companies that have good businesses,
predictable futures, and bargain prices. In short, for
the few who have the ability, knowledge, and time to
predict normal earnings and evaluate individual
stocks, owning less can actually be more—more profits, more safety . . . and more fun!

Chapter Twelve

THERE’S SOMETHING ABOUT THE TOOTH FAIRY. For some reason, I’ve never been able to fully fess up to my kids about
what’s really going on there. Perhaps I just want them to
hold on to their childhood for as long as possible, or
maybe I just want to cherish the innocence of that stage of
their lives. But whatever it is, I’ve been a rock while under
the most intense of interrogations concerning my whereabouts after money has mysteriously appeared under the
various pillows in question.
I’ve had a few close calls, though. I thought the jig
was up one day when one of my kids marched home from
first grade with some new information (it’s scary the kind
of things they pick up hanging out in the school yard). It

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[111]

seems a friend, with absolutely no regard for all my years
of stonewalling, had spilled the beans. As I was doing all
I could to choke back my disappointment, my miniature
Sherlock Holmes declared, “I know who the tooth fairy
is!” My mind raced for some way out as he continued,
“It’s Billy Gordon’s mother!”
After explaining what a ridiculous logistical and financial nightmare it would be for Billy Gordon’s mother to
roam the entire world each night collecting teeth and
shelling out money, I was able to quell that particular piece
of misinformation. And luckily, either because of a lack of
investigative instincts or merely because they have learned
to humor me over the years, that’s the closest any underage member of my house has come to cracking the case.
But here’s a secret I have no problem divulging. In
my house, whatever story my kids choose to believe is just
fine with me. But in the stock market, there’s only one
version of the story I want them to know. It’s harsh and
it’s unfair, but we all have to grow up sometime. And it’s
about time you know it, too. So here it is. When it comes
to Wall Street,
There ain’t no tooth fairy!*
*Of course, since technically that’s a double negative, I still haven’t admitted anything!

[112]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

That’s right. On Wall Street, money won’t magically
appear under your pillow. There’s no one to tuck you in,
no one to take care of you, and no one you can turn to for
good advice. Once you’ve left the warmth and comfort of
your own home, the plain fact is, you’re on your own.
To see why this is necessarily so, we’re going to take
our own little walk down Wall Street. But before we set
out, let’s make a few assumptions. First, you have some
money that you would like to invest over the long term.
(Long term, in this case, means that you will not need this
money to cover your normal expenses for at least the next
three to five years—and, hopefully, longer.)* Second, you
would like to earn as much as possible from your investments, but you are unwilling to take unreasonable risks.
Finally, you’ve heard (and this is generally true) that the
stock market offers the best possibility for high investment returns over time, and this is where you would like
to put most of your money. So, fine, where do we start?
Well, one typical stop is our friendly neighborhood
stockbroker. This is an investment professional whose job is
to hold your hand and help you invest your money. Your
*Since Mr. Market can do anything in the short term, money that you
require over the next few years for necessities is best left in the bank. Otherwise, you may be forced to sell to Mr. Market at just the wrong time (for
instance, when you need money to cover expenses and a depressed Mr. Market is offering low prices for your shares).

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[113]

stockbroker will help you choose between individual
stocks, bonds, investment funds, and various other investment alternatives. If you have enough money, he or she
will even speak with you on the phone, try to understand
your needs, and give you suggestions and advice.
But here’s the thing. If your stockbroker is like the
vast majority, he or she has no idea how to help you! Most
get paid a fee to sell you a stock or a bond or some other
investment product. They don’t get paid to make you
money. Of course, while it’s in their interest for you to be
successful and many may be fine, well-intentioned professionals, a stockbroker’s main incentive is still to sell you
something. They are trained to follow rules, understand
certain financial terms, and explain various investment
products. As for how to make you money in the stock
market or anywhere else, forget it!
You might as well just put your money in a mutual fund.
Now here’s the perfect solution for a small investor. A
mutual fund is an investment fund that is managed by a professional money manager. The manager usually selects a
diverse group of stocks or bonds, generally from 30 to 200
different securities in the same fund. This is a particularly
efficient way for a small investor to spread his or her investment capital over a wide group of different investments.
But here, too, there are some problems. As we’ve discussed before, it’s tough to have special insight into many

[114]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

different companies and investment securities. Consequently, owning dozens or even hundreds of positions
does not often lead to above-average returns. Then, of
course, there is the small matter of fees. Mutual fund
management companies need to charge a fee for their services. Basic math says that average returns minus fees
equals below-average returns. Not surprisingly, after subtracting fees and other expenses, the vast majority of
mutual funds do not beat the market averages over time.
But that’s okay. We can just look for mutual funds
that have above-average managers. It should be relatively
easy to tell whether a manager is above average simply by
looking at the fund’s track record. The only problem with
this strategy is that on average there is no relationship
between a fund’s good past investment record and its
future returns. Even companies whose business is to rate
mutual funds have a poor record of determining which
funds will perform well in the future.
While there are many reasons for this, all of them are
difficult to resolve. Mutual fund management companies
get paid based on how much money is invested in each
fund. A fund with a successful track record will usually
attract more money over time. It is usually in the fund’s
economic interest to accept this money. Once a fund
grows larger, it may be hard for the manager to continue
with the same strategy that led to the successful returns.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[115]

A few good ideas may now be spread even thinner over a
larger pile of money. If investment in smaller companies is
partially responsible for some of the success, this may no
longer be possible in a larger fund. Also, even talented
managers have bad stretches of investment performance
(just like the magic formula). Conversely, bad managers
can have good stretches. Telling which is which, even over
periods of several years, is quite difficult. I could go on,
but the facts are the facts. A good past investment record
isn’t much help when predicting future returns, and picking a good manager is likely no easier than picking attractive individual stocks. Then again, if you could pick
attractive stocks, you probably wouldn’t need the good
manager!
So, instead, you might consider investing in a hedge
fund. These are exclusive private investment funds usually reserved for very wealthy investors. Unfortunately, in
most cases, unless you already have at least $500,000 or
so to invest, you probably won’t even have this option. By
law, most hedge funds can only accept investors who can
afford to lose large amounts of money. But even if you
qualify for this dubious honor, it’s not clear that this is a
smart way to go.
Hedge funds are investment funds that have more
flexibility than most mutual funds. Managers can use the
fund’s capital and borrowed money to buy a large variety

[116]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

of securities. Generally, they are able to place bets on
whether stocks, other securities, or entire market averages will move up or down. Most mutual funds are
restricted to making money only when the securities they
own go up. A hedge fund’s ability to bet up or down over
many different securities, often with the aid of borrowed
money, is seen as a big advantage over most standard
mutual funds. It may be. But most hedge funds charge
huge fees—at least 1 percent of assets under management
plus a 20 percent share of the profits. No doubt attracted
by the large fees, thousands of new hedge funds have
been created over the past few years. Most will have no
chance of justifying their fees. There just aren’t that
many great managers, and your chances of finding one
are quite slim.
So that’s why many people just choose to invest in an
index fund.* An index fund is a mutual fund that just tries
to equal the overall market’s return, less a very small fee.
These funds pick a market index (perhaps the S&P 500
index of 500 large stocks or the Russell 2000 index, an
index that consists of 2,000 somewhat smaller stocks) and
buy all of the stocks in that particular index. Although
*Or an exchange-traded fund (ETF), an index fund that trades similar to the
way a stock trades.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[117]

this strategy won’t help you beat the market, it will help
you achieve returns that are at least close to the market
averages.* Since, after taking into account fees and other
costs, most other investment choices leave you with much
lower returns than index funds, many people who have
carefully studied the issue have concluded that settling for
average returns is actually a pretty good alternative. In
fact, over the last 80 years, average returns from the stock
market have meant returns of over 10 percent per year.
Not too bad at all.
But what if you want to do better than average? The
simple truth is there’s no stop on our little walk that has an
answer for that one. That’s because it’s pretty much like
I told you before: On Wall Street, there is no tooth fairy.
Once you leave home, you can put your money under a
professional’s pillow, but chances are, when you wake up,
all you’ll be left with is lousy performance.
Of course, I know what you’re going to ask. Isn’t
there somewhere you can go? Something you can do?
Someone you can turn to?
*Also, if you are not investing using a tax-free retirement account and taxes
are a concern for you, this strategy will minimize the amount of taxes you
must pay because index funds typically do not sell their stock holdings
unless a particular security is dropped from the index. This is usually less
than 10 percent of the securities in the index in any one year.

[118]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Well, it should come as no surprise that after 25 years
in the investment business, I’ve been asked these same
questions many times. From time to time, I have been able
to recommend a particularly good mutual fund manager
or an exceptional hedge fund manager. In all cases, the
funds in question have subsequently grown to many times
their original size and the investment opportunity has
largely vanished in a rather short period of time. I have
also tried to help people by giving out an occasional stock
tip. However, an occasional stock tip from me is not a
very reliable or universally available long-term investment
strategy.
So I’m usually at a loss. If you want to do as little as
possible and you don’t mind doing average, an index fund
could be a fine choice. But if you are capable of analyzing
businesses and willing to do a fair amount of work, selectively picking individual stocks can be a viable alternative.
The only problem is that most people don’t have the time
or ability to analyze individual companies. As we discussed last chapter, if you don’t know how to evaluate
businesses and project normal earnings several years into
the future, you have no business investing in individual
stocks in the first place.
So here’s the thing. As unbelievable as it may seem, if
you truly want to beat the market, there really is only one

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[119]

good alternative left. After all we’ve been through, I
probably don’t have to spell it out for you. But let’s just
say it rhymes with . . . bagic mormula.
That’s right. Just like I promised earlier, by following
the simple steps outlined at the end of this book, you can
use the magic formula to beat the market. You can achieve
extraordinary long-term investment returns, and you can
achieve those returns with low risk. By following step-bystep, you’ll know exactly where to go and what to do. It
won’t even take much work—just minutes every few
months.
But that’s not the hard part. The hard part is making
sure that you understand why the magic formula makes
sense. The hard part is continuing to believe that the
magic formula still makes sense even when friends,
experts, the news media, and Mr. Market indicate otherwise. Lastly, the hard part is just getting started, though
I’ve tried to make that task as easy as possible.
So, good luck. I truly believe that if you follow the
lessons in this book, you will have a great deal of investment success. That’s what makes the next chapter so
important. After all, if my calculations are correct, you’re
still going to be left with a pretty big problem. I’m very
serious. I mean, what are you going to do with all that
money?

[120]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Quick Summary

1. On Wall Street, there ain’t no tooth fairy!
2. Nothing much rhymes with magic formula.
3. Your step-by-step instructions for beating the market using the magic formula are coming right after
the next chapter.

Chapter Thirteen

WHAT WOULD YOU DO IF YOU HAD A LOT OF MONEY? Of
course, I mean what would you do after taking care of
your family and those close to you, after providing for
retirement and the future of your loved ones, and after
putting some aside to buy a few luxuries along the way?
What would you do?
Actually, you may well have to answer that question
someday. But don’t worry. I’m not going to bore you with
a pile of statistics. I’m not going to tell you about all the
money you could make by using the magic formula. I’m
not even going to discuss the whole idea of compound interest. That’s the one where you invest a relatively small
amount of money, earn a reasonable rate of return over

[122]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

time, continually reinvest all the earnings from those investments, and end up with a large amount of money. I’m
not going to talk about that.
It’s really too bad, though. With the new rules for
contributing larger amounts of money to tax-advantaged
retirement accounts, it would have been a good thing to
discuss. As it turns out, starting now and making the maximum allowable contribution to an IRA* for just the next
few years, you could turn a relatively small amount of
money into a much larger amount. Obviously, with the
type of returns achieved by the magic formula in the past,
this really could have meant a lot of money for you. But,
unfortunately, we’re not going to discuss it.
It’s truly a shame. By contributing just $28,000 in
total over the next six years (the maximum of $4,000 per
year in both 2006 and 2007 and then $5,000 per year
starting in 2008 for four years†), your retirement account
could have grown to over $325,000 at the end of 20 years
and over $1.3 million after 30 years. That’s if you could
achieve an annual return on your investments of 15 percent. Of course, the past record of the magic formula is
somewhat better than 15 percent per year, but it would be
irresponsible to project some higher annual return far into
*Either a traditional investment retirement account or a Roth IRA.
†
Thereafter making no further contributions of any kind.
