
out on the street." Across the top of the job placement blackboard
appeared the name of each department on the trading floor: municipal
bonds; corporate bonds; government bonds; etc. Along the side of the
board was each office in the firm: Atlanta; Dallas; New York; etc. The
thought that he might land somewhere awful in the matrix—or nowhere
at all—drove the trainee to despair. He lost all perspective on the
relative merits of the jobs. He did not count himself lucky just to be at
Salomon Brothers; anyone who thought that way would never have got in
in the first place. The Salomon trainee saw only the extremes of failure
and success. Selling municipal bonds in Atlanta was unthinkably wretched.
Trading mortgages in New York was mouthwateringly good.
Within weeks after our arrival the managers of each department had
begun to debate our relative merits. But the managers were traders at
heart. They couldn't discuss a person, place, or thing without also trading
it. So they began to trade trainees, like slaves. One day you'd see three
of them leaning over the fat blue binder that held our photographs and
resumes. The next day you'd hear that you had been swapped for one
front-row person and one draft choice from the next training program.
The pressure mounted. Who was overheard speaking of whom? Which
trainees had cut deals for themselves? Where were jobs left? Like any
selection process, this one had its winners and losers. But this selection
process was wildly subjective. Since there was no objective measure of
ability, landing a good job was one part luck, one part "presence," and one
part knowing how and when to place your lips firmly to the rear end of
some important person. There wasn't much you
i
could do about the first two, so you tended to focus on the third. You
needed a sponsor. Befriending one of the 112 managing directors was not
enough; you had to befriend a managing director with clout. There was
one small problem, of course. Bosses were not always eager to befriend
trainees. After all, what was in it for them?
A managing director grew interested only if he believed you were widely
desired. Then there was a lot in you for him. A managing director won
points when he spirited away a popular trainee from other managing
directors. The approach of many a trainee, therefore, was to create the
illusion of desirability. Then bosses wanted him not for any sound reason
but simply because other bosses wanted him. The end result was a sort

of Ponzi scheme of personal popularity that had its parallels in the
markets. To build it required a great deal of self-confidence and faith in
the gullibility of others; this was my chosen solution to the job problem.
A few weeks into the training program I made a friend on the trading
floor, though not in the area in which 1 wanted to work. That friend
pressed for me to join his department. I let other trainees know I was
pursued. They told their friends on the trading floor, who in turn became
curious. Eventually the man I wanted to work for overheard others
talking about me and asked me to breakfast.
If that sounds calculating and devious, consider the alternatives. Either
I left my fate in the hands of management, which, as far as I could tell,
did not show a great deal of mercy toward anyone foolish enough to trust
it, or I appealed directly to the ego of the managing director of my
choice. I had friends who tried this tactic. They threw themselves at
their dream boss's feet, like a vassal before a lord, and said something
unctuous and serflike, such as "I am your humble and devoted servant.
Hire me, oh, Great One, and I will do anything you ask." They hoped that
the managing director would respond favorably, perhaps say something
like "Raise yourself up, young man, you've no need to fear. If you are
true to me, I shall protect you from the forces of evil and
unemployment." Sometimes this happened. But if it didn't, you'd shot
your wad. You were remaindered goods. Within the training class a
dispute arose over whether, under the circumstances, groveling was
acceptable. As if the whole point of the Salomon system were simply to
see who wilted under the pressure and who did not.
Each trainee had to decide for himself. Thus was born the Great Divide.
Those who chose to put on a full-court grovel from the opening buzzer
found seats in the front of the classroom, where they sat, lips
puckered, through the entire five-month program. Those who treasured
their pride—or perhaps thought it best to remain aloof—feigned cool
indifference by sitting in the back row and hurling paper wads at
managing directors.
Of course, there were exceptions to these patterns of behavior. A
handful of people fell between the cracks of the Great Divide. Two or
three people cut deals with managing directors at the start of the
program that ensured them the jobs of their choice. They floated
unpredictably, like freemen among slaves, and were widely thought to be

management's spies. A few trainees had back-row hearts, but also wives
and children to support. They had no loyalty. They remained aloof from
the front row out of disdain and from the back row out of a sense of
responsibility.
I considered myself an exception, of course. I was accused by some of
being a front-row person because I liked to sit next to the man from the
Harvard Business School and watch him draw organization charts. I
wondered if he would succeed (he didn't). Also, I asked too many
questions. It was assumed that I did this to ingratiate myself with the
speakers, like a front-row person. This was untrue. But try telling that to
the back row. I lamely compensated for my curiosity by hurling a few
paper wads at important traders. And my stock rose dramatically in the
back row when I was thrown out of class for reading the newspaper while
a trader spoke. But I was never the intimate of those in the back row.
Of all exceptions, however, the Japanese were the greatest. The
Japanese undermined any analysis of our classroom culture. All six of
them sat in the front row and slept. Their heads rocked back and forth
and on occasion fell over to one side, so that their cheeks ran parallel to
the floor. So it was hard to argue that they were just listening with
their eyes shut, as Japanese businessmen are inclined to do. The most
charitable explanation for their apathy was that they could not
understand English. They kept to themselves, however, and you could
never be sure of either their language skills or their motives. Their
leader was a man named Yoshi. Each morning and afternoon the back-row
boys made bets on how many minutes it would take Yoshi to fall asleep.
They liked to think that Yoshi was a calculating troublemaker. Yoshi was
their hero. A small cheer would go up in the back row when Yoshi
crashed, partly because someone had just won a pile of money, but also in
appreciation of any man with the balls to fall asleep in the front row.

The Japanese were a protected species, and I think they knew it. Their
homeland, as a result of its trade surpluses, was accumulating an
enormous pile of dollars. A great deal of money could be made
shepherding these dollars from Tokyo back into U.S. government bonds
and other dollar investments. Salomon was trying to expand its office in
Tokyo by employing experienced locals Here was the catch. Japanese

tend to spend their lives with one Japanese company, and the more able
ones normally wouldn't dream of working for an American firm. In joining
Salomon Brothers, they traded in sushi and job security for
cheeseburgers and yuppie disease, which few were willing to do. The rare
Japanese whom Salomon had been able to snatch away were worth many
times their weight in gold and treated like the family china. The traders
who spoke to us never uttered so much as a peep against them. In
addition, while Salomon Brothers was otherwise insensitive to foreign
cultures, it was strangely aware that the Japanese were different. Not
that there was a generally accepted view of how they might be different.
The Japanese could have rubbed noses and practiced the Ki-wanis Club
handshake each morning, and I'll bet no one would have thought it out of
character.
Still, in the end, the Japanese were reduced to nothing more than a
bizarre distraction. The back row set the tone of the class because it
acted throughout as one, indivisible, incredibly noisy unit. The back-row
people moved in herds, for safety and for comfort, from the training
class in the morning and early afternoon, to the trading floor at the end
of the day, to the Surf Club at night, and back to the training program
the next morning. They were united by their likes as well as their
dislikes. They rewarded the speakers of whom they approved by standing
and doing the Wave across the back of the class.
And they approved wholeheartedly of the man at the front of the room
now. The speaker paused, as if lost in thought, which was unlikely. "You
know," he finally said, "you think you're hot shit, but when you start out
on the trading floor, you're going to be at the bottom."
Was that really necessary? He was playing so well by telling the hooligans
what they liked to hear: Being a winner at Salomon meant being a he-man
in a jungle. Now he risked retaliation by telling the hooligans what they
didn't like to hear: In the jungle their native talents didn't mean squat. I
checked around for spitballs and paper wads. Nothing. The speaker had
built sufficient momentum to survive his
mistake. Heads in the back nodded right along. It is possible that they
assumed the speaker intended that remark for the front row.
In any case, on this point the speaker was surely wrong. A trainee didn't
have to stay on the bottom lor more than a couple of months. Bond
traders and salesmen age like dogs. Each year on the trading floor counts

for seven in any other corporation. At the end of his first year a trader
or salesman had stature. Who cared for tenure? The whole beauty of the
trading floor was its complete disregard for tenure.
A new employee, once he reached the trading floor, was handed a pair of
telephones. He went on-line almost immediately. If he could make millions
of dollars come out of those phones, he became that most revered of all
species: a Big Swinging Dick. After the sale of a big block of bonds and
the deposit of a few hundred thousand dollars into the Salomon till, a
managing director called whoever was responsible to confirm his identity:
"Hey, you Big Swinging Dick, way to be." To this day the phrase brings to
my mind the image of an elephant's trunk swaying from side to side.
Swish. Swash. Nothing in the jungle got in the way of a Big Swinging Dick.
That was the prize we coveted. Perhaps the phrase didn't stick in
everyone's mind the way it did in mine; the name was less important than
the ambition, which was common to us all. And of course, no one actually
said, "When I get out onto the trading floor, I'm going to be a Big
Swinging Dick." It was more of a private thing. But everyone wanted to
be a Big Swinging Dick, even the women. Big Swinging Dickettes. Christ,
even front-row people hoped to be Big Swinging Dicks once they had
learned what it meant. Their problem, as far as the back row was
concerned, was that they didn't know how to act the part. Big Swinging
Dicks showed more grace under pressure than front-row people did.
A hand shot up (typically) in the front row. It belonged to a woman. She
sat high in her regular seat, right in front of the speaker. The speaker
had momentum. The back-row people were coming out of their chairs to
honor him with the Wave. The speaker didn't want to stop now,
especially for a front-row person. He looked pained, but he could hardly
ignore a hand in his face. He called her name, Sally Findlay.
"I was just wondering," said Findlay, "if you could tell us what you think
has been the key to your success."
This was too much. Had she asked a dry technical question, she might
have pulled it off. But even the speaker started to smile. He knew
he could abuse the front row as much as he wanted. His grin spoke
volumes to the back row. It said, "Hey, I remember what these brownnosers were like when I went through the training program, and I
remember how much I despised speakers who let them kiss butt, so I'm
going to let this woman hang out and dry for a minute, heh, heh, hen."

The back row broke out in its loudest laughter yet. Someone cruelly
mimed Findlay in a high-pitched voice, "Yes, do tell us why you're sooooo
successful. "Someone else shouted, "Down, boy!" as if scolding an
overheated poodle. A third man cupped his hands together around his
mouth and hollered, "Equities in Dallas."
Poor Sally. There were many bad places your name could land on the job
placement blackboard in 1985, but the absolute worst was in the slot
marked "Equities in Dallas." We could not imagine anything less
successful in our small world than an equity salesman in Dallas; the equity
department was powerless in our firm, and Dallas was, well, a long way
from New York. Thus, "Equities in Dallas" became training program
shorthand for "Just bury that lowest form of human scum where it will
never be seen again." Bury Sally, they shouted from the back of the
room.
The speaker didn't bother with an answer. He raced to aclose before the
mob he had incited became uncontrollable. "You spend a lot of time
asking yourself questions: Are munis right for me? Are govys right for
me? Are corporates right for me? You spend a lot of time thinking about
that. And you should. But think about this: // might be more important to
choose a jungle guide than to choose your product. Thank you."
The room emptied immediately. There was a fifteen-minute break until
the next speaker began, and two separate crowds rushed as usual for the
two doors out of the classroom. Front-row people exited front, back-row
people exited back in a footrace to the four telephones with the free
WATS lines.
The powers of Salomon Brothers relied on the training program to make
us more like them. What did it mean to be more like them? For most of
its life Salomon had been a scrappy bond trading house distinguished
mainly by its ability and willingness to take big risks. Salomon had had to
accept risk to make money because it had no list of fee-paying corporate
clients, unlike, say, the genteel gentiles of Morgan Stanley. The image
Salomon had projected to the public was of a firm of clannish Jews,
social nonentities, shrewd but honest, sinking its nose
more deeply into the bond markets than any other firm cared to. This
was a caricature, of course, but it roughly captured the flavor of the
place as it once was.
Now Salomon wanted to change. The leading indicator of the shift in the

collective personality of our firm was the social life of our chairman and
CEO, John Gutfreund. He had married a woman with burning social
ambition, twenty years his junior. She threw parties and invited gossip
columnists. Her invitations, the value of which seemed to rise and fall
with our share price, were wrapped in a tiny bow and delivered by hand.
She employed a consultant to ensure she and her husband received the
right sort of coverage. And though she did not go so far as to insist that
the employees of Salomon Brothers were made as presentable as her
husband (whom she stuffed into a new wardrobe), it was impossible in our
company for some of this indulgence and posturing not to trickle down.
Despite the nouveau fluctuation in our corporate identity, the training
program was without a doubt the finest start to a career on Wall Street.
Upon completion a trainee could take his experience and cash it in for
twice the salary on any other Wall Street trading floor. He had achieved,
by the standards of Wall Street, technical mastery of his subject. It
was an education in itself to see how quickly one became an "expert" on
Wall Street. Many other banks had no training program. Drexel Burnham,
in what I admit is an extreme example, even told one applicant to
befriend someone at Salomon just to get hold of the Salomon training
program handouts. Then, materials in hand, he should work for Drexel.
But the materials were the least significant aspect of our training. The
relevant bits, the ones I would recall two years later, were the war
stories, the passing on of the oral tradition of Salomon Brothers. Over
three months leading salesmen, traders, and financiers shared their
experiences with the class. They trafficked in unrefined street wisdom:
how money travels around the world (any way it wants), how a trader
feels and behaves (any way he wants), and how to schmooze a customer.
After three months in the class trainees circulated wearily around the
trading floor for two months more. Then they went to work. All the while
there was a hidden agenda: to Salomonize the trainee. The trainee was
made to understand, first, that inside Salomon Brothers he was, as a
trader once described us, lower than whale shit on the bottom of the
ocean floor and, second, that lying under whale shit at Salomon
Brothers was like rolling in clover compared with not being at Salomon at
all.
In the short term the brainwashing nearly worked. (In the long term it
didn't. For people to accept the yoke, they must believe they have no

choice. As we shall see, we newcomers had both an exalted sense of our
market value and no permanent loyalties.) A few investment banks had
training programs, but with the possible exception of Goldman Sachs's,
none was so replete with firm propaganda. A woman from The New York
Times who interviewed us three months into our program was so
impressed by the uniformity in our attitudes toward the firm that she
called her subsequent article "The Boot Camp for Top MBA's." Like all
newspaper articles about Salomon Brothers, it was quickly dismissed.
"The bitch don t know what she' stalking about," said the back row. The
class Boy Scouts were mercilessly hounded for saying in print things like
"They—Salomon—don't need to give us a pep talk, we're pumped up,"
which, you had to admit, was a little much.
The article was revealing for another reason. It was the only time
someone from the outside was let in and permitted to ask the most
obvious question: Why were we so well paid? A back-row person, who had
just taken anM.B.A. from the University of Chicago, explained to the
readers of the Times. "It's supply and demand," he said. "My sister
teaches kids with learning disabilities. She enjoys her work as much as I
do, but earns much less. If nobody else wanted to teach, she'd make
more money." Say what you will about the analysis. The Times readers
certainly did. The same article had mentioned more than 6,000 people
had applied for the 127 places in the program. Paychecks at Salomon
Brothers spiraled higher in spite of the willingness of others who would,
no doubt, do the same job for less. There was something fishy about the
way supply met demand in an investment bank.
But there was also something refreshing about any attempt to explain
the money we were about to be paid. I thought it admirable that my
colleague had given it the old business school try. No one else ever did.
The money was just there. Why did investment banking pay so many
people with so little experience so much money? Answer: When attached
to a telephone, they could produce even more money. How could they
produce money without experience? Answer: Producing in an investment
bank was less a matter of skill and more a matter of intangibles—flair,
persistence, and luck. Were the qualities found in a producer so rare
that they could be purchased only at great expense?
Answer: yes and no. That was the question of questions. The ultimate
expression of our dumb compliance was in not asking at the outset why

the money flowed so freely and how long it would last. The answer could
be found on the Salomon Brothers trading floor, perhaps more easily
than anywhere on Wall Street, but many never bothered to work it out.
Each day after class, around about three or four or five o'clock we were
pressured to move from the training class on the twenty-third floor to
the trading floor on the forty-first. You could get away with not going
for a few days, but if not seen on the floor occasionally, you were
forgotten. Forgotten at Salomon meant unemployed. Getting hired was a
positive act. A manager had to request you for his unit. Three people
were fired at the end of our training program. One was assigned to
Dallas and refused to go. A second disappeared mysteriously, amid
rumors that he had invited a senior female Salomon executive into a
menage a trois (the firm tolerated sexual harassment but not sexual
deviance). And a third, by far the most interesting, couldn't bear to step
off the elevator and onto the trading floor. He rode up and down in the
rear of the elevator every afternoon. He meant to get off, I think, but
was petrified. Word of his handicap spread. It reached the woman in
charge of the training program. She went to see for herself. She stood
outside the elevator banks on the forty-first floor and watched with her
own eyes the doors open and shut for an hour on one very spooked
trainee. One day he was gone.
On braver days you cruised the trading floor to find a manager who
would take you under his wing, a mentor, better known to us as a rabbi.
You also went to the trading floor to learn. Your first impulse was to step
into the fray, select a likely teacher, and present yourself for
instruction. Unfortunately it wasn't so easy. First, a trainee by definition
had nothing of merit to say. And, second, the trading floor was a
minefield of large men on short fuses just waiting to explode if you so
much as breathed in their direction. You didn't just walk up and say hello.
Actually that's not fair. Many, many traders were instinctively polite,
and if you said hello they'd just ignore you. But if you happened to step
on a mine, then the conversation went something like this:
ME: Hello.
TRADER: What fucking rock did you crawl out from under? Hey, Joe,
hey, Bob, check out this guy's suspenders.
ME (reddening): I just wanted to ask you a couple of questions. JOE:
Who the fuck does he think he is?

TRADER: Joe, let's give this guy a little test! When interest rates go up,
which way do bond prices go? ME: Down.
TRADER: Terrific. You get an A. Now I gotta work. ME: When would you
have some time— TRADER: What the fuck do you think this is, a charity?
I'm busy. ME: Can I help in any way? TRADER: Get me a burger. With
ketchup.
So I watched my step. There were a million little rules to obey; I knew
none of them. Salesmen, traders, and managers swarmed over the floor,
and at first I could not tell them apart. Sure, I knew the basic
differences. Salesmen talked to investors, traders made bets, and
managers smoked cigars. But other than that I was lost. Most of the men
were on two phones at once. Most of the men stared at small green
screens full of numbers. They'd shout into one phone, then into the
other, then at someone across the row of trading desks, then back into
the phones, then point to the screen and scream, "Fuck!" Thirty seconds
was considered a long attention span. As a trainee, a plebe, a young man
lying under all that whale shit, I did what every trainee did: I sidled up
to some busy person without saying a word and became the Invisible Man.
That it was perfectly humiliating was, of course, precisely the point.
Sometimes I'd wait for an hour before my existence was formally
acknowledged; other times, a few minutes. Even that seemed like
forever. Who is watching me in my current debased condition? I'd
wonder. Will I ever recover from such total neglect? Will someone please
notice that the Invisible Man has arrived? The contrast between me
standing motionless and the trader's frenetic movements made the
scene particularly unbearable. It underlined my uselessness. But once I'd
sidled up, it was difficult to leave without first being officially
recognized. To leave was to admit defeat in this peculiar ritual of making
myself known.
Anyway, there wasn't really any place else to go. The trading room was
about a third the length of a football field and was lined with connected
desks. Traders sitting elbow to elbow formed a human chain. Between the
rows of desks there was not enough space for two people to pass each
other without first turning sideways. Once he started wandering
aimlessly, a trainee risked disturbing the gods at play. All the
senior people, from Chairman Gutfreund down, stalked the trading floor.
It was not a normal corporation, in which trainees were smiled
