
breakdown. Since common knowledge offers few good opportunities, access to early warning of
trend change provides a needed edge for profit.
Use the first rise/first failure (FR/FF) pattern to target new ranges and reversals before the
competition. This simple formation works through all time frames and applies to both tops and
bottoms. FR/FF signals the first 100% retracement of a dynamic trend within the time frame of
interest. Trends should find support during pullbacks no further than the 62% retracement, as
measured from the starting point of the last wave that pushes price into an intermediate high or low.
Healthy trends should base from this level and bounce toward a new breakout. The market reverses
within this specific time frame if price breaks through this important support.
FIGURE 3.6
The familiar triangular shape of the first rise/first failure pattern quickly identifies potential reversals. The first
retracement of a rally through 62% ends the trend and sets the stage for a significant move in the opposite direction.
Swing traders can often cross-verify this break through other charting landscape features. Note how the strong trendline
breaks on the same bar as the 62% violation following this late 1998 Amazon explosion.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The 100% retracement violates the primary price direction and terminates the trend it corrects.
Completion also provides significant S/R where swing traders can initiate defensive bounce trades.
From this important pivot, continuation trends may reawaken in the next-larger time frame if they

push through the 38% (62% retracement level of the downtrend) S/R and continue past the 62%
(38% retracement level of the downtrend) S/R, toward a test of the last intermediate high.
Long side entry at the 100% retracement offers good reward:risk when it coincides with a 38% or
62% retracement in the next-higher time frame. However, the setup may develop more slowly than
anticipated. In other words, a successful position must pass expected congestion through the 38–
62% zone before it can access a profitable retest of the old high and possibly move higher.
Allow for whipsaws at all major Fibonacci retracement levels before execution. Insiders know these
hidden turning points and take out stops to generate volume. Also watch out for trend relativity
errors. Bull and bear markets exist simultaneously through different time frames. Limit FR/FF
trades to the time frame for which the retracement occurs unless cross-verification supports a
broader opportunity.
Every popular topping formation draws its own unique pattern features. But all tell a common tale
of crowd disillusionment. Whether it evolves through the loss of faith of the head and shoulders or
the slow capitulation of the rising wedge, the final result remains the same. Price breaks sharply to
lower levels while unhappy stockholders unload positions as quickly as they can.
Value and improving fundamentals attract knowledgeable holders early in a rally. But the
motivation for new participants degenerates as an uptrend progresses. News of a budding stock rally
creates excitement and attracts a greedier crowd. These momentum players slowly outnumber the
value investors and price movement becomes more volatile. The issue continues upward as this
frantic buying crowd feeds on itself well beyond most reasonable price targets.
Both fire and ice can kill uptrends. As long as the greater fool mechanism holds, each new long
allows the previous one to turn a profit. But the right conditions eventually come along to force a
climax to the upside action. A shock event can suddenly erupt to kill the buying enthusiasm and
force a sharp reversal. Or the trend’s fuel may just run out as the last buyer takes a final position. In
either case, the stock loses its ability to defy gravity and stops rising.
Many swing traders mistakenly assume bulls turn into bears immediately following a dramatic,
high-volume reversal. They enter ill-advised short sales well before the pattern physics rob the
crowd’s enthusiasm. These early sales provide fuel for the intense short covering rallies that most
topping formations exhibit. Keep in mind that reversals only turn trends into sideways markets.
Topping patterns must complete before they turn sideways markets into declines. Limit entry to
classic fade strategies at the edges of S/R until the breakdown begins. Then initiate trend-following
short sales to capitalize on crowd disillusionment and panic.
The descending triangle illustrates the slow evolution from bull market to bear decline better than
any other topping pattern. Within this simple structure, examine how life drains slowly from a
dynamic uptrend. Variations of this destructive formation precede more breakdowns than any other
reversal. And they can be found doing their dirty deeds in all time frames and all markets.

REVERSALS
Why does the descending triangle work with such deadly accuracy? Most swing traders really don’t
understand how or why patterns predict outcomes. Some even believe these important tools rely on
mysticism or convenient curve fitting. The simple truth is more powerful: congestion patterns
reflect the impact of crowd psychology on price change.

Shock and fear quickly follow the first reversal that marks the triangle’s major top. But many
shareholders remain true believers and expect their profits will return after selling dissipates. They
continue to hold their positions as hope slowly replaces better judgment. This initial selloff carries
further than anticipated and their discomfort quickly increases. But just as pain begins to escalate,
the correction suddenly ends and the stock firmly bounces.
For many longs, this late buying and short covering reinforces a dangerous bias that they were right
all along. Renewed confidence even prompts some to add new positions. But smarter players have a
change of heart and view this new rally as their first chance to get out whole. They quietly exit and
the strong bounce loses momentum. The stock once again rolls over and draws the second lower
top of the evolving pattern. Those still holding long positions then watch the low of the first
reversal with much apprehension.
Prior countertrend lows draw scalpers and investors familiar with double bottom behavior. As price
descends toward the emotional barrier of the last low, they step in and stop the decline. But the
smart money stands aside and the subsequent bounce only draws in new investors with very bad
timing. As the pattern draws its third peak, the last bullish energy dissipates from the criss-cross
price swings. Price continues to hold up through this sideways action but relative strength indicators
signal sharp negative divergence. Momentum indicators roll over and Bollinger Bands contract as
price range narrows.
The scalpers depart and this final bounce quickly fades. Shorts now smell blood and enter larger
positions. Fear increases and stops build just under the double low shelf. Price returns for one final
test as negative sentiment expands sharply. Price and volatility then contract right at the breaking
point. The bulls must hold this line, but the odds have shifted firmly against them. Recognizing the
imminent breakdown, swing traders use all upticks to enter new short sales and counter any weak
bull response. Finally, the last positive sentiment dies and horizontal support fails. As the sell stops
trigger, price spirals downward in a substantial decline.
Stock charts print many unique topping formations. Many can be understood and traded with very
little effort. But the emotional crowd also generates many undependable patterns as greed slowly
evolves into mindless fear. Complex rising wedges will defy the technician’s best efforts at
prediction, while the odd diamond formation will burn trading capital as it swings randomly back
and forth.
Avoid these fruitless positions and seek profit only where the odds strongly favor the predicted
outcome. First locate the single feature common to most topping reversals: price draws at least one
lower high within the broad congestion before violating the major uptrend. This simple double top
mechanism becomes a primary focus for short sale planning. Use this well-marked signpost to
follow price outward to its natural breaking point and enter when support fails.
Flip over the Adam and Eve bottom pattern and find a highly predictive setup for topping
reversals. This Adam and Eve top offers swing traders frequent high-profit short sales
opportunities. Enter new shorts when price violates the reaction low, but use tight stops to avoid
whipsaws and 2B reversals. These occur when sudden short covering rallies erupt right after the
gunning of stops just below the failure.
FIGURE 3.7
Sharp, parabolic rallies often set the stage for dramatic topping formations. In this classic example, Infoseek sketches a
perfect descending triangle reversal following a vertical 1998 price expansion. After the initial breakdown, price pulls
back to the filled gap and offers a second short sale opportunity. Note how this triangle also draws a variation of the
Adam and Eve pattern.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Each uptrend generates positive sentiment that the topping formation must overcome. Adam and
Eve tops represent an efficient bar structure to accomplish this task. The violent reversal of Adam
first awakens fear. Then the slow dome of Eve absorbs the remaining bull impulse while dissipating
the volatility needed to resume a rally. As the dome completes, price moves swiftly to lower levels
without substantial resistance.
Observant swing traders recognize the mechanics of descending triangles and Adam and Eve
formations in more complex reversals. The vast majority of tops display characteristics of these two
familiar patterns. Crowd enthusiasm must be eliminated for a decline to proceed. Buying interest
eventually recedes through the repeated failure of price to achieve new highs. Then the market can
finally drop from its own weight.
Price draws a double top when it can’t pass the resistance of the last high. The more violent the
reversal at the initial top, the more likely the first attempt to exceed it will fail. The longer it takes
for this test to approach the first top, the more likely it will fail. When both conditions support a
double top failure, swing traders can sell short into the second rise if:
•
•

They are willing to exit immediately if price violates the old high.
The execution target stands at or just below the old high.

The third rise into a top should rarely be sold short. Markets can easily head to new highs when they
turn and rally after pulling back from a first failed test. This first attempt washes out shorts and
those that missed selling on the initial top. The third rise allows accumulation to build and sets up a
classic cup and handle breakout pattern. It also traps shorts from the failed test and uses their buying
power to build a new uptrend.

DECLINES
The same crowd that lifts price provides the fuel for a subsequent decline. Longs build false
confidence after rally momentum fades and a topping pattern forms. As smart money quietly exits,
the uptrend hits a critical trigger point: the bulls suddenly realize that they are trapped. They start to
dump the stock in an attempt to salvage profits. Price breaks support and selling spirals downward
through wave after wave.
Common features appear in most price declines. Volume repeatedly surges through waves of selling
pressure while false bottoms print and then quickly fail. Violent covering rallies erupt to shake out
poorly timed short sales and offer hope to wounded longs. Price carries well past rational targets,
but just as panic builds, the stock finds a sustainable bottom.
The swing trader capitalizes upon this repeating market behavior through the same wave mechanics
that guide strong rallies. But fear replaces greed during sell- offs and invokes different setup
considerations. When R. N. Elliott discussed primary trend waves in the 1930s, he noted the special
characteristics of downtrends through the five-wave decline (5WD) pattern. This price correction
structure remains as effective today as it was many decades ago. And swing traders can apply its
power without understanding the broad Elliott Wave Theory, because it captures the fear of the
emotional herd.
The 5WD consists of three primary trend impulses and two reactions, just like its uptrend cousin.
Direct waves push lower in this complex pattern between countertrend bear rallies. The middle
wave often prints a downtrend continuation gap as dynamic as the uptrend version. The last impulse
can reflect parabolic movement driven by intense fear. After this drop, the uptrend may resume
immediately. But more often price forms a double bottom or similar pattern that provides a good
base for a breakout above the downtrend line.
The first impulse (TOP) corrects the uptrend that carries an issue to a new high. This often prints a
first failure retracement. It also initiates the price decline that completes the stock’s technical
breakdown through the third wave (1). Volume peaks sharply during this middle correction as
shareholders recognize the ugly event. But the worst is usually reserved for last in major declines.
As the third wave completes, a false bottom paints a comforting picture that slows the selling and
brings in new value longs. The decline then suddenly resumes and accelerates into an emotional
fifth wave (2) that violates popular targets and reasonable support zones. Note that the top of the
fourth wave can reach up and touch the bottom of the second wave during the 5WD. This would
violate common EWT rules if it occurred during a rally instead of a selloff.
FIGURE 3.8
TOP-1-2-DROP UP: Use this simple count to identify the five-wave decline and accurately predict trend reversals. The
three primary waves mark the Top-1-2 in the 5WD pattern. Connect the third (1) and fifth (2) waves with a
trendline. The trendline can violate first (TOP) wave in any way. The first bounce after the (DROP) may come close to
that trendline but will rarely violate it.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The fifth wave panic extinguishes the selling pressure and bounces the stock. This rapid upward
motion squeezes shorts and ignites the first impulse of a possible new uptrend. The strong rally then
quickly fails. As longs brace for more pain, the prior low unexpectedly holds. A new crowd notices
the support and steps in. Price builds back to the 1-2 trendline as a double bottom forms. The
balance of power then shifts and the stock breaks out through that line into a new uptrend.
Orient the decline against broader uptrend movement to predict price evolution. Start with
Fibonacci retracement analysis and measure the selloff against the prior trends. One simple 5WD
structure draws the first wave to 38%, the second to 50%, and the final impulse to 62% of a larger
uptrend. This predicts that price will eventually return to test the high where the decline originally
began. But if the pattern corrects 100% or more of a major rally, the subsequent bounce could be
very weak and the stock may eventually go lower. Expect price to break through the down trendline
in these conditions but quickly pause and drop back below new support. Trade defensively and
capitalize on the price swings. Then shift tactics quickly when the bottom appears ready to break.
5WD short selling requires great precision. The 1-2 trendline consists of only two points unless the
TOP aligns perfectly with the next two impulses. So this important signpost doesn’t really print
until the second major selloff breaks to new lows. The first upward impulse after the climax marks a
good short entry if price gets close enough to the trendline. But this setup carries a lower reward

than the other downward moves and the position requires countertrend entry because price should
eventually hold above the prior low.
The best short sales arise from natural breakdown points as impulses violate prior support. Avoid
positions on the first impulse since this wave may complete with no technical breakdown. This first
decline also faces a short squeeze danger and a large pool of potential longs. The second downward
5WD impulse (1) may begin close to the high of the TOP. This forms a classic double top pattern.
Subsequent waves present less danger to short positions as the bear mentality undermines price
recovery. Locate logical entry points where weak rallies bounce into major resistance.
FIGURE 3.9
Examine every decline within the context of larger price movement. After Tellabs rallied for 6 points on the 5-minute
chart, it quickly pulled back to the 62% retracement in a clear five-wave decline pattern. It then formed a simple double
bottom and broke out to the upside. Since the old uptrend remained intact, the first target should be a test of the old high
at 62. Keep an eye out for TOP-1-2-DROP-UP in all time frames.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Experience teaches that downtrends do not easily give way to new uptrends. While a break of the 12 trendline marks the completion of the 5WD, subsequent price movement may not generate much
momentum. Try to capture the expansion move across the trendline or the first pullback for a quick
swing trade. Then exercise caution to see how the new uptrend develops. Remember the old adage:
the bigger the move, the broader the base. Long declines need time to heal and the broken trendline

may only yield to a sideways market. Price break momentum will be directly proportional to the
distribution level during the previous decline. Recognize those times when price will likely rise at
the same angle at which it originally fell, and watch out for those times when it won’t.
The skilled eye will find 5WDs in all time frames. Some exhibit sharp vertical selloffs, while
others move sideways and provoke far less attention. Both occurrences allow swing traders to focus
attention on price correction and find low-risk entry on both sides of the market. Fit this volatile
formation into its proper stage within the broad Pattern Cycles structure. Then watch how markets
create opportunity through the evolution of the master pattern.

MARKET MECHANICS
Most Pattern Cycles trading occurs at key intersections. Prior action prints complex S/R barriers.
Price discovery then tests these constricted zones, which must eventually hold or fail. Classic swing
strategies depend on these barriers to stop and reverse price. Momentum tactics expect them to
break. When they do, bars expand in the direction of the violation. This common trending
mechanism also displays a fortunate side effect for sleeping traders. Price often revisits the original
breakout level and permits low-risk pullback entry.
S/R takes many diverse forms. It may appear as a series of tops or bottoms, gaps, retracements, or a
variety of other landscape features. Any straight set of three or more lines that extend outward
yields a trendline that can stop price movement. When S/R methods intersect, they signal crossverification and odds increase that the predicted trading event will occur. Train the mind to see
unique S/R on each stock chart and then concentrate on the intersecting points. The next profit hides
there and waits for discovery.
Bull, bear, top, bottom, breakout, breakdown, high, low. That’s about it. Pattern Cycles
continuously repeat the same stages through all charts and time frames. Successful swing trading
requires little more than accurate recognition of a stock’s current phase and waiting patiently for
low-risk execution. Learn the characteristics of each stage and start to think in 3D. Consistent
profits come from chart elements that align through several time periods. But concurrent trends
often stand in conflict and yield unpredictable results. For example, many trading losses will come
from buying one trend while another signals an immediate sale.
Above all else, Pattern Cycles recognize the difference between bull and bear markets. Trend
mechanics operate very differently through rallies and declines. Collar the position to the bull-bear
axis and filter trades in tune with the predominant cycle. Countertrend entry works well but requires
advanced execution skills. Don’t attempt it without extensive experience and careful planning. And
avoid picking tops or bottoms in fast-moving conditions. The markets present much safer trades
with equal rewards.
Try to execute positions just as countertrend movement ends and the primary trend reasserts itself.
These pullbacks, dips, and bear rallies shift reward:risk strongly in the swing trader’s favor. Trend
mechanics exhibit frequent and predictable countertrend movement. The challenge during these
times lies in emotional self-control. Success requires buying when fear says sell and selling when
greed says buy. Profit at that critical moment depends on adhering to the prime directive of
technical analysis: play the numbers and forget the story.

PATTERN CHARACTERISTICS
Congestion patterns swing between key S/R levels. They complete when a new trend leg breaks
through this wall into directional price movement. This surge may be in the same or opposite

direction as the previous one. A pattern between adjacent price moves in the same direction
continues that trend. Alternatively, when a breakout turns backwards and retraces the last trend leg,
that pattern reverses the prior move.
All range patterns display a tendency toward continuation or reversal. This underlying bias
generates their predictive power. Reversal patterns take longer to complete than continuation
patterns. Swing traders exploit this tendency when they locate other congestion zones within the
same trend and compare the bar count. Learn to recognize patterns well before they complete, and
choose entry points where price momentum will likely erupt. Always keep in mind that reversal
patterns tend to be more dependable than breakout patterns.
Trend has only two choices upon reaching a barrier: continue forward or reverse. Pattern Cycles
focus trading efforts toward the more likely result and point to low-risk execution levels that
capitalize upon the event. But effective analysis must also consider that the opposite outcome could
develop. Many times this pattern failure will yield a more profitable trade than the one originally
planned. So always see if an execution in the other direction might make sense. Charts consistently
offer early prediction of these events through unexpected behavior near common breakout levels.
Price acts differently at tops and bottoms. Bottoms take longer to form, and declines from tops tend
to be more vertical than rises off bottoms. This phenomenon illustrates a known gravity principle
within the markets. Price bars appear to have a weight that influences their trend development. This
odd tendency generates an inappropriate gravity bias that inhibits the ability to visualize dramatic
rallies before they occur. Fortunately, self-therapy for this condition will cure it. Take a chart and
throw it on the floor. From above, walk circles around it until you don’t know which way is up. The
stroll confuses the mind and the bias will dissipate as hidden trade setups appear out of nowhere.
The big move hides just beyond the extremes of price congestion. Intermediate highs or lows within
the boundaries of a range point to major breakouts when price violates them. They also locate major
fade levels where the smart money recognizes that ranges persist longer than trends. First identify
these important features through examination of the charting landscape. Then, rather than jump in
with the crowd, wait for the herd’s reaction to these pivots before deciding which way to make the
trade.
