
day is greater than 500,000.
• 60-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 10.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 20-day simple moving average of
close for today.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today

216

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

is greater than 50-day simple moving average of
close for 40 days ago.
• Maximum range over 30 days starting today is
greater than maximum range over 15 days starting today.
• Maximum range over 15 days starting today is
greater than maximum range over 5 days starting today.
• Daily OBV for today is less than daily OBV for
40 days ago.
• Daily MACD line (12,26,9) for today is less than
daily MACD Line (12,26,9) for 40 days ago.
• 50-day simple moving average of close for today
is greater than 200-day simple moving average
of close for today.
In the absence of a solid screen, you will just have to
eyeball the charts on your watch list. In fact, this is a better way to go because it allows you to watch a wedge
develop over several days and weeks. That OBV trigger signal is really the key to this setup: if you can get in on the
day that happens, you often will be in at the very start of a
signiﬁcant trend-down sell-off. The stocks that show up on
the preceding screen most often have already triggered
their OBV trendline signal.
In Figure 10.13, NVDA begins to trade within a narrowing range or wedge just before breaking down. Note
that once we have the two trendlines in place we can clearly
see that the support line is rising at a steeper pace than the
resistance line. The indicators told us ahead of time that

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Figure 10.13
pattern.

217

NVDA breaks down from a rising wedge

trouble was ahead, and indeed it was. An entry at the close
on the day of the sell short trigger—the break of the OBV
trendline—would have returned ⫹30 percent at the maximum extension of the trade in just about four weeks. Note,
too, that the sell short trigger occurred prior to price
breaking down out of the wedge pattern.
In Figure 10.14, CSCO throws up a rising wedge
breakdown signal following a bullish gap up in a strong

218

Figure 10.14

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

CSCO triggers OBV sell signal in rising wedge.

uptrend. Even though the price has not yet closed below
the wedge, this is still a valid signal and can be entered on
the close of the trigger day at a price of 20.75. Note the
bearish candle on the trigger day and the bearish divergence seen in the MACD indicator.
That wedge breakdown sell trigger signaled the end
to CSCO’s uptrend. After price took a few sessions to clear
the lower edge of the trendline, it was a slow and steady
drop over the next two months to hit a closing low of 17.24,

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

Figure 10.15

219

CSCO rising wedge breakdown setup.

for a nice return of ⫹17 percent. Note how the wedge
breakout triggered the transition from a strong uptrend to
a strong downtrend in CSCO shares in Figure 10.15.

THE FINAL SCREENING PROCESS
Okay, so you’ve eyeballed all your charts, run your special
screens, and now you have a shortlist of stocks to consider
either buying long or selling short. The next thing you need

220

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

to do is whittle this list of possible plays down to only the
most highly qualiﬁed, most riskworthy candidates, which
you will monitor the next trading day for entries. Input
each stock into your Stockcharts.com chart setup with all
the indicators I’ve listed in the aforementioned setups.
Make sure the chart is large enough to get a good, clear picture of at least six months of daily data. You then put each
setup through a series of tests. Do not—I repeat, do not—
be tempted to skip this further testing. It is tedious and
sometimes yields few results, but it is absolutely essential if
you want to streamline your shortlist down to the one or
two best possible trades for the day. In this process you are
going from your B-list to your A-list of stocks. This last step
is key to putting the greatest number of odds on your side.
Here is how you would further test or screen your
shortlists per the various setups we have just discussed.

Bullish Setups
The pullback: You will favor stocks where . . .
• Volume on the dip to support is lower than

average.
• There is no close during the dip under the 50 MA.
• The trendline supporting the uptrend has not
been violated.
• There is no bearish divergence seen in any of the
indicators.
• Price has not put in a double top formation (two
equal price highs) on the daily chart.
• The weekly chart shows that price is not trading

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

221

just under a major weekly moving average (like
the 50 MA or 200 MA).
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry (to avoid unnecessary volatility).
The coiled spring: You will favor stocks where . . .
• Volume in the coil is lower than average.
• The coil is longer than 7 candles but not longer

than 15 candles.
• There is no close in the coil under the 50 MA.
• There are more green candles (close higher than
the open) in the coil than red candles (close lower
than the open).
• At least two of the RSI, CCI and OBV are rising
during the coil.
• The weekly chart shows that price is not trading
just under a major weekly moving average (like
the 50 MA or 200 MA).
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
The bullish divergence: You will favor stocks where . . .
• You see above-average volume during the last low.
• The last low is near an area of previous price

support, long-term trendline support, or major
moving average support.
• The divergences on the indicators relative to
price are strong (i.e., much lower price low plus
much higher indicator low).

222

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• There are more than two indicator divergences.
• The last low is more than 10 percent away from

the 20 MA.
• The weekly chart shows that price is not trading
just under a major weekly moving average (like
the 50 MA or 200 MA).
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
The blue sky breakout: You will favor stocks where . . .
• You see above-average volume on the breakout

day.
• The breakout high is the highest price for six
months or more.
• The breakout follows a period of price
consolidation, with several unsuccessful attempts
to break to new highs.
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
The bullish base breakout: You will favor stocks where . . .
• You see above-average volume on the signal day.
• Price has not yet broken out of the bullish base.
• The base is prolonged beyond the minimum time

required.
• There are more green candles in the base than
red candles.
• At least two of the RSI, CCI and OBV are rising
during the base.

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

223

• The weekly chart shows the base lying at or near a

major weekly moving average (20, 50, 200).
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.

Bearish Setups
The relief rally: You will favor stocks where . . .
• Volume on the rally to resistance is lower than

average.
• There is no close during the dip above the
50 MA.
• The trendline containing the downtrend has not
been violated.
• There is no bullish divergence seen in any of the
indicators.
• Price has not printed in a double bottom or
inverted head-and-shoulders formation on the
daily chart.
• The weekly chart shows that price is not trading
just under a major weekly moving average (like
the 50 MA or 200 MA).
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
The Bearish Divergence: You will favor stocks where . . .
• You see above-average volume during the last

high.
• The last high is near an area of previous price
resistance.

224

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• The divergences on the indicators relative to

price are strong (i.e., much higher price high plus
much lower indicator high).
• The divergences on the indicators are strong.
• There are more than two indicator divergences.
• The last high is more than 10 percent away from
the 20 MA.
• The weekly chart shows that price is not trading
just under a major weekly moving average (like
the 50 MA or 200 ).
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
The gap down: You will favor stocks where . . .
• You see above-average volume on the gap down

day.
• The high preceding the gap down is at an area of
previous price resistance.
• The high preceding the gap down corresponds to
bearish divergence on one or more of our
primary indicators.
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
The blue sea breakdown: You will favor stocks where . . .
• You see above-average volume on the breakdown

day.
• The breakdown low is the lowest price for six
months or more.

SELECTING BEARISH STOCKS TO TREND-TRADE

225

• The breakdown follows a period of price

consolidation, with several unsuccessful attempts
to break to new lows.
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
The rising wedge breakdown: You will favor stocks where . . .
• You see above-average volume on the signal day.
• Price has not yet broken out of the wedge.
• You will favor rising wedges over ascending

triangle wedges.
• There are more red candles in the wedge than
green candles.
• At least two of the RSI, CCI, and OBV are
falling during the wedge.
• The weekly chart shows the wedge lying at or
near a major weekly moving average (20, 50, 200).
• Earnings are set to be announced at least two
weeks after entry.
This ﬁnal screening process will force you to focus
only on those stocks that have the highest technical merit.
This ﬁnal list is now ready for one last question, and it is
an all-important one: Is the risk/reward ratio worth taking a
chance on?
To calculate a stock’s risk/reward ratio, divide the percentage of your expected gain by the percentage of your
initial stop-loss. If you plan on trailing a stop-loss (to be
explained in the Chapter 11) as the trade moves in your
favor, then you will need only a 1.25 ratio or better. For

226

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

example, if your target price is ⫹10 percent, then you can
afford a stop-loss of (8 percent because as the trade moves
in your favor, this percentage loss gets smaller and smaller,
and your risk/reward ratio becomes more favorable. The
best risk/reward scenarios, however, start at 2.0 or better.
Any setup that cannot predict at least a 10 percent return
before running into signiﬁcant resistance should be
scratched.
One ﬁnal note: Don’t be afraid to say, even after several hours of hard work, that you simply do not have any
setups that have either enough technical merit or a high
enough risk/reward ratio to warrant your investment. As
Donald Trump says, “Sometimes the best investments are
the ones you don’t make.” Not that we need to take investment advice from The Donald, but the point is well taken:
it is best to stand aside and see what the next day’s trading
offers than to risk good money in less-than-optimal trades.

entries and exits

CHAPTER
11

B

EFORE going further, let me take a moment here to

remind you of what was written earlier about trading psychology. There I listed several major resources that will
help traders work through the emotional and temperamental issues that can so often undermine even the most
robust trading systems. If you skipped over that section,
and if you (like me) struggle with strictly following the
trading plan you have laid out, then I suggest you go back
and read through that section of the book again. Study one
or more of the resources listed there. Spend a week on your
emotional control and you will go far toward establishing
a lifetime of proﬁtable trading.

ENTERING THE TRADE
If you ﬁnd a stock that satisﬁes all the requirements of a
particular setup, and it has passed your further screening
process and presents a favorable risk/reward ratio, then
entering that trade is merely a matter of picking the best
entry price and setting an order with the broker for that
price. In every case for all the setups, I recommend the fol227

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

228

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

lowing as the most reasonable and proﬁtable way to pick
the best entry price.

For Long Setups
• Once all your requirements for a valid entry have

been satisﬁed on the chart, enter the trade on a
stop order set at either $0.02 (for slower-moving
stocks) or $0.05 (for faster-moving stocks) above
the intraday high of the previous trading day.
• If the stock gaps up above this buy point, then set
a limit order for that price and wait for the price
to come back down. If it never hits this buy price,
then consider the trade a scratch and move on.

For Short Setups
• Once all your requirements for a valid entry have

been satisﬁed on the chart, enter the trade on a
stop order to sell at either $0.02 (for slowermoving stocks) or $0.05 (for faster-moving
stocks) below the intraday low of the previous
trading day.
• If the stock gaps down below this sell short point,
then set a limit order for that price and wait for
the price to come back up. If it never hits this sell
short price, then either pay up for your shares or
consider the trade a scratch and move on.
Let me add to that last note an important principle:
the entry is the least important part of trading. Too many
traders angst out over shaving a penny or two off their
entry price. I’ve seen traders abandon excellent, extremely

ENTRIES AND EXITS

229

proﬁtable setups simply because they were afraid of paying
up a nickel for their shares. So don’t worry about the entry.
If you’ve got a great setup and your entry price is not hit
by the end of the day, don’t skimp. Pay up and adjust your
stop and target accordingly.
Entering the trade is the easy part. Knowing when to
exit, now that is hard. Not only is it hard, but for most mortals it is close to impossible to exit a trade anywhere near
the right time. When a trade goes against us, we either
panic and sell too soon or entertain irrational hopes and
hold on too long. When a trade moves in our favor, we
either exit too soon out of fear or hang on too long out of
greed. The true geniuses of trading, the masters of the
mouse who can turn the chaotic noise of the markets into
proﬁtable events, are all extremely proﬁcient at knowing
when to exit trades.
That kind of genius, that sixth sense that seems to
know intuitively just when a price will pivot, is probably a
birthright, a divine gift. For the rest of us, we need hardand-fast rules; rules that, if followed, will restrain our emotions and rational minds long enough to keep us from
making the kind of embarrassing clown trades I described
in the Introduction. In the following section I outline the
rules. There are several exit strategies suggested here. Try
each one for yourself to determine which strategy best ﬁts
your trading style.

STOP-LOSSES
Once you are in a trade, you will need to put into action
your exit strategy. That strategy must take into account
two different possibilities: the trade goes against you and

230

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

you need to exit in order to cut your loss short, or the trade
goes in your favor and you need to bank the proﬁt before,
inevitably, the momentum fades. In this section we will deal
with the ﬁrst of these two possibilities: how to manage
losses.
Remember, we are not position traders and not buyand-holders. Trend trading is not about trying to grab the
full move of a stock’s price, only the “meat” of the current
trend. We want a high percentage of wins (at least ⫹60 percent, but up to ⫹80 percent is possible with some systems
and in certain market conditions), small losses, and no
regrets about banking small proﬁts. Obviously, we want
our proﬁts to run, but we are quick on the trigger to bank
those proﬁts when they begin to dwindle (and they nearly
always will if you hold long enough). The way we minimize
our losses in the event a trade turns against us is to set a
stop-loss.
Every trade you put on needs to have an exact price at
which you will deﬁnitely sell it in the event the trade goes
against you. This is what we call a stop-loss: a speciﬁed exit
you will take no matter what in order to cut your losses. One
more time: every trade needs a stop-loss, and a stop-loss is
that exact price (not a notional, in-your-head price
“area”—give me a break!) at which you will close the position in the event of a loss or decrease in proﬁt.
I teach my students four different methods for setting
stop-losses. The method that works best for you depends
on the kind of trader you are, your trading experience, your
chart-reading experience, your tolerance for risk, and so
on. I recommend experimenting with these four types of
stops to see which is most proﬁtable for you. Remember,

ENTRIES AND EXITS

231

the only wrong way to put on a stop-loss is to put on no
stop-loss. The four stop-loss methods are:
• A percentage stop-loss
• A price pattern stop-loss
• An average true range stop-loss
• A parabolic SAR stop-loss

Percentage Stop-Loss
The percentage stop-loss is the easiest to set. It works this
way: to set a stop-loss, simply calculate a percentage loss
from your point of entry and set the stop at that price. In
trend trading, your expected percentage return varies from
stock to stock, depending on the issue’s volatility and the
pattern or setup you are trading. In most cases, however,
due to the relatively short-term nature of these trades, you
will want to set a stop-loss no greater than −8 percent on
any given trade no matter what you expect to gain from a
successful completion of the trade. You should move this
stop at the end of each day, as long as the trade moves in
your favor, recalculating the percentage stop from the current closing price. Some online brokerages will allow for a
trailing stop, which will automatically recalculate your stoploss at every new intraday high (if long) or low (if short), or
at every new closing price if you select that option.

Price Pattern Stop-Loss
A more sophisticated stop-loss, and the one I use myself, is
the price pattern stop-loss: here we want to look for an area
on the chart of nearby price support (if long) or resistance

232

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

(if short) that if price were to violate that area would signal that the trade is not likely to work out. Price support
or resistance can come in the form of a major moving
average, an area of previous price reversal, or a trendline.
Traders familiar with Bollinger Bands or other forms of
standard deviation envelopes can also use those tools to set
price pattern stops.
The price pattern stop-loss is a more reasonable way
to apply stop-losses in that, instead of relying on an arbitrary distance away from the entry price, it uses a distance
suggested by the price action of the stock itself. Furthermore, a price pattern stop gives you a quick read on the
risk/reward ratio. Say, for example, your stock is in a strong
uptrend and has pulled back to the 50 MA and then triggered an entry signal only 3 percent above that MA, and at
the same time you calculate a target price of 12 percent.
This would prove to be an excellent risk/reward entry. But
in every case, I recommend not risking more than an 8 percent loss on any given trade. In most trades you should set
a stop-loss at something more like 5 to 6 percent. The average loss in our Swing Trade Newsletter, for example, is 4.76
percent. Leave it to the investors and position traders to
take the double-digit losses!

Average True Range (ATR)
A third way to calculate a stop-loss is to use the average
true range (ATR) of the stock. The “R” in ATR stands for
the range of intraday movement a stock makes from its
intraday high to its intraday low; the “T” is there because
this calculation also includes the previous day’s closing

ENTRIES AND EXITS

233

price, thus incorporating any overnight gap; and the “A”
signiﬁes that a running average of these ﬁgures is what
makes up the indicator’s end value. The ATR is a measurement of the intraday volatility of the stock. As shares
tend to trade within a larger intraday range, ATR moves
up. As price consolidates and the intraday moves tighten,
ATR moves down. Using ATR to set your stop-loss means
you are correlating the amount you are willing to lose with
the stock’s volatility: the greater the volatility, the greater
the potential reward, but also the greater the potential
loss.
Most charting packages will calculate ATR for you.
The default periodicity for the ATR is usually set at 14,
which works just ﬁne. Double the ATR value and in most
cases you have a reasonable place to set a stop-loss. If that
ﬁgure is more than 8 percent from the entry price, the
stock may be too volatile for a swing trade and should
either be entered very lightly with a tighter stop or not
entered at all. The ATR has the added advantage of giving
you a valuable tool for position sizing, and it is used in a
variety of formulas by fund managers seeking to reduce
risk in their portfolios.

Parabolic SAR Stop
A fourth and ﬁnal way to input a stop-loss, the parabolic
SAR stop-loss, can also be done with your charting package.
Most charting packages will allow you to overlay a parabolic SAR (stop and reverse) indicator on the price chart.
This indicator was developed by Welles Wilder as a means
of trading volatile stocks in a stop-and-reverse fashion: if

234

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

you were stopped out long, you would immediately go
short, and vice versa. The indicator doesn’t work that well
on most stocks as an SAR entry system, but it is a handy
tool for setting stop exits. The SAR overlay consists of a
series of dots under each day’s candlestick. Some lie under
price lows and some lie above price highs. As the stock
moves up and down, these dots change location. They
even change if the stock trades ﬂat. The parabolic SAR is
designed as both a price and a time stop: if the trade goes
nowhere, or even if it goes against you, your stop-loss
tightens up regardless—hence, the parabolic effect of the
tool.
Your charting package will tell you the value of the
current day’s SAR, so that value is then your stop price.
Figure 11.1 is an example of a chart with the parabolic SAR
overlay on it (MRVL). You can see that the SAR nicely
catches the major trends, but it loses money during choppier market moves.

HOW TO BANK YOUR PROFITS
