
Repeating Historical Levels
If, once they had been set up, important Support and Resistance Levels
always “worked,” we should see Intermediate Tops and Bottoms form at

AU3772_book.fm Page 246 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

246

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

exactly the same ranges year after year in one Bull and Bear cycle after
another. As a matter of fact, there is a well-marked tendency for this to occur
in old-line, actively traded stock. In General Electric, for example, the 22–24,
34–35, 40–42, and 48–50 zones have been characterized by large turnover
(and, consequently, by many Intermediate Reversals of trend), throughout
the 1920s to 1950s. In Southern Pacific, there are historical Support and
Resistance Zones at 21–22, 28–30, 38–40, and 55–56. In U.S. Steel, 42–45,
55–58, 69–72, 78–80, and 93–96 are conspicuously marked as Reversal
Ranges. And many other stocks might be cited. EN9: While the particular stocks
are dead or transmogrified the principle is alive and well.
Over long periods, however, such Support and Resistance Levels do tend
to be gradually modified, broadened, or “blurred,” and new ones created.
One source of many important new Supply Zones is a Bear Market Panic.
For this is the one type of decline that can be counted on to pay no heed
whatever to previous underlying Support Zones. Panics (which, as we have
seen in our earlier study of Primary Swings in connection with Dow Theory,
typify the second phase of Bear Markets), once they get under way, seem to
sweep away all potential Support in their calamitous plunges until they
exhaust themselves in a general market Selling Climax. And that climax may
or may not come at a level that bears a relation to some previously established Support. To use U.S. Steel again as an example, the 1937 Panic Decline
took the stock down through its 93–96 range, hesitated briefly at the 78–80
level, and then plunged through 69–72 and 55–58 to stop just above 50. In
the 1946 Panic, X again broke swiftly through 78–80 and 69–72 to halt at 66.
When there is a large turnover at a Panic Bottom in any given stock, that
level acquires a strong “vested interest” for the future, and will usually
furnish conspicuous Resistance to a subsequent advance (after another Bear
Market Decline has taken quotations below the Panic Level).
This discussion of Panics brings us back to a consideration of Support
and Resistance performance at other stages of the Primary Trend — a matter
on which we stated early in this chapter we should have more to say. Bearing
in mind the relation of Resistance to volume, it is easy to see why in a long
drawn out, but otherwise typical Bear Swing, in which trading interest
diminishes to a very low ebb as the final low is approached, the next to the
last Intermediate Bottom may produce relatively little supply, and consequently, only a small reaction when the new uptrend reaches its level. Add
to this the fact that many of the buyers in the last stages of a Major Decline
are deliberate scale-down investors who fully expect prices will go lower
and, hence, are not easily shaken out. The slow progress so often seen in the
first part of a new Primary Bull Market is due not so much to overhead
Resistance as to lack of impatient public bidding.
The Recovery Trends that follow precipitous Bear Market Panics usually
exhaust themselves, for obvious reasons, long before they get back up to the
last Resistance Level left behind in that Primary Downswing (which is usually the Bottom of the first Intermediate Decline from the extreme Top of the

AU3772_book.fm Page 247 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen:

Support and Resistance

247

cycle), but they often meet supply at a lower Resistance Zone set up in the
preceding Bull Market. Look way back on your charts, therefore, when sizing
up the prospective advance in such situations.
A further thought along that line is: there is no law that requires an
advancing trend to keep right on climbing until it reaches a distant overhead
Supply Zone. It is true, as a corollary which we have already mentioned to
our Support and Resistance Theory, that prices can and do rise easily through
a price range where no Bottoms or Congestion Areas have formed in previous downtrends, but if the first established Resistance Level is a long ways
above, the advance may exhaust itself before it gets there. Heavy supply may
come in for other reasons at a lower level. Think, then, of a distant Resistance
Level as a maximum possibility rather than as a certain goal. However,
between two stocks whose purchase you are considering, you should select
the one which, other things being equal, has the “thinner” track overhead,
can rise farther before it encounters a charted Supply Zone.

Pattern Resistance
We can revert now to some of the Minor phenomena discussed in connection
with Reversal and Consolidation Patterns in earlier chapters. Take gaps, for
instance. You will now see why it is easy and, hence, quite in order for a
reaction that comes soon after a gap has been made to slip back and close
that gap. There is no “vested interest” whatever in the range through which
prices skipped to form the gap on the chart. You will also see why such a
reaction may stop short and reverse as soon as it has closed the gap, provided
there was a high-volume turnover in the price range immediately preceding
the gap. Such is usually the case with a Breakaway Gap.
Any gap, for the same reason, is easy to close once a reaction starts prices
moving back in that direction, if it is not too far away and if there are no
intervening Resistance Levels to stop the reaction before it gets there. In the
case of a Runaway Gap, however, there is no reason why a reaction should
halt as soon as it has covered the gap range; on the contrary, it will probably
continue on through the “thin” price track that preceded the gap.
Pullbacks and Throwbacks — the quick return moves which we noted
as developing so often shortly after a breakout from a Head-and-Shoulders
or other Area Pattern — exemplify the principles of Support and Resistance.
When prices break down, for example, out of a Descending Triangle, the
horizontal lower boundary of the formation, which was originally a Demand
Line, promptly reverses its role and becomes a Resistance Level. Any attempt
to put prices back up through it, therefore, after a decisive breakout, is
stopped by supply at or near the line. By the same token, the neckline of a
Head-and-Shoulders Top, which was a Demand Line, becomes a Resistance
Level after it has been broken. The Top or Supply Line of a Rectangle becomes
a Support after prices have pushed above it on volume and by a decisive
margin.

AU3772_book.fm Page 248 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

248

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

76
72
68
64
60
56
52
48
1945–1947

GT

GOODYEAR TIRE
44
Sales
100’s
50
40
30
20
10
N

D

J

F

M A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N

D

J

F

M

A M

FIGURE 143. We first discussed Pullbacks in connection with the Head-and-Shoulders in Chapter 6 and refer to them again in this chapter (page 243) as Support–Resistance phenomena. At least one Pullback to the neckline (after the breakout) occurs
in the great majority of cases. Many Head-and-Shoulders Formations produce two,
the first within a few days after the breakout and before prices have gotten very far
away, and the second weeks later, sometimes after the minimum measurement of
the Head-and-Shoulders has been fulfilled. Goodyear saw the unusual number of
four Pullbacks to its 1946 neckline — the first two weeks after the August breakout,
another in October, a third in November, and a fourth in February 1947, which met
the Double Resistance of the neckline and the down trendline (Chapter 14) projected
from the 1946 April head and August right shoulder.

Earlier in this chapter, in our discussion of the three criteria for appraising the amount of Resistance to be expected at a former Bottom level, we
named “distance away” as one of them and stated as a general rule that
prices should have gone at least 10% beyond that level in a medium-priced
stock before much Resistance would be set up. This 10%-away rule does not
apply, however, in the case of a Throwback to a well-defined area formation,
when it follows shortly after a breakout. All that is necessary to establish
strong Resistance to such moves at the pattern boundary is a conclusive
breakout.
The Symmetrical Triangle has a different sort of Support and Resistance
“field.” You will recall that the first Reversal point in the formation of a
Symmetrical Triangle (a Top, if it forms on a rising trend, or a Bottom if on
a decline) is normally accompanied by high trading volume, but that activity

AU3772_book.fm Page 249 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen:

Support and Resistance

249

30
1945
28
26
24
22
20

INTERNATIONAL TEL. & TEL.

IT

19
Sales
100’s
500
400
300
200
100
JANUARY FEBRUARY
MARCH
APRIL
MAY
JUNE
6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30

FIGURE 144. Several examples of the support “field” of the Symmetrical Triangle
appear in this 1945 daily chart of “IT.” Following the belated February 5 breakout
from the first Triangle, prices returned on the 9th to the level of the mid-January Top,
but then suffered a more extensive reaction, which came down on February 26 to
the Triangle’s apex level. This was a critical juncture. The apex point itself is a strong
Support (or Resistance), but its level becomes weaker as time passes. In this case an
“end run” might have been developing. Stop-loss orders should always be entered
under an apex level (see Chapter 27). Here the apex held, however, and prices went
into another “Coil,” breaking out topside on March 10. Their next reaction was
supported, as was to be expected after an early breakout like this, at the Top Pattern
Line.
The price track from mid-March to the end of April fell into an Ascending Triangle
Pattern, the top boundary of which functioned as Support in June but was broken
in July. Refer back to Figure 120, page 204.

diminishes rapidly on succeeding fluctuations within its converging boundaries. Consequently, once prices have broken out of the Triangle and have
proceeded well beyond the level of the pattern’s first Reversal point, that
level, because of the volume of shares traded there, becomes a Support (or
Resistance) against a subsequent reaction. But, if the breakout move does
not carry beyond the Triangle’s first Reversal Level by a clear margin, any
Throwback will probably bring quotations back to the extended (sloping)
pattern boundary, and if the reaction does not occur until the trend has
worked out to or beyond the Triangle’s apex, then the Throwback usually
will not meet Support (or Resistance) until it has carried back to the level of
the apex. The apex, in brief, represents the concentration level or axis of the
Triangle’s Support and Resistance.

AU3772_book.fm Page 250 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

250

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

INTERLAKE IRON

IK

1944

10

9

8
Sales
100’s
125
100
75
50
25
JULY
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 2 9 16 23

FIGURE 145. In this instance, a belated upside breakout (August 10) from a Symmetrical Triangle failed quickly and the subsequent reaction, after holding for several
days at the apex level, finally broke down for an “end run.” Thereafter, note that the
apex level turned into a Resistance against Recovery Moves.

The intersection of the two converting boundary lines of a Symmetrical
Triangle has sometimes been called a “cradle.” The axis Support (or Resistance) is strongest near the cradle point and gets weaker as the axis line
(apex level) is extended out to the right on the chart (i.e., as time passes).
Thus, if a late breakout move fails to carry prices very far from the Triangle
area, and the trend then peters out, flattens, and begins to react after the
cradle point has been passed in terms of time, its action, as it reaches the
axis line, must be closely watched. (A stop-loss order may be indicated here.)
Should the axis Support fail to hold, the reaction may plunge through and
accelerate in a more extensive swing, which has aptly been termed an “end
run around the line.”

Volume on Breaks Through Support
On those occasions when prices fail to retreat when they hit a Resistance (or
Support) Range, but, after perhaps holding there for several days, push on
through, there is nearly always a sudden acceleration and a marked pickup
in volume. This may be taken as confirmatory evidence of a decisive break
and, consequently, an indication that the move will carry on. The reasons
for this volume increase are obscure. Some say, “It takes volume to overcome
Resistance,” which is true enough, but the volume usually comes after the
Resistance has been penetrated. Therefore, others say, “The volume is evidence that technicians see what has happened and are now jumping in.” But
that line of thought, in the authors’ opinions, also has little to substantiate
it. (We shall have more to say about the questionable influence of technicians
on the trend later on.) Many of the arguments over volume change vs. price

AU3772_book.fm Page 251 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirteen:

Support and Resistance

251

H
S

64

S
NL

60
56
52
48
44

SOUTHERN RAILWAY

SR

1946

40

34
Sales
100’s
125
100
75
50
25

XD 75C

36

XD 75C

38

S

H

S

APRIL
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUGUST
SEPTEMBER
6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28

FIGURE 146. Here is a typical case of two Pullbacks to a Head-and-Shoulders
neckline, the first immediately after the breakout and the second 3 weeks later. Note
that the initial breakthrough “bounced” from the early April Top Support, and the
late July decline met Support at the general April–May Congestion Area. But what
this chart illustrates, particularly, is how volume increases when a good Support
Range is penetrated. Note the decided pickup on August 27, when the April–May
area was left behind.

change savor of the old hen-or-egg riddle. In any event, causes for many
technical phenomena, such as this one, may be left to the academicians,
provided the practical implications are clear.

Support and Resistance in the Averages
As has been the case with nearly every other technical phenomenon we have
studied, the principles of Support and Resistance apply, with suitable allowances, to Averages as well as to individual stocks. Since an Average reflects
the combined charts of the majority of the issues that compose it, but with
a minority of them frequently evincing quite divergent patterns, it follows
naturally that Support and Resistance Zones in the Averages cannot be as
sharply and narrowly construed. Minor Tops and Bottoms in the Averages,
particularly, are less dependable as Resistance Levels. Clearly defined and

AU3772_book.fm Page 252 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

252

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

important Intermediate Reversals, however, since they nearly always represent Reversals in the entire market (practically all stocks), will normally
produce strong Resistance (or Support, as the case may be) in the subsequent
Average Trend.
When the Averages break down through a Support Level, but one or
more stocks, at the same time, hold firm at or above their corresponding
individual Supports, there is a presumption that those particular stocks are
in a stronger position than others to participate in the next recovery. The
phrase “other things being equal” should be added, however, for there are
qualifications to this presumption which must be considered. For instance,
it may be that the stock that has resisted decline will, for that very reason,
be less attractive to new buyers than one which broke drastically and is,
therefore, now purchasable at a more “attractive” price.
Many of the claims made regarding future prospects for stocks that have,
by one criterion or other, previously evinced “better-than-Average” or
“worse-than-Average” market performance permit argument either way. It
is safest to treat all such relative performance indications as only one minor
factor to be appraised in the overall chart picture.

AU3772_book.fm Page 253 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter fourteen

Trendlines and Channels
One of our basic tenets in this system of technical stock chart analysis —
indeed, a fact which any neophyte can quickly verify for himself by inspection of the market records for whatever period he chooses — is that prices
move in trends. The market in general, and the many stocks which compose
it, do not jump up and down in an altogether random fashion; on the
contrary, they show definite organization and pattern in their charted course.
Prices move in trends. These trends may be either up or down or sideways (horizontal). They may be brief or of long duration. They may be
classified as Major (Primary), Intermediate (Secondary), or Minor, according
to the rules of Dow Theory, or as Horizontal Line Formations. (The distinction between a short Intermediate and an extended Minor Trend is often
more difficult to make with individual stocks than it is with the Averages,
but it is not so important.) But sooner or later, trends change; they may
change by reversing from up to down or down to up, and they may also
change direction without reversing as, for example, from up to sideways
and then perhaps to up again, or from a moderate slope to a steep slope,
and vice versa.
Profits are made by capitalizing on up or downtrends, by following them
until they are reversed. The investor’s problem is to recognize a profitable
trend at the earliest possible stage of its development and then later to detect,
again as quickly as possible, its end and Reversal. The Reversal of any
important trend is usually characterized, as we have already seen, by the
construction of some sort of joint price and volume pattern — in brief, of a
Reversal Formation.

The Trendline
All of the foregoing statements regarding trends have been expressed or
implied in earlier chapters of this text. It is our purpose now to examine
trends, as such, more closely, to see how they may be plotted most effectively
on the charts, and determine to what extent they can be used to reinforce or
supplement the technical forecasts derived from our other chart formation
and Support–Resistance studies — sometimes to furnish even earlier forecasts or warnings of change.

253

AU3772_book.fm Page 254 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

254

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

One of the first discoveries a new student is likely to make when he
begins to inspect stock charts with a critical eye is that nearly all Minor and
most Intermediate Trends follow nearly straight lines. A few readers will,
perhaps, dismiss this as perfectly natural, something to be taken for granted.
But the majority become increasingly amazed and excited as they delve
deeper. Not only the smaller fluctuations, but, frequently, also the great
Primary Swings of several years’ duration appear on the charts as though
their courses had been plotted with a straight-edge ruler. This phenomenon
is, in truth, the most fascinating, impressive, and mysterious of all that the
stock charts exhibit.
If we actually apply a ruler to a number of charted price trends, we
quickly discover that the line which most often is really straight in an uptrend
is a line connecting the lower extremes of the Minor Recessions within those
trends. In other words, an advancing wave in the stock market is composed
of a series of ripples, and the Bottoms of each of these ripples tend to form
on, or very close to, an upward slanting straight line. The Tops of the ripples
are usually less even; sometimes, they also can be defined by a straight line,
but more often, they vary slightly in amplitude, and so any line connecting
their upper tips would be more or less crooked.
On a Descending Price Trend, the line most likely to be straight is the
one that connects the Tops of the Minor Rallies within it, while the Minor
Bottoms may or may not fall along a straight edge.
These two lines — the one that slants up along the successive wave
Bottoms within a broad up-move and the one that slants down across successive wave Tops within a broad down-move — are the basic trendlines.
It is unfortunate that a more distinctive name for them has never been
devised than the threadbare word “line,” which has so many other uses and
connotations. A few analysts have called them “tangents,” a term that has
the advantage of novelty, but, because it is a distinct perversion of the true
meaning of the word tangent, confuses many readers even more. Perhaps
tangent will eventually become established in this new sense. However, we
shall be satisfied herein with the overworked “line,” but can give it some
distinctiveness in its present context by joining it to trend in the one word
“trendline.”
Trendlines, you may have heard it said, “are made to be broken,” but
that is one of those exasperatingly sententious remarks which fails to clarify
anything. Of course they are broken; they are all always broken, ultimately,
and some very shortly after they are set up. The problem is to decide which
breaks (i.e., penetrations by a price movement) are of important technical
significance and which are of no practical consequence, requiring possibly
only a Minor Correction in the drawing of the original trendline. There are
no 100% certain, quick answers to this problem; the significance of some
penetrations cannot be determined as soon as they appear, but must await
confirmatory indications from other chart developments. In a great majority
of instances, however, an important break — one that requires a prompt
review and possibly a revision of trading policy — is easy to recognize.

AU3772_book.fm Page 255 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen:

Trendlines and Channels

255

52
ATLANTIC REFINING AFI
48
44
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
Sales
100’s
250
200
150
100
50

1944

1945

1946

1947

FIGURE 147. A series of Intermediate Trendlines drawn to illustrate the “basic”
principle (see below) on a weekly chart of Atlantic Refining, extending from January
1944 through August 1947. Observe that each up trendline required two distinct
