
“I dream a lot,” he said the day before leaving for San Diego, and the dreams could be disturbing. “I have a
multiplex going on in there. It’s a full-time occupation.” That evening he ordered a club sandwich for dinner
and ate with a visitor in his office, wanting to fill the time until Sharon took over to distract him with a bridge
game, then conversation till all hours. Now he sat talking, at first struggling through a brittle discussion about
business and politics. Eventually, the conversation wound its way to what had been bubbling beneath the
surface for days: the surgery that would take place shortly after the meeting ended.
For the briefest fraction of a second, a look of surprise flickered across his face. Then his face began to
crumple, and collapsed into his hands. His shoulders heaved and rocked and he slid forward in his chair, like
a tower crumbling in an earthquake. Dry, desolate, heaving sobs, like silent screams, came gasping out of
him. There wasn’t any consolation for this.
Gradually the wracking sobs spent themselves. Then he began to talk about Susie. He cried quietly, off and
on, for about two hours. He was afraid of what she was going to have to suffer through. She was stronger
than he; his main concern was the pain she would face. He was even more worried that she might accept
death as a natural thing and not fight it as he would. He was terrified of losing her. Assumptions that were
part of the very core of his being had been upended. He had always assumed that he would never be alone
because she would outlive him. He had always assumed that he could count on her wisdom and judgment to
handle any life-and-death decisions that might have to be made. He had always assumed that she would run
the foundation after he was gone. She would keep peace within the family if he was not there; she would see
to it that Astrid was taken care of; she would resolve any conflicts, soothe any bad feelings. She would
handle his funeral and shape the way in which everyone would remember him. Above all, he had been
counting on Susie to be there for him at the end, to sit beside him and hold his hand and calm his terror and
ease his suffering when death was approaching, just as she had done for so many others. For the first time he
had to contemplate that it might not work out this way. But these thoughts were so unbearable that he could
only glance at them before shutting them down. He was sure that her doctors would take care of her and that
she would live. By the time he left the office for his bridge game, he was in a somber mood but calm and
collected.
The next morning he flew to San Diego. At the Buffett Group conference, he struck people as subdued but
not despondent. He presided over three days of meetings that included a dinner at the Gateses’ house, a talk
by Bill Ruane about his project to improve the schools in Harlem, Jack Byrne on management succession,
and Charlie Munger on the life of Andrew Carnegie, the great industrialist, who had maintained that he who
dies rich dies disgraced. Howie Buffett dropped in to describe the motivations behind the photographs in his
book, Tapestry of Life, which showed scenes of human suffering in impoverished Africa; Geoffrey Cowan,
dean of the Annenberg School for Communications at USC, gave a speech entitled “From Young Idealists to
Old Bureaucrats,” about the aging of the so-called Silent Generation, those born in the 1930s and early ’40s,
which comprised most of those who were in the room.11
While Warren was in San Diego, Astrid was at the Canyon Ranch spa in Tucson, where he had sent her
because she was so upset about Susie that he wanted her to get away to a place where she might be able to
relax. She had never been to a spa before and resisted at first. Pampering herself at a swanky hacienda was
like attempting a triple lutz to a woman who had never so much as treated herself to a pedicure. Astrid had no
vanity whatsoever; she packed just a few T-shirts for her week at the famous resort. Handed a turkey wrap
for lunch on arrival, out of habit she began to badger the staff about recycling and Styrofoam packaging. At
the reception area, a nurse took her into a small office to design a spa and wellness regime for her. When
asked how she was feeling and what concerns she had, Astrid replied that her concern was her friend Susie.
The nurse apparently recognized that she was dealing with one of those women who focus on everybody else
at the expense of their own needs. Gently, she steered Astrid toward relaxing treatments, like “healing
touch.” Astrid took a couple of yoga classes, went on a bird walk, took some cooking classes, got a facial,
had a couple of massages, and learned some golf. She groused about being taken care of but, to her surprise,
managed to survive it, and found that some aspects of it were not so terrible.
Buffett flew from the meeting in San Diego to San Francisco the day before Susie’s surgery. He had been
scheduled to attend a NetJets marketing event that day and had made up his mind to go, but Susie Jr., who
recognized this as a form of denial, told him he must come to San Francisco instead. Reluctantly, therefore,

he joined the family for dinner at Susie’s apartment. Everyone behaved in character. Since Susie had no one
to care for (but herself), she avoided discussing her feelings about the next day’s surgery with the family and
busied herself talking on the phone. Warren spent much of the evening playing helicopter, with his eyes
leashed to the computer.
Very early the next morning, the family accompanied Susie to the University of California, San Francisco
Medical Center, where the technicians hooked her up to an IV and drew a huge oval from her knee to her left
ankle with a Magic Marker. This, they said, was to indicate the area where they were going to open her leg to
take out what they needed for the bone graft. Dr. Isley, Susie’s surgeon, came by to tell them that he would
leave the operating room after ninety minutes or so to let them know for sure whether the cancer had spread.
Then Susie took her daughter into the bathroom and shut the door behind them. She didn’t want Warren to
hear what she had to say. “Listen,” she said, “he is a wuss. You need to understand that if they get in there
and there’s more cancer, don’t let them operate. I’m so afraid he’s going to tell them to operate even if it’s
really widespread, because he won’t want me to die.”
By eight a.m. Susie was in surgery, and the family went to the main surgical lounge, where they awaited
word, along with all the other people who were passing the time watching Jerry Springer on television while
their loved ones were in the O.R. Warren pretended to read the newspaper. From time to time, he closed the
paper, held it up before his face, reached a hand behind to wipe tears from his eyes, then opened it again.
Dr. Isley returned only forty-five minutes later. Although he had found cancer in two lymph nodes, it had not
spread from there, which was good news. The surgery would remove only the lower floor of her mouth, the
inside of her cheek, and about a third of her tongue. She did not need a bone graft. After Dr. Isley left,
Warren began to ask, “Well, now, Sooz, was that what he said would take an hour and a half, or is he going
to come back out again? Are you sure? Will they really know?” Each time, Susie Jr. reassured him that they
already had the answer, and each time he would wait a few minutes and ask her again. “Well, how did they
know so fast?” He kept saying, “I don’t think this is good. Maybe he’s going to come back out.”
Sixteen hours later, Susie was in the intensive-care unit, breathing through a tracheotomy tube. Her left arm
was bandaged from wrist to elbow where the surgeons had carved a slice of flesh for the skin graft inside her
mouth. Because her tongue was swollen out of her mouth, a feeding tube had been threaded through her nose
into her stomach. She coughed continually, clogging the trach tube, which had to be cleared frequently so
that she could breathe.12
The next morning at the hospital, Susie Jr. told her father, “You need to get really ready for this. It’s a
shocking thing to see.” Warren steeled himself as he walked into Susie’s room. He knew he could not allow
her to see any spasm on his face that would reveal to Susie how ghastly she appeared. Making a huge effort
of will, he managed to sit unflinching with her for a little while. Then Susie Jr. told him and her brothers that
they could go home. There was nothing further they could do. Having stuffed his feelings into a Pandora’s
box while he remained at Susie’s bedside, after he left he says he “spent two days just crying, basically.”
He went back to San Francisco for the following two weekends. Then, just before Susie was going to leave
the hospital and go home, he flew down to Georgia and spoke to a group of students at Georgia Tech. He
didn’t talk about business much, but he invoked many of his familiar themes. He told them the fable of the
genie, and he talked about philanthropy. He said the best investment they could make in life was in
themselves. He told them about his hero Ben Graham and said to choose their heroes carefully, because
heroes matter in your life. He told them to work for people they admired.
They asked him what had been his greatest success and greatest failure. He didn’t tell them about his business
mistakes of omission this time. Instead he said:
“Basically, when you get to my age, you’ll really measure your success in life by how many of the people
you want to have love you actually do love you.
“I know people who have a lot of money, and they get testimonial dinners and they get hospital wings

named after them. But the truth is that nobody in the world loves them. If you get to my age in life and
nobody thinks well of you, I don’t care how big your bank account is, your life is a disaster.
“That’s the ultimate test of how you have lived your life. The trouble with love is that you can’t buy it. You
can buy sex. You can buy testimonial dinners. You can buy pamphlets that say how wonderful you are. But
the only way to get love is to be lovable. It’s very irritating if you have a lot of money. You’d like to think
you could write a check: I’ll buy a million dollars’ worth of love. But it doesn’t work that way. The more
you give love away, the more you get.”13
***
Warren continued visiting every weekend after Susie went home to her sunshine-filled apartment overlooking
San Francisco Bay. The egg-yolk-yellow rugs were gone, lest their dust clog the trach tube. Chair elevators
carried her up the four flights of stairs. The nurses used a rented suction-tracheotomy system. The doctors
began to prepare Susie for the six-week course of radiation, which was intended to kill any remaining cancer
cells. It would begin in December and continue through the holidays. The radiation, which she had never
quite agreed to in the first place, was going to burn her throat. The doctors had told her to bulk up before the
surgery because she could expect to lose around fifty pounds over the entire course of the surgery and
radiation. That was a lot of weight, but one of the thoughts that had comforted her before the surgery was
that she could afford to lose a good bit of it. Now, as the feeding tube came out, the nurses began to feed
Susie six units of liquid meal replacement a day. It took her much of the day to get it down, because of the
pain.
Under stress, Warren had gained a little weight. He felt that he needed to lose twenty pounds and had
decided to diet alongside Susie’s liquid meal regimen. “That can’t be a lot of fun,” he said, “so I won’t have
any fun either.”
Buffett’s manner of dieting was as eccentric and unhealthy as the rest of his eating habits. He decided to stick
with his usual approach, which was to consume only a thousand calories a day and budget it however he
liked. That meant he could spend the thousand calories on licorice, peanut brittle, hamburgers, or whatever
else he wanted to eat so long as he didn’t exceed the self-imposed limit. The easiest step was to cut back on
all the Cherry Coke, replacing it with nothing and thereby dehydrating himself. The idea behind the
thousand-calorie starvation regimen was to get the pain of dieting over with fast. He was impatient and cut
off debate over the health merits of such a diet. At my height and age, he said, I reckon that I can eat about a
million calories a year and maintain my weight. (The nice round, even number of a million calories pleased
him.) I can spend those calories however I want. If I want to eat a bunch of hot-fudge sundaes in January and
starve the rest of the year, I can do that.
It was completely rational (on the surface) yet totally ludicrous. But since he had never been either seriously
overweight or seriously ill, it was pointless to argue with him. (He went on this crash diet every year right
before the shareholder meeting; it is possible, however, that all that dehydration may have had nothing to do
with his earlier kidney stone.) Regardless, Buffett had a way of winning arguments before they ever
occurred. The one extremely rare exception was when he argued with the press over how it presented him.
He never sparred with the Financial Times or the New York Times, both of which he read religiously. His
problem, always, was the Wall Street Journal.
Through the years, his penchant for letting the rubes in on the fact that Wall Street was a sort of speakeasy
inhabited by people who were out to fleece them had made trafficking with the Journal, Wall Street’s official
broadsheet, dangerously fraught. He had once done an “editorial board” luncheon at the Journal that
backfired on him. Editorial board meetings were an opportunity for Buffett to put on his teaching hat and
explain the economic issues of the day to editors—something he relished—but this time, an off-the-record
quote had shown up in the paper. Kay Graham’s rule of journalism had tripped him up—Graham’s maxim
being that a statement given off the record means the quote will not be used—unless it is really good.14
Buffett had been furious, and obtained excuses and apologies from the Journal over its betrayal, which could

not be undone. Moreover, the Journal’s editorial page poured vitriol on him periodically because he
supported shifting the tax burden away from the poor and middle class and toward the rich.
***
He would not dream, however, of skipping a day of reading the Journal, even on Fridays, the day he drove
out to Eppley Airfield for the three-hour NetJets flight to San Francisco. Sharon Osberg picked him up at the
airport and took him straight to Susie’s apartment in Pacific Heights. Not wanting to disturb her or to be
awakened by the light that came in through Susie’s huge uncurtained windows, he slept down in the
ground-floor apartment that Susie used mainly for storage. While Susie napped and slept, he went to Sharon’s
much of the time to watch football on TV and cry on her shoulder. Sometimes they went to midnight movies.
When Warren was in town, Susie saw no visitors, only her daughter, her nurses, and a couple of people like
Kathleen who were caring for her day to day. Nearly everyone, even Jeannie Lipsey Rosenblum and
Warren’s sister Bertie, who had bought apartments in the same building, were kept away all the time—not
just during the weekends—the feeling being that even a soupçon of attention would be too draining for Susie.
Every day Jeannie wrote Susie a card and left it downstairs for her. Like many of Susie’s loved ones, Bertie
was sad about not being able to see her sister-in-law. She had always looked up to Susie for her wisdom about
people, and now, in the wake of her husband’s recent death, she felt that she had gained a similar wisdom
herself. “Hilt was a psychologist,” she says, “and even without trying, he could see what people’s meta
message was. When Hilt died, what he willed to me was that I can see things about people that I never saw
before. All of a sudden my eyes opened about things I had never understood.” Bertie felt that now her
relationship with Susie would be different, more equal, so that she would no longer have to lean on Susie. She
also felt she was starting to understand Susie for the first time.
As her brother traveled back and forth to San Francisco every week, he, too, was learning about things he
had never known before—medication, radiation, and the ins and outs of dealing with doctors and nurses and
hospital equipment. And he was also exploring a new emotional territory—facing Susie’s fears as well as his
own. When talking about this new world he had just entered, he measured out his words, keeping his feelings
private, adjusting how much he shared according to how well he knew his audience. Sometimes he used as a
distraction a favorite prop, Arnold Schwarzenegger, a fellow elephant friend whom he had recently endorsed
as the Republican candidate in a recall election to unseat Gray Davis, the governor of California. “My wife
had an operation in San Francisco about six weeks ago, and I’ll be out there a couple of days every week.
(Pause) Well, you know, Arnold, sometimes people can’t tell which one is which, when we’re next to each
other. When we’re stripped down, nobody has a chance.”
When someone he knew better called, he struggled to talk about a subject that formerly he would have
avoided at all costs.
“Oh, hi, Chuck. Yeah. Well, she’s doing better in every respect than people have told us would be the case
going in. She doesn’t have any energy and it’s—it’s been an experience like she hasn’t had before. But in
terms of her mouth healing, in terms of swallowing—everything, it’s all going fine. And the people are
terrific. Not a lot of pain right now. I think it’s psychological more than—I mean, she’s not finding life any
fun at all at the moment but.
“The annual meeting? Well, I would say this, now with Susie’s condition the way it is, I think we’re going to
skip the music and just—there’s no way she’ll be singing in this May’s meeting, so let’s see what happens
next year.”
From time to time he still talked about Susie being able to sing again, even though that wasn’t going to
happen. And only with people with whom he was very close, such as his daughter, would he drop the
occasional hint that he needed help.
“Hello? Hi. I feel fine. I’m getting two hours of sleep every night. Oh, great. Why don’t you come down and

swap cars with me? Oh yeah, there’s a ham to pick up, incidentally too. It’s here…. We will. Maybe
tomorrow or something. Okay. Okay? Okay.”
Two hours’ sleep a night.
“If I’m thinking about something I’m not going to sleep. I slept two hours last night, actually, and I feel
fine. It doesn’t kill me not to sleep. Susie’s going through this thing again about whether she wants the
radiation.
“We’ll get over it. Her inclination over this was going in a worse direction when I left San Francisco but
it’s still better than it was when I got there. So.
“The only good thing about Susie having the operation is that this is the first year, in thirty-odd years, that
I won’t go to Emerald Bay for Christmas. I’m not even sure my house is there anymore.”

59
Winter
Omaha and San Francisco • December 2003–January 2004

Susie was still resisting the idea of radiation, so anxious about it that she was taking a lot of Ativan. And
“Dr. Isley started giving me little Ativan speeches,” said Susie Jr., “about how I needed to stop asking for so
much Ativan for her. But she was very agitated about the radiation.”
Warren’s view was that it was a form of handicapping: If radiation improved your odds, why not do it? The
surgery, he told her, was the hard part. The radiation wouldn’t be nearly as hard. But the radiation oncologist
had told Susie, if anyone tells you about their radiation and says it’s not that bad, don’t believe them.
Radiation in your mouth is not like any other radiation. Everything will taste like metal. Your whole mouth
will be burned. Your salivary glands will be damaged or destroyed. You may lose all your taste buds. There
will be a lot of pain. Susie had already had a lot of pain. She felt she had the right to refuse more pain.
“She’s seen a lot of people die, seen people go through more than they needed to go through. We both want
control over the end of life. She has no fear of death, but somehow she got the idea that by having
radiation, she would lose control and that radiation would increase the chances of a terrible end. We went
on for hours and hours, around and around. It’s up to her to decide what to do. But on the other hand,
nothing makes sense right now. She keeps saying, ‘I know my brain isn’t working right.’ And she’s had these
two doctors prepare her for sort of a worst-case scenario, in the nicest way, but just because they’d rather
do it that way.”
To calm her anxiety, every night she went through a bedtime ritual centered around a song by the singer
Bono, who had befriended Susie Jr. after meeting Warren at a NetJets event. Now Susie put on U2’s Rattle
and Hum DVD when she was going to bed and fell asleep to “All I Want Is You.”
“All the promises we break
From the cradle to the grave
When all I want is you…”
At the NetJets event, Bono had initiated his connection to the Buffetts when he told Warren that he just
wanted fifteen minutes of his time.

“I knew nothing of Bono to speak of. So he asked me a few questions, and for some reason we hit it off.
When I gave him an idea and he liked it, he’d say, ‘That’s a melody!’ And at the end he said, ‘I can’t believe
it. Four melodies in fifteen minutes.’…I love music. But actually U2’s music doesn’t blow me away. What
interests me is that Bono splits the revenue of U2 among four people absolutely equally.”
Buffett could at times be brutally rational about the way vast sums of money made a person more attractive,
funny, and intelligent. Still, his wonderment had never quite ceased that celebrities of any rank sought him
out. No matter how cool he tried to play it, he was flattered that no less a personage than Bono had deemed
him smart. When Bono came out to Omaha during his Heartland of America tour, he contacted Buffett and
through him met Susie Jr. Still a rock-and-roll girl at heart, Susie Jr. in turn was flattered and captivated by
the singer’s interest in her. The soulful leader of what some considered the biggest rock band on earth, he had
a romantic hipster nobility that appealed to both her and her mother. U2’s music spoke of a spiritual longing
for love and peace. Their message—“the more you take, the less you feel, you gotta give it away”—was
exactly the kind of thing both Susies would respond to. He invited Susie Jr. to join the board of his charitable
operation DATA (Debt, AIDS, Trade, Africa). And he had made a huge impression on Susie’s children too.
“He was just terrific with my grandkids—Susie’s kids, Emily and Michael. He talked to Emily and had an
enormous effect on her.”
Bono had invited Emily to work as an intern at DATA the following summer. Big Susie, however, had never
met her granddaughter’s rock-star boss. She seemed to feel that she had finished her own personal mission on
earth. “Why can’t I just lie in bed the rest of my life,” she said, “and the grandchildren can come out, and it
will be fine.” Is she kidding? thought Susie Jr. This is not going to happen. “You have to get up!” she told her
mother. “You can’t just lie in bed the rest of your life! You’ll do the radiation and you’ll get better, and
you’ll be able to travel again.” Big Susie looked surprised. “Do you really think so?” she asked.1
Finally Susie was persuaded to go through with the radiation. She went in to be measured for the mask that
the radiologist had to construct to cover her face so that the radiation could be safely applied. Buffett was
now involving himself more and more in the details of his wife’s treatment.
“I’m just nuts about her radiologist, who designs the mask and the angle of attack. She shows me on her
computer exactly what gets hit from every angle, where the tongue and the vocal cords are.”
Some of Susie’s friends questioned whether she was once again doing something to please everybody else
instead of making her own choices. Nevertheless, she had agreed to thirty-three treatments, five treatments a
week, with weekends off, beginning in mid-December. Since the doctors had stressed the importance of
continuous radiation, the rational Buffett ruminated over the fact that the off days happened to coincide with
weekends. He thought it awfully convenient for the doctors, and wondered whether his wife’s health was
being compromised.
A week after the first treatments began, he flew to Buffalo to announce a new $40 million GEICO service
center the company was going to open near Buffalo to manage its rapid expansion, holding a news
conference with New York Governor George Pataki. The new center would bring two thousand or more jobs
to the state, replacing some of the 17,700 jobs the Buffalo–Niagara region had lost in the past three years.2
Buffett Carnegized Buffalo, a city chosen for its “smart, friendly people.”
From there, he headed out to San Francisco for Christmas, which occurred during the first two weeks of
Susie’s radiation. For the first time since the 1970s, she was not going to be with her children and
grandchildren over the holidays. But she wanted everyone else to be together for Christmas, so the rest of the
family gathered at Susie Jr.’s in Omaha while Warren and Susie spent the time together in San Francisco.
For Christmas, Warren and Susie gave each of the kids another six hundred shares of Berkshire stock for
their foundations—a complete surprise, which thrilled all of them.3 Howie had donated most of his money so
far to wildlife and environmental causes, Susie Jr. to education and local causes in Omaha, and Peter to
environmental, Native American, and local causes in Wisconsin.4 With an eye to the future, knowing that

