
Appendix

375

eventually and lowered interest rates, but they failed to seize the
initiative. This has made it harder to build up confidence and it will
make it much harder to reassert control over wages when the economy does pick up.
One would have thought the French would learn from the British
experience. But they are proving even more inflexible. One could
sympathize with their efforts to defend the franc fort policy because
they fought so long and so hard to establish it, and they were on the
verge of reaping the benefits in the form of improved competitiveness vis-a-vis Germany when the reward was snatched from their
hands by recurrent attacks on the franc. But, once the franc fort policy proved untenable, they ought Po have adjusted their approach to
the new situation. Instead, they are sticking voluntarily with a
regime which proved so disastrous when it was imposed on them
by the ERM. I think I understand their motivation: they are concerned with rebuilding their reserves and repaying the debt that
the Banque de France incurred with the Bundesbank in defending
the parity. But they got their priorities wrong. France is in a serious
recession and it needs to lower interest rates. That is what brought
on the August crisis. To try and keep the French franc close to the
Deutschmark by keeping interest rates high is self-defeating. The
only way to have a strong franc is to have a strong economy.
The Bundesbank itself has been remarkably consistent in the
pursuit of its objectives, especially if we include institutional selfpreservation among those objectives, and amazing% successful. It
found itself in an impossible situation after the reunification of
Germany: a sudden increase in the stock of money, an enormous
budget deficit, and a threat to its institutional survival. Yet it came
out victorious. Whether it was worth the cost-a Europe-wide recession and the breakdown of the ERM-is another question.
A few months ago I was convinced that the Bundesbank was following the wrong monetary policy, even for domestic purposes, because Germany was in a recession and monetary policy ought to be
counter-cyclical. The Bundesbank stuck to its medium-term monetary targets, but I thought that M3-which had worked well as a
target in near-equilibrium conditions-had been rendered irrelevant in today's far-from-equilibrium conditions; and I thought that
the Bundesbank had overstayed its course in following a tight monetary policy.
But that was before the widening of the bands in the ERM. Since
then, the Deutschmark has rallied, the German long bonds have

376
I

t

Appendix

strengthened and, on top of it all, the German economy is showing
some signs of strength. I must now admit that I may have been
wrong and the Bundesbank may have been successful in its pursuit
of its domestic policy goals. But, if anything, that strengthens my
argument that there is a conflict of interest between the domestic
responsibilities of the Bundesbank and its role as the anchor of the
EMS. The events of the last two months have clearly demonstrated
that the needs of Germany and the rest of Europe are very different. Germany needs low interest rates on long bonds because it borrows at the long end, whereas the rest of Europe needs lower
interest rates at the short end because the liquidity of the banking
system needs to be rebuilt and hwer short-term rates zre needed to
stimulate economic activity. Germany got what it needs, but the
rest of Europe did not.
The fact that I may have been wrong on the Deutschmark brings
me to the fourth factor. It is not only the authorities who make mistakes, but also market participants. Markets are often wrong.
Specifically, they were wrong when 'they assumed that the path to a
common currency would follow a straight line. International investors, particularly managers of international bond funds, went for
the highest yields, ignoring exchange rate risks. Helmut Schlesinger
was right in warning that the ECU does not consist of a fixed basket
of currencies. There had been large capital movements into weakcurrency countries like Italy, Spain and Portugal. The movement
was initially self-reinforcing but eventually self-defeating. It created excessive rigidity in exchange rates in the first place, and excessive instability in the second. The errors of the market compounded
the errors of the authorities in creating dynamic disequilibrium.
Finally, there is a fifth factor that reinforces the trend toward
disintegration. It may be called the emotional amplifier. When
things are going wrong, especially when mistakes are being made,
there is an impulse to blame someone else. Who would have
thought that respected officials like Jacques Delors and the Finance
Minister of Belgium and the newly appointed head of the Banque
de France really believed in an Anglo-Saxon conspiracy/ to destroy
the Franco-German alliance? These attitudes then color subsequent
discussions as in the case of the GATT negotiations.
There is also a sixth element which needs to be considered;
namely, the instability of Eastern Europe and particularly of the
former Yugoslavia. I believe that this factor is working in the opposite direction. The threat of instability and the influx of refugees

Appendix

377

are good reasons to band together and build a "Fortress Europe."
At the same time, tkie lack of unity in the European Community
has the effect of reinforcing the political instability and economic
decline in Eastern Europe. The outcome is going to be a European
Community which is a far cry from the open society to which the
people whom I suppdrt in Eastern Europe aspire.
All this is truly disturbing and depressing. I realize that I sound
more like a prophet of gloom and doom than a guru. But let me remind you that there is nothing determinate about the boom/bust
sequence; that the direction of the process can be reversed practically at any time. Indeed, a reversal of direction is an essential part
of a boom/bust sequence. What I am trying to say is that exrents are
now going in the wrong direction and they will continue to go in
that direction until we recognize that there is something fundamentally wrong and we take resolute action to correct it.
There can be no doubt that there is something fundamentally
wrong with the European Monetary System as it is currently constituted. First, the domestic obligations of the Bundesbank have
proven to be irreconci'lable with its role as the anchor currency; indeed, one could argue that the Bundesbank has exploited its role as
the anchor currency in order to solve its domestic problems. Second, there is an asymmetry between the obligations of the strong
and the weak currencies. And most importantly, there is asymmetry between the risks and rewards of international investors, that is
to say, speculators. These structural faults were these from the beginning, but they only became apparent in the course of the last
year. Once they became known, it is impossible to return to the
conditions which prevailed previously. The best way to eliminate
the faults of the ERM Is to have no exchange rate mechanism at
all. But freely floating exchange rates would destroy the Common
Market. Hence the necessity for a common currency. That means
implementing the Maastricht Treaty. At the time the treaty was negotiated, the path leading to the common currency was envisaged
as a gradual, near-equilibrium path. But the gradual path has run
into unexpected obstacles. To continue on a gradual path will now
lead in the opposite direction because there has been a trend reversal and we are now in a process of disintegration. Therefore we
must find a different path. If we can't get there gradually, it is better to get there all at once than not to get there at all.
At the emergency meeting on August lst, an official from
Portugal reportedly proposed that the introduction of a common

378
1

I

Appendix

currency should be speeded up. A German participant reportedly
reacted by saying, "Surely, you must be joking!" If my line of argument is correct, it is time to take the suggestion seriously. This
may sound a little too facile, and it is. My argument will be taken
seriously only if I can show a path that would lead to a common
currency. Since we are in dynamic disequilibrium, the path has to
be a disequilibrium one. At present, the first priority of the
Fre2ch monetary authorities is to rebuild their reserves. In order
to do so, they are trying to keep the French franc strong. That is
wrong. The first priority ought to be to stimulate the French economy, and the maturity of the French debt to the Bundesbank
ought to be extended for, say, two years so that France could l o w ~ r
interest rates now. When I say lower interest rates, I mean three
percent. The rate reduction ought to be coordinated with the
other members of the EMS, excluding Germany and Holland. The
Deutschmark would undoubtedly appreciate. The overvaluation
of the Deutschmark would have a negative effect on the German
economy, hastening the decline in German interest rates. As the
German economy weakened and the rest of Europe picked up, the
trend in exchange rates would be reversed and they may eventually settle down not very far from where they were before the
bands were widened. The main difference would be in economic
activity. The rest of Europe would recover, first at the expense of
Germany; but eventually Germany would also join the recovery.
When that happened, the dynamic disequilibrium would have
been corrected, and the march towards a common currency could
be resumed in near-equilibrium conditions. The whole process
would not take more than two years. After that, you could move
to a common currency directly, without reinstituting the narrow
bands. But you cannot get there in a straight line. Right now, you
are caught in a vicious circle; you need to turn it around and
make it a virtuous circle. This has already happened, up to a
point, in Italy. It could be done in the rest of Europe.
I have not dealt with issues of foreign policy, the future of NATO
and the fate of Eastern Europe, but I have covered too much ground
already. In any case, those issues are intricately interlinked with
monetary policy. European monetary policy is wrong and it can be
corrected.

