
320

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.1 This is a near-perfect Head and Shoulders pattern: well-deﬁned left
shoulder, head, and right shoulder, followed by a break beneath the neckline, which
is indicated here by a circle.

Think once more about the psychology behind the pattern. We return
to the basic notion that bulls want to see a steady progression of higher
highs and higher lows. During the formation of the left shoulder, assuming
the stock has been enjoying a consistent run-up in price, the bulls are still
satisfied that all is well. The peak of the left shoulder marks yet another
high price in the stock.
As the head begins to form, the bulls remain satisfied, because once
again they are seeing a higher high in the stock. But something is going
wrong, because as the price eases back again, it returns to the same level
that the left shoulder was at before (in other words, the neckline). So we no
longer have a series of higher highs and higher lows. The lows are matching
one another. But at least, from the bullish point of view, there is still strong
support at a given price level (again, the neckline).
When the right shoulder begins to form, the bulls want to see a new
high made, exceeding the price just made by the head price. (Keep in mind
the vast majority of individuals watching the stock aren’t even looking at
a chart, let alone thinking in terms of heads and shoulders.) But not only
does the price not exceed that of the head, it doesn’t even match the price

Head and Shoulders

321

FIGURE 13.2 The Head and Shoulders pattern typically precedes a major decline
in price.

made by the left shoulder. So the stock is actually seen as weakening now,
and the buying volume dries up as the price comes to rest, once again, at
the neckline.
At this point, the market has a decision to make. It can continue to
support the price at the equilibrium level it has found. Or the sellers can
overcome the buyers, and the neckline will be broken. In the latter case,
the H&S pattern is complete, and the stock price is probably in trouble (for
the bulls, at least).
There is one more element to this story, however, and that is the retracement. Just as you saw retracements with saucer-like patterns, the H&S
pattern sometimes sports a retracement as well. In this case, after a brief,
quick drop in price, bargain hunters came out and temporarily provided
support for the stock. If the H&S pattern holds, the price will make its
way back up to the equilibrium point (the neckline), but no further. This
provides a golden opportunity in the form of a second chance for those
wanting to sell the stock short—because it is entirely likely once the retracement is complete, the price will begin falling again, and it will fall far
past the point where it originally paused.

322

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

A CLOSE-UP VIEW OF BRCM’s H&S
PATTERN
One of the most remarkable examples of the H&S pattern in action in
the U.S. stock market in recent years was Broadcom (BRCM) from 1998
through 2002. Looking at how this stock formed and broke down with the
H&S as its reversal formation will yield insight in how to profit from this
pattern.
Beginning with Figure 13.3, we can see how Broadcom, over a period of
several years, had a remarkable run-up in price, moving from a single-digit
stock to one priced over $180. This was during the Internet boom of the late
1990s, and Broadcom, as a major force in network-related semiconductors,
was one of the hottest stocks in the United States. When the NASDAQ stock
market began breaking down after March 2000, Broadcom suffered badly,
falling from about $160 to about $80, a loss of 50 percent. But stocks related to networking regained their composure, and by the summer of 2000
Broadcom was reaching new lifetime highs.

FIGURE 13.3 The most lucrative H&S pattern is preceded by a long run-up in
price. This chart shows BRCM starting to break after it has moved up hundreds of
percent already.

Head and Shoulders

323

FIGURE 13.4 The neckline is the key to the H&S, but there are occasions when
fakeouts can occur. Here BRCM appears to break down, only to move back above its
neckline. A little more than a week later, the true breakdown begins.

In retrospect, we can see something fascinating happening between
July and October of 2000—the formation of a rather well-defined H&S pattern. This one is a bit unusual in the fact that it has two right shoulders.
This is not unheard of, but it suggests a hesitation on the part of the market
to push the stock beneath its neckline.
Looking closer at this period where the H&S formed, you can see a
clear neckline at about $130. Something rather extraordinary happened on
October 26, 2000: The stock pushed below the neckline on strong volume,
and then returned above the neckline again! You can imagine how frustrating this was to the bears on this stock, since the widely anticipated
breakdown of BRCM had finally started taking place, only to be cancelled
out the very same day.
Eight sessions later, the stock gapped down beneath the neckline, but
this time there was no turning back (Figure 13.4). Even more important, the
breakdown in the stock was accompanied by a gigantic rise in the volume
as owners of the stock rushed for the exit doors. Even though there had
been a false breakdown that had faked out many investors, it seemed this
second breakdown was authentic.

324

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.5 After BRCM snapped its neckline, the volume surged dramatically
for many months afterward.

What happened following this breakdown was extraordinary. From
November 7, 2000, through April 4, 2001, Broadcom lost about 90 percent of
its value, all in a span of about five months. And it did so on extremely high
volume (Figure 13.5). The H&S pattern, in spite of its false start, provided
an astonishingly prescient prediction of this stock’s direction.
After the stock reached its bottom on April 4, 2001, it spent about the
next 14 months bouncing in a huge trading range between $12 and $36
(Figure 13.6). Clearly the investing public had been caught in a horrible
tailspin and was trying to establish an appropriate value for the stock. After all this churning, the stock starting losing support again, and it ultimately bottomed at a little over $6 (just over 3 percent of its peak price) in
October 2002.

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE NECKLINE
There is no more important feature to the H&S pattern than the neckline, because the neckline defines whether the pattern is complete and,

Head and Shoulders

325

FIGURE 13.6 Over 96 percent of BRCM’s peak value was lost during its fall, and
this fall came in three large phases: the initial descent, a plateau period, and then a
ﬁnal collapse.

therefore, has any meaning. As with other lines in technical analysis, the
neckline represents a line in the sand dividing bulls and bears. Along the
line itself is a sort of equilibrium between buyers and sellers. Trading above
the line represents strength and hope. Trading beneath the line represents
weakness and fear.
With an ideal H&S pattern, the neckline has five unique touch points.
The first is on the left side of the left shoulder; the second is at the right
side of the left shoulder (which is also the left side of the head); the third
is at the right side of the head; the fourth is at the right side of the right
shoulder, at which point the price breaks beneath the neckline; and the
fifth point (which is optional, in a sense) is when the price retraces back
up to the neckline before falling hard once again.
Once the price has broken beneath the neckline, the H&S pattern has
validity only if the price remains below the neckline. (When the price retraces, you may want to allow for a few pennies of “violation” before dismissing the pattern altogether.) Just because the price goes above the
neckline doesn’t absolutely mean the stock will not fall, but it does indicate strength that is normally not part of a good, strong H&S breakdown.

326

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.7 Sometimes the neckline is violated to the upside after it has been
broken. In these instances, the pattern should be viewed with more skepticism.

Figure 13.7 shows an instance where the price broke below the neckline,
went well above it again, then once more fell beneath it. A pattern with
noise such as this should be viewed with more skepticism than a pattern
absent such noise.
What you instead want to see is more along the lines of the chart shown
in Figure 13.8, which is actually the same stock as the one in Figure 13.7 but
at a different point in time. The neckline drawn on this chart clearly shows
a left shoulder, a head, a right shoulder (which has a lower high than the
left shoulder, always a good sign), and then a break below the neckline.
When the price gains strength and retraces back to the neckline, it touches
the neckline virtually to the exact penny and then swiftly falls away. This
is a superb example of the H&S pattern at its best.
The aftermath of the H&S that was shown in Figure 13.7 is actually
pretty impressive, in spite of the neckline violation that took place. As Figure 13.9 illustrates, the descent in price was quite rapid and relatively uninterrupted. A very clear series of lower lows and lower highs was laid out
after the H&S was complete.
An even more extreme example of the H&S’s ability to withstand neckline violations in shown with Figure 13.10. On the left side of this chart you

Head and Shoulders

327

FIGURE 13.8 Here is a diﬀerent H&S pattern on the same stock, which shows a
cleaner pattern.

FIGURE 13.9 In spite of the imperfect behavior around the neckline, the H&S
pattern performs well in this instance.

328

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.10 The price of this stock moved above the neckline but ultimately
fell far below the original price target.

can see the H&S, the initial breakdown, the retracement, and the subsequent fall in price. In itself, this would have been quite a nice trade. The
stock strengthened quite a bit over the subsequent months, and it spent a
couple of months above the neckline price (by this time, the H&S pattern
was no longer meaningful for a trade). Over the long haul, the stock fell
far more in price than it did after the initial H&S completion, showing that
the reversal in price took a while to play out and was not without its complications (namely, the price moving above the neckline for a protracted
period).
As with many technical patterns, the H&S demands a certain amount of
judgment on your part since perfect patterns are rare. They are also much
easier to detect in retrospect. Authentidate Holding Corporation, whose
stock is shown in Figure 13.11, is an outstanding example of an H&S. It
has all the required elements: a huge run-up in price from $2 to $18.75, the
formation of an H&S with a right shoulder lower than the left, a break, a
retracement, and then a final plunge all the way back down to $2.
Some followers of this pattern believe you can set a price target for
just how far the stock is going to fall. The calculation involves taking the
difference between the peak of the stock and the value of the stock at the

Head and Shoulders

329

FIGURE 13.11 This pattern shows the right shoulder much lower than the left
shoulder, which lends credence to this H&S pattern.

neckline and then subtracting that value from the value at the neckline. For
example, if a stock peaked at $40 and had a neckline at $30, the price target
would be $20 (since the difference between $40 and $30 is $10 which, when
subtracted from $30, yields the result of $20).
This calculation does not seem reliable. The chart in Figure 13.11, for
instance, would yield a nonsensical negative value. A better approach is to
judge each chart independently, looking for areas of meaningful support
where the stock price might slow its descent.

USING RETRACEMENTS
The act of retracement in the world of the Head and Shoulders pattern
sometimes seems like an act of generosity on the part of the stock market. When a price retraces back up to the neckline after breaking below it,
two benefits are provided. First, it affirms the importance and validity of
the neckline (assuming that, once the retracement is complete, the price
starts to fall again). And second, for those traders who prefer less risk, it

330

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.12 This is a perfect retracement, with the price moving back and
touching the neckline after the break.

provides a welcome second chance to get into a position with a very clear
stop price—namely, the value of the stock at the neckline.
Take AK Steel Holding, illustrated in Figure 13.12. This stock had a
neckline at $19, and it cleanly broke that neckline, falling to about $13.
For those people who had been bearish on this stock, it might seem that it
was too late, since selling a stock short at $13 with a stop price above $19
represents an outsized risk. Getting stopped out above $19 on a position
entered at $13 would represent a loss of nearly 50 percent, which most
people would find unacceptable.
However, the price strengthens and makes its way back to just pennies
beneath the $19 level. Now, instead of entering a short position at $13, a
trader could enter it at a price just underneath the neckline and set a stop
price just above the neckline. The risk in this case is pennies instead of
dollars.
Such a trade would have worked out brilliantly, as shown in Figure 13.13. Once the neckline was retraced, the price fell hard, eventually
descending to a price of about $2, a nearly 90 percent drop from the neckline price.

Head and Shoulders

331

FIGURE 13.13 Shorting this stock at the retracement point would have provided
the perfect low-risk/high-reward opportunity.

The problem, of course, is that not all retracements are this smooth. In
fact, hardly any of them are. Perhaps the retracement will push just above
the neckline for a few moments, forcing the execution of the stop-loss order. Perhaps the retracement will only be partial, not getting close to the
neckline and in doing so snatching away a second chance to enter the position as the price resumes its fall. Or maybe the retracement won’t happen
at all, meaning the only individuals profiting from the stock’s fall are those
bold enough to have entered their positions immediately upon the neckline’s break.
Figure 13.14, the chart of Advanced Micro Devices, shows how a
stock’s price can bobble around its neckline, frustrating bulls and bears simultaneously. This kind of price action indicates major uncertainty among
those taking positions in the stock as they fight for direction. The stock fell
below the neckline, went well above it, fell once more, went even higher
above it again, and then fell a third time. This kind of cycle will shake out
the weak hands trading the stock, since there is no clear direction.
Once the price fell under the neckline a third time, the bears maintained control. As the arrow in Figure 13.15 shows, the third break under
the neckline led to a significant decline in price, which was then followed

332

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.14 This break beneath the neckline is very rough, since it took three
separate attempts before a true break was in place.

FIGURE 13.15 After the third break beneath the neckline, the stock began to fall
badly.

Head and Shoulders

333

FIGURE 13.16 This retracement took many months to complete, but it provided
a second chance for those who had missed the short the ﬁrst time.

by a retracement that took many months to complete. Those following this
stock who kept the original neckline on their chart would have recognized
that, finally, a clean retracement was being offered. The AMD stock was
offering a second chance to those who wanted to take a bearish position,
and those who did profited well from it, since the stock subsequently fell
much harder.
Breaks beneath necklines can be imperfect, and retracements are all
a little different. Experience as a chartist and a trader will give you the
confidence required to make a sober judgment of the likely direction of a
stock based on its behavior toward the neckline. After all, if a price ascends
above the neckline and just keeps going higher, it should not take you long
to decide that the H&S pattern no longer has any meaning for that stock at
that time, and you should delete the neckline altogether.
Waiting for a retracement can take patience, but the reward for this
patience is a significant reduction in risk. The chart in Figure 13.16 took
many months to retrace fully to its neckline. Indeed, it could be argued on
this chart that there were two necklines in place, one of which was retraced
much earlier. The arrow on the chart indicates the peak of the retracement,
representing the lowest-risk entry point for this security.

334

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.17 The same retracement point is marked here with an arrow.

The same point in the chart is indicated by the arrow in Figure 13.17,
which shows a much longer-term perspective on this stock. The price
moved in a series of lower highs and lower lows, which is the most reliable trend you want to monitor when judging when it is time to take profits
and close the position. When the series of lower highs and lower lows is
violated, it is probably time to close the position and bank your profits.

MORE ON THE HEAD AND SHOULDERS
PATTERN
Let us reexamine the basic elements of the H&S pattern so you can
more readily recognize this pattern in your own trading. Charts may
not often present perfect manifestations of anything resembling two
shoulders and a head. But the price movement should be close enough
to warrant recognition of the pattern. Figure 13.18 shows a chart that, to
most observers, would seem to be nondescript price action. The rounded
rectangles drawn on top of the chart help call out the elements we seek—a
left shoulder, a head, and a right shoulder. The right shoulder doesn’t have

Head and Shoulders

335

FIGURE 13.18 These rounded rectangles help more plainly show where the component parts of the H&S are.

the characteristic of being lower than the left, but this is still a perfectly
reasonable H&S pattern.
Since you studied rounded tops in Chapter 10, you may wonder what
distinguishes a rounded top from an H&S. The general shape and outcome
of the two is similar—they both represent a loss of upward momentum in
a stock’s price that takes the shape of a gradual reversal. The H&S, however, does it in three stages, each of which clings to the neckline. The H&S
(Figure 13.19) could even be thought of as three rounded tops, although
much narrower in time scope.
The quality of the H&S is amplified when the right shoulder is lower
than the left (Figure 13.20). The reason for this is that it indicates the market’s ability to push the stock higher is weaker than before. It has failed
to get as high as the head’s peak, and it has even failed to get as high as
the other shoulder’s peak. Owners of the stock will begin to give up, and
if the neckline is violated to the downside, the selling will rapidly intensify
through a combination of stop orders being executed and owners voluntarily rushing for the exits.
One of the maxims of the stock market is that stocks fall faster than
they rise. Traders not blessed with a lot of patience therefore finding

336

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.19 The diﬀerence between a rounded top and an H&S is the presence
of a left and right shoulder, although the eﬀect of both patterns is similar.

FIGURE 13.20 A lower right shoulder is a good sign of basic weakness in the
stock.

Head and Shoulders

337

FIGURE 13.21 Here is an excellent example of the price retracing to its neckline.

selling stocks short more fulfilling, since descents in price often happen at
a quicker pace. Stocks usually slowly climb the fabled wall of worry, but
they can swiftly slide down the slope of hope.
Figure 13.21 provides a good example of how a person selling a stock
short would enjoy a relatively rapid profit. The neckline, at $31, is broken,
and the stock falls to about $26. The stock then takes a few weeks to execute a nearly perfect retracement to the neckline, creating a great opportunity to enter into a short position or buy puts on this security.
As illustrated in Figure 13.22, the fall in price was fast and furious. It
took this stock five years to build its equity up and only a couple of months
for all that equity—and then some—to be wiped out. Those traders short
this stock would have enjoyed a very fast profit, and those owning puts on
this security would have enjoyed gigantic gains, all based upon the good
application of an easily recognized pattern.
Holders of short positions on this stock with more patience would have
seen their profits grow even more. Even though the stock had a big plunge
over a two-month period, it was in a severe downtrend over the next few
years (Figure 13.23). As you can see, it would have been a somewhat nervewracking ride, since the stock threatened to push above its neckline again

338

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.22 It took ﬁve years for the stock to climb this high in price but only
a couple of months to destroy the same amount of equity.

FIGURE 13.23 This retracement point, marked with an arrow, was perfect for
shorting this stock.

Head and Shoulders

339

FIGURE 13.24 This H&S pattern was preceded by a more than 10-fold increase
in price.

in early 2001. But by early 2003, the stock was beneath $4, a 90 percent
decline from its peak four years earlier.
A vital prerequisite for fat profit potential with the H&S pattern is a
major increase in price preceding the pattern. If a stock’s neckline is at
$20, but for years it traded in a range between $16 and $18, there is very
little reason to sell the stock short since there is so much support beneath
the neckline. Figure 13.24, however, shows a stock with a gigantic price
increase. There is plenty of air beneath the neckline for the stock to fall.
There are certainly a couple of areas with some support along the way
down, but because the stock has soared many hundreds of percent, there
is ample opportunity for it to fall hard.
This particular stock, Doral Financial (ticker DRL) provides a good example of how H&S patterns may be rather unusual in shape. Figure 13.25
illustrates the left shoulder, a very high head, and a right shoulder. The
neckline has been drawn for the sake of clarity. In spite of the rather distorted shape of the H&S, there was no diminishment in the power of this
pattern as the stock fell from about $40 to $5.
Doral, as well as Epix Pharmaceuticals (Figure 13.26), provides proof
that a higher right shoulder doesn’t mean the H&S pattern should be
