
Durables are generally bigger-ticket purchases, such as washing machines and furniture, so
they’re also looked at as a leading indicator of overall consumer spending. If consumers are
feeling flush with cash and confidence, big-ticket spending is more common. If consumers are
uncertain, or times are tight, high-cost purchases are the first to be postponed. Also,
businesses tend to concentrate their spending in the final month of each quarter, which can
distort prior months and exaggerate the last.

Housing-market indicators
The real estate or housing market is a major factor behind consumer spending since homes
typically represent the largest asset on a household’s balance sheet. Rising home prices are seen to
support consumption through the wealth effect (the richer you feel, the more likely you are to
spend), whereas falling house prices can be a major drag on personal spending. The U.S. real
estate bubble burst in 2006–2007 and triggered the GFC and recession of 2008–2009, turning U.S.
housing data into a major drag on U.S consumption, likely for many years still to come.
There’s a raft of monthly housing market reports to monitor the sector, based on whether the homes
are new or existing.
Existing-home sales data is reported by the National Association of Realtors (NAR).

Sales of preexisting homes (condos included) account for the lion’s share of residential
real-estate activity — about 85 percent of total home sales. Existing-home sales are
reported on an annualized rate, and the market looks at the monthly change in that rate.
Median home prices and the inventory of unsold homes are important clues to how the
housing market is evolving. Existing-home sales are counted after a closing. Pending home
sales are a separate report viewed as a leading indicator of existing-home sales. Pending
home sales are counted when a contract is signed to buy an existing home.
New-home sales are just that, brand-new homes and condos built for sale, reported on an
annualized basis. New-home sales account for about 15 percent of residential home sales,
but the sector was the fastest growing during the recent real-estate boom and has since
seen activity decline steeply. New-home sales are counted when a contract is signed to
purchase the new home, which means that contract cancellations (not reported) may result
in lower actual sales than originally reported.
Housing starts measure the number of new-home construction starts that took place in
each month, reported on an annualized rate. Housing starts are considered a leading
indicator of new-home sales but more recently have been looked at as an indication of
home builder sentiment, as builders try to reduce inventories of unsold new homes.
Building permits are the starting point of the whole new-housing cycle and are reported
alongside housing starts each month. Building permits are required before construction
can begin on new homes, so they’re viewed as another leading indicator of housing starts
and new-home sales.

Business-level data reports
Getting a handle on how businesses are faring is an important clue to the strength of the economy,
which in turn drives the outlook for interest rates and the overall investment environment. The
following series of data reports offer insights into how companies are responding at the enterprise
level.

Institute for Supply Management and Purchasing Managers Index
The Institute for Supply Management (ISM) calculates several regional and national indices of
current business conditions and future outlooks based on surveys of purchasing managers. ISM
readings are based on a boom/bust scale, with 50 as the tipping point — a reading above 50
indicates expansion, whereas a reading below 50 signals contraction.
The main ISM reports to keep an eye on are
Chicago Purchasing Managers Index (PMI): The Chicago PMI remains the key regional
manufacturing activity index because the Chicago area and the Midwest region are still
significant hubs of manufacturing activity in the United States. The Chicago PMI is also

the first of the national PMIs to be reported, and the market frequently views it as a
leading indicator of the larger national ISM manufacturing report, which is typically
released a day after the Chicago PMI.
ISM manufacturing report: The ISM manufacturing report is the monthly national survey
of manufacturing activity and is one of the key indicators of the overall manufacturing
sector. The ISM manufacturing report also includes a prices-paid index, which is viewed
as an interim inflation reading, along with other key subsector measurements, like the
employment situation. The market tends to react pretty strongly to sharp changes in the
report or if the ISM is moving above or below 50, but keep in mind that the manufacturing
sector accounts for a relatively small portion of overall U.S. economic activity, so the
importance of the ISM manufacturing gauge tends to be exaggerated.
ISM nonmanufacturing report: The ISM nonmanufacturing report is the monthly
ISM report that covers the other 80 percent of the U.S. economy, namely the service
sector. The ISM manufacturing report may get more attention, but the ISM nonmanufacturing report is the one to focus on.

Regional Federal Reserve indices
A number of the Federal Reserve district banks issue monthly surveys of business sentiment in
their regions, usually concentrated on the manufacturing sector. The regional Fed indices are
looked at on their own as well as for what they suggest about subsequent national sentiment
surveys, like the ISM index. The main index reading is a subjective response on general business
conditions, with responses above zero indicating that conditions are improving and readings
below zero indicating deterioration. The main regional Fed indices to watch are
Philadelphia Fed index: Usually the first of the major Fed indices to be reported each
month, covering the manufacturing sector in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware.
The Philly Fed index includes subindices focusing on new orders, employment,
inventories and prices, among others.
New York Empire State index: Assesses New York state manufacturers’ current and
six-month outlooks.
Richmond Fed manufacturing index: A composite index based on new orders,
production, and employment, covering the Middle Atlantic states.

Industrial production and capacity utilization
Industrial production measures the amount of output generated by the nation’s factories, mines, and
utilities on a monthly basis and is viewed as an indication of changes in the broader economy. The
manufacturing sector is still viewed as a leading indicator for overall business cycles, so changes

here could signal a larger swing in the economic outlook. The capacity utilization report measures
actual output versus a theoretical maximum capacity and is looked at for what it suggests about
inflationary pressures. High levels of capacity utilization above 80 percent may indicate price
pressures are building and send a warning sign to policymakers. Lower levels of capacity
utilization may signal the absence of inflationary pressures and allow monetary policymakers to
keep interest rates lower.

The Fed’s Beige Book
The Beige Book, named for the color of its cover, is a compilation of regional economic
assessments from the Fed’s 12 district banks, issued about two weeks before every Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) policy-setting meeting. The regional Fed banks develop their
summaries based on surveys and anecdotal reporting of local business leaders and economists,
and the report is then summarized by one of the Fed district banks, all of which take turns issuing
the report. The Beige Book is designed to serve as the basis of economic discussions at the
upcoming FOMC meeting.
Markets look at the Beige Book’s main findings to get a handle on how the economy is developing
as well as what issues the FOMC might focus on. A typical Beige Book report may include
generalized observations along the following lines: Most districts reported retail sales activity
that was steady or moderately expanding; a few districts reported declines in manufacturing
activity; some districts noted increased labor-market tightness and rising wage demands; all
districts noted a sharp slowing in real-estate activity.

The key for the market is to assess the main themes of the report, such as:
Is the economy expanding or contracting? How fast, and how widespread?
Which sectors are strongest, and which sectors are weakest?
Are there any signs of inflation?
How does the labor market look?
The Beige Book is released in the afternoon (New York time), when liquidity is thinner, so it can
generate a larger-than-normal response if its tone or conclusions are significantly different from
what markets had been expecting.

Structural data reports
Structural data reports are the big picture, macroeconomic data that depict the longer-term
economic outlook. What is the structure of the economy? Is it growing or contracting? If so, how
fast? Is inflation under control or are prices rising too fast? Is the economy gaining or losing from

trade? These reports can be some of the most significant drivers of central bank monetary policy.

Inflation gauges
Inflation reports are used to monitor overall changes in price levels of goods and services and as
key inputs into setting interest rate expectations. Increases in inflation are likely to be met with
higher interest rates by central-bank policy makers seeking to stamp out inflation, while
moderating or declining inflation readings suggest generally lower interest-rate expectations.
There are a number of different inflation reports, with each focused on a different source of
inflation or stage of the economy where the price changes are appearing. In the United States and
other countries, inflation reports come out on a headline (total) basis and a core basis (which
excludes food and energy to minimize distortions from these volatile inputs). Inflation indexes
report changes on a month-to-month basis (abbreviated MoM, for month-over-month) to monitor
short-term changes, as well as changes over the prior year’s levels (YoY, for year-over-year) to
gauge the longer-term rate of inflation. The main inflation reports to keep an eye on are
Consumer price index (CPI): The CPI is what most people are familiar with when they
think of inflation. The CPI measures the cost of a basket of goods and services at the
consumer or retail level — the prices that we’re paying. The CPI is looked at as the final
stage of inflation.
Producer price index (PPI): The PPI measures the change in prices at the producer or
wholesale level, or what firms are charging one another for goods and services. The PPI
looks at upstream inflation by stage of processing and may serve as a leading indicator of
overall inflation.
Personal consumption expenditure (PCE): The PCE is roughly equivalent to the
CPI in that it measures the changes in price of a basket of goods and services at the
consumer level. But the PCE has the distinction of being preferred by the Federal Reserve
as its main inflation gauge because the composition of items in the PCE basket changes
more frequently than in CPI, reflecting evolving consumer tastes and behavior. If the Fed
thinks the more-dynamic basket is the one to watch, who am I to disagree? When the Fed
refers to an inflation target or tolerable level of inflation, it’s typically referring to core
PCE readings.
Institute for Supply Management (ISM) prices paid index: The national and regional
purchasing managers indices have subcategories reporting on the level of prices paid and
the level of prices received by firms. The prices-paid component usually gets the most
attention as another producer-level indication of price pressures, likely to be mirrored by
the PPI.

Gross domestic product

Gross domestic product (GDP) measures the total amount of economic activity in an economy over
a specified period, usually quarterly and adjusted for inflation. The percentage change in GDP
from one period to the next is looked at as the primary growth rate of an economy. If GDP in the
first quarter of a year is reported as +0.5 percent, it means the economy expanded by 0.5 percent
in the first quarter relative to the prior fourth quarter’s output. GDP is frequently calculated on a
quarterly basis but reported in annualized terms. That means a 0.5 percent quarterly GDP increase
would be reported as a 2 percent annualized rate of growth for the quarter (0.5 percent × 4
quarters = 2 percent). The use of annualized rates is helpful for comparing relative growth among
economies.

In most countries, GDP is reported on a quarterly basis, so it’s taken as a big-picture reality
check on overall economic growth. The market’s economic outlook will be heavily
influenced by what the GDP reports indicate. Better-than-expected growth may spur talk of
the need for higher interest rates, while steady or slower GDP growth may suggest easier
monetary policy ahead. At the same time, though, GDP reports cover a relatively distant
economic past — a quarter’s GDP report typically comes out almost midway through the next
quarter and is looking back at economic activity three to four months ago. As a result, market
expectations continue to evolve based on incoming data reports, so don’t get too caught up in
GDP for too long after its initial release.

Trade and current account balances
Two of the most important reports for the forex markets, because there are direct and potentially
long-term currency implications, are trade and current account balances:
Trade balance measures the difference between a nation’s exports and its imports. If a
nation imports more than it exports, it’s said to have a trade deficit; if a nation exports
more than it imports, it’s said to have a trade surplus. Trade balances are reported on a
monthly basis; prior periods are subject to revision.
Current account balance is a broader measure of international trade, and includes
financial transfers as well as trade in goods and services. Current accounts are also either
in deficit or surplus, reflecting whether a country is a net borrower or lender to the rest of
the world. Nations with current account deficits are net borrowers from the rest of the
world, and those with current account surpluses are net lenders to the world. Current
account reports are issued quarterly, and because the monthly trade balance comprises the
bulk of the current account balance, markets tend to have a good handle on what to expect
in current account data.

Countries with persistently large trade or current account deficits tend to see their
currencies weaken relative to other currencies, whereas currencies of countries running trade

surpluses tend to appreciate. The basic idea is that the currency of a deficit nation is in less
demand (it’s being sold to buy more foreign goods) than the currency of a surplus nation (it’s
being bought to pay for domestically produced goods).
For example, the U.S. dollar was under pressure for several years before the GFC, owing to its
widening (increasing) trade and current account deficits. In late 2006, however, the size of the
deficit stopped increasing, which removed some of the pressure on the dollar. But because the
deficit remains high in absolute and historical terms, the U.S. trade deficit is still a major U.S.
dollar negative.

Government debt and budget deficits
The aftermath of the GFC has exposed high debt and deficit levels in many major economies,
especially in the United States, Europe, the UK, and Japan. Fears of a debt restructuring (where
terms of a bond are altered) or default can seriously undermine confidence in a national currency,
leading to an extended bout of weakness, as was seen with the euro in the 2010 European debt
crisis.

There’s no single data release that adequately covers the debt situations in major
economies, though most national governments typically release a monthly budget statement.
Instead, monitoring the debt/deficit picture of key countries depends on a series of news and
data flows:
Budget and deficit forecasts: Issued by individual governments and the IMF, these are
the best way to stay on top of evolving fiscal changes.
Government bond yields, spreads, and CDS (credit default swaps): As investors’ fears
increase over the creditworthiness of governments, they sell those countries’ bonds,
driving yields higher. Yield spreads are another measure of risk, noting the difference
between the yields of an embattled nation and a safer alternative. Credit default swaps are
a form of insurance that pays investors in the event of a default — the higher they are, the
greater the perceived risk.
Government debt auctions: When governments seek to borrow in capital markets, lack
of demand or too high a price can shut them out and possibly trigger a default. Watch for
indicators of demand, like the bid/cover ratio, which measures the amount of bids
submitted relative to the issuance amount (the higher the better) and pricing (the higher the
yield demanded, the greater the risk).
Sovereign credit ratings: Major credit rating agencies, like Moody’s S&P and Fitch,
may announce periodic credit reviews of sovereign debt, possibly suggesting a
downgrade. Actual credit rating downgrades can send investors fleeing, driving up a
country’s borrowing costs and increasing the risks of default.

Major International Data Reports
In the preceding sections, I cover the main economic reports using U.S. data as the basis for
explaining what each report measures and how the market views them. The main data reports of
other major national economies essentially mirror the U.S. data reports, but with some minor
differences in calculation methods or reporting. In other words, the CPI report out of the United
Kingdom is looked at the same way as the CPI report is viewed in the United States — as a
measure of consumer-level inflation.
But plenty of national data reports don’t have an equivalent in the United States, and others are
followed more closely in local markets and require extra attention. In the next few sections, I
highlight the main data reports of other national economies beyond what I cover earlier.

Eurozone
The main data reports out of the Eurozone are remarkably similar to those of the United States. The
key difference is that individual European countries report national economic data, which comes
out alongside Eurozone-wide reports from Eurostat or the European Central Bank (ECB).

Because the Eurozone has a common currency and central bank, the forex market focuses
primarily on indicators that cover the entire region, such as Eurozone industrial production
and CPI, for example. Among individual national reports, the market concentrates on data
from the largest Eurozone economies, mainly Germany and France. Keep an eye on all the
major reports coming out of those countries. They can generate sizeable reactions based on
the idea that they’re leading indicators of Eurozone-wide data. If German industrial
production slumps, for instance, it may suggest that overall Eurozone industrial production is
set to decline, too.
The only European reports that may escape your attention due to unusual names are the principal
European confidence indicators. These reports can generate sizeable reactions depending how
they compare to forecasts:
ZEW survey: This survey measures growth expectations over the next six months by
institutional investors and analysts. The survey is done for Germany and the whole
Eurozone.
IFO and GfK surveys: IFO is a corporate sentiment survey that queries businesses
across Germany on current sentiment and how business is expected to develop over the
next six months. The GfK survey is a monthly measure of consumer confidence
Purchasing Manager Indexes (PMIs): A data firm called Markit produces monthly PMIs
for the manufacturing and service sectors for Germany, France, and the whole Eurozone,

similar to the Chicago PMI in the United States. The reports come out on a preliminary
and final basis.
Eurozone Confidence: The European Commission (EC) produces monthly confidence
surveys for a variety of sectors: consumer, services, industrial, and overall economic
sentiment.

