
136/396

blowing, as basically everyone was in on the
racket.
That changed on October 4, 2009, when
the Greek government turned over. A scandal felled the government of Prime Minister
Kostas Karamanlis and sent him packing,
which perhaps is not surprising. What’s surprising was the nature of the scandal. In late
2008, news broke that Vatopaidi had somehow acquired a fairly worthless lake and
swapped it for far more valuable
government-owned land. How the monks
did this was unclear—paid some enormous
bribe to some government official, it was assumed. No bribe could be found, however. It
didn’t matter: the furor that followed drove
Greek politics for the next year. The Vatopaidi scandal registered in Greek public
opinion like nothing in memory. “We’ve never seen a movement in the polls like we saw
after the scandal broke,” the editor of one of
Greece’s leading newspapers told me.

137/396

“Without Vatopaidi, Karamanlis is still the
prime minister, and everything is still going
on as it was before.” Dimitri Contominas, the
billionaire creator of a Greek life-insurance
company and, as it happens, owner of the TV
station that broke the Vatopaidi scandal, put
it to me more bluntly: “The Vatopaidi monks
brought George Papandreou to power.”
After the new party (the supposedly socialist Pasok) replaced the old party (the supposedly conservative New Democracy), it
found so much less money in the government’s coffers than it had expected that it decided there was no choice but to come clean.
The prime minister announced that Greece’s
budget deficits had been badly understated—and that it was going to take some
time to nail down the numbers. Pension
funds and global bond funds and other sorts
who buy Greek bonds, having seen several
big American and British banks go belly-up,
and knowing the fragile state of a lot of

138/396

European banks, panicked. The new, higher
interest rates Greece was forced to pay left
the country—which needed to borrow vast
sums to fund its operations—more or less
bankrupt. In came the IMF to examine the
Greek books more closely; out went whatever
tiny shred of credibility the Greeks had left.
“How in the hell is it possible for a member
of the euro area to say the deficit was 3 percent of GDP when it was really 15 percent?” a
senior IMF official asks. “How could you
possibly do something like that?”
Just now the global financial system is consumed with the question of whether the
Greeks will default on their debts. At times it
seems as if it is the only question that matters, for if Greece walks away from $400 billion in debt, then the European banks that
lent the money will go down, and other
countries now flirting with bankruptcy
(Spain, Portugal) might easily follow. But
this question of whether Greece will repay its

139/396

debts is really a question of whether Greece
will change its culture, and that will happen
only if Greeks want to change. I am told fifty
times if I am told once that what Greeks care
about is “justice,” and what really boils the
Greek blood is the feeling of unfairness. Obviously this distinguishes them from no human being on the planet, and ignores what’s
interesting: exactly what a Greek finds unfair. It’s clearly not the corruption of their
political system. It’s not cheating on their
taxes, or taking small bribes in their service
to the state. No: what bothers them is when
some outside party—someone clearly different from themselves, with motives apart
from narrow and easily understood self-interest—comes in and exploits the corruption
of their system. Enter the monks.
Among the first moves made by the new
minister of finance was to file a lawsuit
against the Vatopaidi monastery, demanding
the return of government property and

140/396

damages. Among the first acts of the new
parliament was to open a second investigation of the Vatopaidi affair, to finally nail
down exactly how the monks got their sweet
deal. The one public official who has been
strung up—he’s had his passport taken away
and remains free only because he posted a
bail of 400,000 euros—is an assistant to the
former prime minister, Giannis Angelou,
who stands accused of helping these monks.
In a society that has endured something
like total moral collapse, its monks had
somehow become the single universally acceptable target of moral outrage. Every rightthinking Greek citizen is still furious with
them and those who helped them, and yet no
one knows exactly what they did, or why.
to be in his late
fifties—though who knows, as their beards
cause them all to look twenty years older.
He’s about as famous as you can get, for a
monk: everyone in Athens knows who he is.
FATHER ARSENIOS LOOKS

141/396

Mr. Inside, the consummate number two,
the CFO, the real brains of the operation. “If
they put Arsenios in charge of the
government real-estate portfolio,” a prominent Greek real estate agent said to me, “this
country would be Dubai. Before the crisis.” If
you are kindly disposed to these monks,
Father Arsenios is the trusted assistant who
makes possible the miraculous abbacy of
Father Ephraim. If you are not, he’s Jeff
Skilling to Ephraim’s Kenneth Lay.
I tell him who I am and what I do—and
also that I have spent the past few days interviewing political types in Athens. He smiles,
genuinely: he’s pleased I’ve come! “The
politicians all used to come here,” he says,
“but because of our scandal they don’t now.
They are afraid of being seen with us!”
He escorts me into the dining hall and
plants me at what appears to be the pilgrim’s
table of honor, right next to the table filled
with the top monks. Father Ephraim heads

142/396

that table, with Arsenios in shouting
distance.
Most of what the monks eat they grow
themselves within a short walk of the dining
hall. Crude silver bowls contain raw, uncut
onions, green beans, cucumbers, tomatoes,
and beets. Another bowl holds bread baked
by the monks, from their own wheat. There’s
a pitcher of water and, for dessert, a soupy
orange sherbet-like substance and dark honeycomb recently plundered from some beehive. And that’s pretty much it. If it were a
restaurant in Berkeley, people would revel in
the glorious self-righteousness of eating the
locally grown; here the food just seems plain.
The monks eat like fashion models before a
shoot. Twice a day four days a week, and
once a day for three: eleven meals, all of
them more or less like this. Which raises an
obvious question: Why are some of them fat?
Most of them—maybe 100 out of the 110 now
in residence—resemble their diet. Beyond

143/396

thin: narrow. But a handful, including the
two bosses, have an ampleness to them that
cannot be explained by eleven helpings of
raw onion and cucumber, no matter how
much honeycomb they chew through.
After dinner the monks return to church,
where they will remain chanting and singing
and crossing and spraying incense until one
in the morning. Arsenios grabs me and takes
me for a walk. We pass Byzantine chapels
and climb Byzantine stairs until we arrive at
a door in a long Byzantine hall freshly
painted but otherwise antique: his office. On
the desk are two computers; behind it a
brand-new fax machine-cum-printer; on top
of it a cell phone and a Costco-size tub of vitamin C pills. The walls and floor gleam like
new. The cabinets exhibit row upon row of
three-ring binders. The only sign that this
isn’t a business office circa 2010 is a single
icon over the desk. Apart from that, if you
put this office side by side with the office of

144/396

Greece’s minister of finance and asked which
one housed the monk, this wouldn’t be it.
“There is more of a spiritual thirst today,”
he says, when I ask him why his monastery
has attracted so many important business
and political people. “Twenty or thirty years
ago they taught that science will solve all
problems. There are so many material things
and they are not satisfying. People have gotten tired of material pleasures. Of material
things. And they realize they cannot really
find success in these things.” And with that
he picks up the phone and orders drinks and
dessert. Moments later a silver tray arrives,
bearing pastries and glasses of what appears
to be crème de menthe.
Thus began what became a three-hour encounter. I’d ask simple questions—Why on
earth would anyone become a monk? How
do you handle life without women? How do
people who spend ten hours a day in church
find time to create real estate empires?

145/396

Where did you get the crème de
menthe?—and he would answer in twentyminute-long parables in which there would
be, somewhere, a simple answer. (For example: “I believe there are many more beautiful things than sex.”) As he told his stories
he waved and jumped around and smiled
and laughed: if Father Arsenios feels guilty
about anything, he has a rare talent for hiding it. Like a lot of people who come to Vatopaidi, I suppose, I was less than perfectly
sure what I was after. I wanted to see if it felt
like a front for a commercial empire (it
doesn’t) and if the monks seemed insincere
(hardly). But I also wondered how a bunch of
odd-looking guys who had walked away from
the material world had such a knack for getting their way in it: How on earth do monks,
of all people, wind up as Greece’s best shot at
a Harvard Business School case study?
After about two hours I work up the nerve
to ask him. To my surprise he takes me

146/396

seriously. He points to a sign he has tacked
up on one of his cabinets, and translates it
from the Greek: The smart person accepts.
The idiot insists.
He got it, he says, on one of his business
trips to the Ministry of Tourism. “This is the
secret of success for anywhere in the world,
not just the monastery,” he says, and then
goes on to describe pretty much word for
word the first rule of improvisational comedy, or for that matter any successful collaborative enterprise. Take whatever is thrown
at you and build upon it. “Yes . . . and” rather
than “No . . . but.” “The idiot is bound by his
pride,” he says. “It always has to be his way.
This is also true of the person who is deceptive or doing things wrong: he always tries to
justify himself. A person who is bright in regard to his spiritual life is humble. He accepts what others tell him—criticism,
ideas—and he works with them.”

147/396

I notice now that his windows open upon a
balcony overlooking the Aegean Sea. The
monks are not permitted to swim in it; why, I
never asked. Just like them, though, to build
a beach house and then ban the beach. I notice, also, that I am the only one who has
eaten the pastries and drunk the crème de
menthe. It occurs to me that I may have just
failed some sort of test of my ability to
handle temptation.
“The whole government says they are angry
at us,” he says, “but we have nothing. We
work for others. The Greek newspapers, they
call us a corporation. But I ask you, Michael,
what company has lasted for a thousand
years?”
At that moment, out of nowhere, Father
Ephraim walks in. Round, with rosy cheeks
and a white beard, he is more or less the spitting image of Santa Claus. He even has a
twinkle in his eye. A few months before, he’d
been hauled before the Greek parliament to

148/396

testify. One of his interrogators said that the
Greek government had acted with unusual
efficiency when it swapped Vatopaidi’s lake
for the Ministry of Agriculture’s commercial
properties. He asked Ephraim how he had
done it.
“Don’t you believe in miracles?” Ephraim
had said.
“I’m beginning to,” said the Greek MP.
When we are introduced, Ephraim clasps
my hand and holds it for a very long time. It
crosses my mind that he is about to ask me
what I want for Christmas. Instead he says,
“What is your faith?” “Episcopalian,” I cough
out. He nods; he calibrates: it could be
worse; it probably is worse. “You are married?” he asks. “Yes.” “You have children?” I
nod; he calibrates: I can work with this. He
asks for their names . . .
THE SECOND PARLIAMENTARY inquiry into the

Vatopaidi affair is still gathering steam, and
you never know what it may turn up. But the

149/396

main facts of the case are not in dispute; the
main question left to answer is the motives
of the monks and the public servants who
helped them. In the late 1980s, Vatopaidi
was a complete ruin—a rubble of stones
overrun with rats. The frescoes were black.
The icons went uncared for. The place had a
dozen monks roaming around its ancient
stones, but they were autonomous and disorganized. In church jargon they worshipped
idiorrhythmically—which is another way of
saying that in their quest for spiritual satisfaction it was every man for himself. No one
was in charge; they had no collective purpose. Their relationship to their monastery,
in other words, was a lot like the relationship
of the Greek citizen to his state.
That changed in the early 1990s, when a
group of energetic young Greek Cypriot
monks from another part of Athos, led by
Father Ephraim, saw a rebuilding opportunity: a fantastic natural asset that had been

150/396

terribly mismanaged. Ephraim set about
raising the money to restore Vatopaidi to its
former glory. He dunned the European
Union for cultural funds. He mingled with
rich Greek businessmen in need of forgiveness. He cultivated friendships with important Greek politicians. In all of this he exhibited incredible chutzpah. For instance, after
a famous Spanish singer visited and took an
interest in Vatopaidi, he parlayed the interest into an audience with government officials from Spain. They were told a horrible
injustice had occurred: in the fourteenth
century a band of Catalan mercenaries, upset
with the Byzantine emperor, had sacked
Vatopaidi and caused much damage. The
monastery received $240,000 from the government officials.
Clearly one part of Ephraim’s strategy was
to return Vatopaidi to what it had been for
much of the Byzantine Empire: a monastery
with global reach. This, too, distinguished it

151/396

from the country it happened to be inside.
Despite its entry into the European Union,
Greece has remained a closed economy; it’s
impossible to put one finger on the source of
all the country’s troubles, but if you laid a
hand on them, one finger would touch its insularity. All sorts of things that might be
more efficiently done by other people they do
themselves; all sorts of interactions with other countries that they might profitably engage in simply do not occur. In the general
picture the Vatopaidi monastery was a stunning exception: it cultivated relations with
the outside world. Most famously, until scandal hit, Prince Charles had visited three summers in a row, and stayed for a week each
visit.
Relationships with the rich and famous
were essential in Vatopaidi’s pursuit of government grants and reparations for sackings,
but also for the third prong of its new management’s strategy: real estate. By far the

152/396

smartest thing Father Ephraim had done was
go rummaging around in an old tower where
they kept the Byzantine manuscripts, untouched for decades. Over the centuries Byzantine emperors and other rulers had deeded
to Vatopaidi various tracts of land, mainly in
modern-day Greece and Turkey. In the years
before Ephraim arrived, the Greek government had clawed back much of this property,
but there remained a title, bestowed in the
fourteenth century by Emperor John V
Palaiologos, to a lake in northern Greece.
By the time Ephraim discovered the deed
to the lake in Vatopaidi’s vaults, it had been
designated a nature preserve by the Greek
government. Then, in 1998, suddenly it
wasn’t: someone had allowed the designation
to lapse. Shortly thereafter, the monks were
granted full title to the lake.
Back in Athens, I tracked down Peter
Doukas, the official inside the Ministry of
Finance first accosted by the Vatopaidi

153/396

monks. Doukas now finds himself at the center of the two parliamentary investigations,
but he had become, oddly, the one person in
government willing to speak openly about
what had happened. (He was by birth not an
Athenian but a Spartan—but perhaps that’s
another story.) Unlike most of the people in
the Greek government, Doukas wasn’t a lifer
but a guy who had made his fortune in the
private sector, inside and outside of Greece,
and then, in 2004, at the request of the
prime minister, had taken a post in the Finance Ministry. He was then fifty-two years
old and had spent most of his career as a
banker with Citigroup in New York. He was
tall and blond and loud and blunt and funny.
It was Doukas who was responsible for the
very existence of long-term Greek-government debt. Back when interest rates were
low, and no one saw any risk in lending
money to the Greek government, he talked
his superiors into issuing forty- and fifty-

154/396

year bonds. Afterwards the Greek newspapers ran headlines attacking him (DOUKAS
MORTGAGES OUR CHILDREN'S FUTURE), but it was
a very bright thing to have done. The $18 billion of long-term bonds now trade at 50
cents on the dollar—which is to say that the
Greek government could buy them back on
the open market. “I created a nine-billiondollar trading profit for them,” says Doukas,
laughing. “They should give me a bonus!”
Not long after Doukas began his new job,
two monks showed up unannounced in his
Finance Ministry office. One was Father
Ephraim, of whom Doukas had heard; the
other, unknown to Doukas but clearly the
sharp end of the operation, a fellow named
Father Arsenios. They owned this lake, they
said, and they wanted the Ministry of Finance to pay them cash for it. “Someone had
given them full title to the lake,” says
Doukas. “What they wanted now was to
monetize it. They came to me and said, ‘Can

155/396

you buy us out?’” Before the meeting,
Doukas sensed, they had done a great deal of
homework. “Before they come to you they
know a lot about you—your wife, your parents, the extent of your religious beliefs,” he
said. “The first thing they asked me was if I
wanted them to take my confession.” Doukas
decided that it would be unwise to tell the
monks his secrets. Instead he told them he
would not give them money for their
lake—which he still didn’t see how exactly
they had come to own. “They seemed to
think I had all this money to spend,” says
Doukas. “I said, ‘Listen, contrary to popular
opinion, there is no money in the Finance
Ministry.’ And they said, ‘Okay, if you cannot
buy us out, why can’t you give us some of
your pieces of land?’”
This turned out to be the winning strategy:
exchanging the lake, which generated no
rents, for government-owned properties that
did. Somehow the monks convinced

156/396

government officials that the land around
the lake was worth far more than the 55 million euros an independent appraiser later assessed its value as, and then used that higher
valuation to ask for 1 billion euros’ worth of
government property. Doukas declined to
give them any of the roughly 250 billion
euros’ worth controlled by the Ministry of
Finance. (“No fucking way I’m doing that,”
he says he told them.) The monks went to
the source of the next most valuable
land—farmlands and forests controlled by
the Ministry of Agriculture. Doukas recalls,
“I get a call from the minister of agriculture
saying, ‘We’re trading them all this land, but
it’s not enough. Why don’t you throw in
some of your pieces of land, too?’” After
Doukas declined, he received another
call—this one from the prime minister’s office. Still he said no. Next he receives this
piece of paper saying he’s giving the monks

157/396

government land, and all he needs to do is
sign it. “I said, ‘Fuck you, I’m not signing it.’”
And he didn’t—at least not in its original
form. But the prime minister’s office pressed
him; the monks, it seemed to Doukas, had
some kind of hold on the prime minister’s
chief of staff. That fellow, Giannis Angelou,
had come to know the monks a few years before, just after he had been diagnosed with a
life-threatening illness. The monks prayed
for him; he didn’t die, but instead made a
miraculous recovery. He had, however, given
them his confession.
By now Doukas thought of these monks
less as simple con men than as the savviest
businessmen he had ever dealt with. “I told
them they should be running the Ministry of
Finance,” he says. “They didn’t disagree.” In
the end, under pressure from his boss,
Doukas signed two pieces of paper. The first
agreed not to challenge the monks’ ownership of the lake; the second made possible

158/396

the land exchange. It did not give the monks
rights to any lands from the Finance Ministry, but, by agreeing to accept their lake into the Ministry of Finance’s real estate portfolio, Doukas enabled their deal with the
minister of agriculture. In exchange for their
lake the monks received seventy-three different government properties, including what
had formerly been the gymnastics center for
the 2004 Olympics—which, like much of
what the Greek government built for the
Olympic Games, was now empty and abandoned space. And that, Doukas assumed,
was that. “You figure they are holy people,”
he says. “Maybe they want to use it to create
an orphanage.”
What they wanted to create, as it turned
out, was a commercial real estate empire.
They began by persuading the Greek government to do something it seldom did: to
rezone a lot of noncommercial property for
commercial purposes. Above and beyond the

159/396

lands they received in their swap—which the
Greek parliament subsequently estimated to
be worth a billion euros—the monks, all by
themselves, were getting 100 percent financing to buy commercial buildings in Athens
and to develop the properties they had acquired. The former Olympics gymnastics
center was to become a fancy private hospital—with which the monks obviously enjoyed
a certain synergy. Then, with the help of a
Greek banker, the monks drew up plans for
something to be called the Vatopaidi Real
Estate Fund. Investors in the fund would, in
effect, buy the monks out of the properties
given to them by the government. And the
monks would use the money to restore their
monastery to its former glory.
From an ancient deed to a worthless lake
the two monks had spun what the Greek
newspapers were claiming, depending on the
newspaper, to be a fortune of anywhere from
tens of millions to many billions of dollars.

160/396

But the truth was that no one knew the full
extent of the monks’ financial holdings; indeed, one of the criticisms of the first parliamentary investigation was that it had failed
to lay hands on everything the monks owned.
On the theory that if you want to know what
rich people are really worth you are far better
off asking other rich people—as opposed to,
say, journalists—I polled a random sample of
several rich Greeks who had made their fortune in real estate or finance. They put the
monks’ real estate and financial assets at less
than $2 billion but more than $1 billion—up
from zero since the new management took
over. And the business had started with
nothing to sell but forgiveness.
The monks didn’t finish with church until
one in the morning. Normally, Father
Arsenios explained, they would be up and at
it all over again at four. On Sunday they give
themselves a break and start at six. Throw in
another eight hours a day working the
