
Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 39

A WORD ON MODELS

Before continuing, a few observations on models in general will be worthwhile.

A model is a scaled down or more easily managed representation of the real world.
The model may be a physical one, such as a model airplane or building, or it may be a
mathematical one, such as a formula. In each case, the model is constructed to help us
petter understand the world in which we live. However, it is unwise, and sometimes
dangerous, to assume that the model and the real world which it represents are
identical in every way. They may be very similar, but the model is unlikely to exactly
duplicate every feature of the real world.

All models, if they are to be effective, require us to make certain prior assumptions
about the real world. Mathematical models require the input of numbers which quantify
these assumptions. If we feed incorrect data into the model, we can expect an incorrect
representation of the real world. Every model user must be aware: garbage in, garbage
out.

These general observations about models are no less true for option pricing models.
An option model is only someone’s idea of how options might be evaluated under
certain conditions. Since either the model itself, or the data which we feed into the
model, might be incorrect, there is no guarantee that model-generated values will be
accurate, nor can we be sure that these values will bear any logical resemblance to actual
prices in the marketplace.

There is in fact a great deal of disagreement among traders as to the usefulness of
option pricing models. Some traders feel that models are so much hocus-pocus, and have
no relationship to what goes on in the real world. Other traders feel that once they have
a sheet of theoretical values in hand all their problems are solved. The reality lies
somewhere in between.

Anew option trader is like someone entering a dark room for the first time, Without
any guidance he will grope in the dark and may eventually find what he is looking for.
The trader who is armed with a basic understanding of theoretical pricing models enters
the same room with a small candle. He can make out the general layout of the room,
but the dimness of the candle prevents him from distinguishing every detail. Moreover,
some of what he does see may be distorted by the flickering candle. In spite of these
limitations, a trader is more likely to find what he is looking for with a small candle than
with no illumination at all.

The real problems with theoretical pricing models arise after the trader has acquired
some sophistication. As he gains confidence he may begin to increase the size of his
trades. When this happens, his inability to make out every detail in the room, as well as
the distortions caused by the flickering candle flame, take on increased importance.
Now a misinterpretation of what he thinks he sees can lead to financial disaster, since
any error in judgement will be greatly magnified.

The sensible approach is to make use of a model, but with a full awareness of what
it can and cannot do. Option traders will find that theoretical pricing models are
invaluable tools to understanding the pricing of options. Because of the insights gained
from a model, the great majority of successful option traders rely on some type of


40 Chapter 3

theoretical pricing model. However, an option trader, if he is to make the best use of a
theoretical pricing model, must be aware of its limitations as well as its strengths.
Otherwise he may be no better off than the trader groping in the dark.2

A SIMPLE APPROACH

How might we adapt the concepts of expected return and theoretical value to the
pricing of options? We might begin by calculating the expected return for an option.
Let’s take a simple example.

Suppose an underlying contract is trading at $100 and that on a certain date in the
future, which we will call expiration, the contract can take on one of five different
prices: $80, $90, $100, $110, or $120. Assume, moreover, that each of the five prices
is equally likely with 20% probability. The prices and probabilities might be represented
by the line in Figure 3-1.

If we take a long position in the underlying contract at today’s price of $100, what
will be the expected return from this position at expiration? 20% of the time we will
lose $20 when the contract ends up at $80. 20% of the time we will lose $10 when the
contract ends up at $90. 20% of the time we will break even when the contract ends
up at $100. 20% of the time we will make $10 when the contract ends up at $110. And
20% of the time we will make $20 when the contract ends up at $120. We can write
the arithmetic:

(20% x $20) -(20% x $10) +(20% x 0} +(20% x $10) +(20% x $20) = 0

Since the profits and losses exactly offset each other, the expected return to the
long position is zero. The same reasoning will show that the expected return to a short
position taken at the current price of $100 is also zero. Given the prices and prob-
abilities, if we take either a long or short position we can expect to just break even in
the long run.

Now suppose that we take a long position in a $100 call. Forgetting for a moment
about what we might pay for the call, what will be the expected return given the prices
and probabilities in Figure 3-1? If the underlying contract finishes at $80, $90, or $100
the call will expire worthless. If the underlying contract finishes at $110 or $120 the
call will be worth $10 and $20, respectively. The arithmetic is:

(20% x 0) +(20% x 0} +(20% x 0) +(20% x $10) +(20% x $20) = +86

Figure 3-1

$80 $90 $100 $110 $120
20% 20% 20% 20% 20%

2. Two interesting articles discuss these limitations:
Figlewski, Stephen; “What Does an Option Pricing Model Tell Us about Option Prices?,” Finaneial
Analysts Journal, Septeraber/October 1989, pages 12-15.
Black, Fischer; “Living Up to the Model,” Risk, Vol. 3, No. 3., March 1990, pages 11-13.


Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 41

The call can never be worth less than zero, so the expected return from the call
position is always a non-negative number, in this case $6.

If we want to develop a theoretical pricing model using this approach, we might
propose a series of possible prices and probabilities for the underlying contract at
expiration. Then, given an exercise price, we can calculate the value of the option at
each price outcome, multiply the value by its associated probability, add up all these
numbers, and thereby obtain an expected return for the option.

In the foregoing example we took a very simple situation with only five possible
price outcomes, each with identical probability. What changes might we make in order
to develop a more realistic model? For one thing, we would have to know the settlement
procedure for the option. In the United States, all options are subject to stock-type
settlement, which requires full payment for the option. If the $100 call will have an
expected return of $6 at expiration, we will have to deduct the carrying costs to get its
value today. If interest rates are 12% annually (1% per month) and the option will expire
in two months, we will have to discount the $6 expected return by the 2% carrying
cost, or about 12¢. The theoretical value of the option will then be $5.88.

What other factors might we have to consider? We assumed that all five price
outcomes were equally likely. Is this a realistic assumption? Suppose you were told that
only two possible prices were possible at expiration, $110 and $250. With the
underlying contract at $100 today, which do you think is more likely? Based on
experience, most traders would probably agree that extreme price changes which are
far away from today’s price are less likely than small changes which remain close to
today’s price. For this reason, $110 is more likely than $250. To take this into
consideration, perhaps our price outcomes, in terms of probability, ought to be concen-
trated around the present price of the underlying contract. Such a distribution is shown
in Figure 3-2. Now the expected return from a $100 call is:

(10% x 0) +(20% x 0) +(40% x 0) +(20% x $10) +(10% x $20} = $4.00

If, as before, the option is subject to stock-type settlement and carrying costs are
2%, the theoretical value of the option will now be $3.92.

Note that in Figure 3-2 all outcomes and probabilities are arranged symmetrically.
Even though the new probabilities altered the expected return for the $100 call, the
expected return from any position taken in the underlying contractis still zero. For each
upward price move, there is a downward move of equal magnitude and probability. We
Might, however, believe that the expected return to an underlying contract is not zero,
that there is a greater chance that the contract will move one direction rather than
another. Look at the price outcomes and probabilities in Figure 3-3. Using these new
probabilities, the expected return from a long position in the underlying contract is:

—(10% x $20) -(20% x $10} +(30% x 0) +(25% x $10) +(15% x $20} = +$1.50
and the expected return for the $100 call is:
(10% x 0} +(20% x 0) +(30% x 0) +(25% x $10) +(15% x $20) = +$5.50


42 Chapter 3

Figure 3-2
$80 $90 $100 $110 $120
10% 20% 40% 20% 10%
Figure 3-3
$80 $90 $100 $110 $120
10% 20% 30% 25% 15%

Note that the underlying contract now has a positive expected return, so it may seem
that there is money to be made simply by purchasing the underlying contract. This
would be true if there were no other considerations. But suppose the underlying
contract is a stock, and therefore subject to stock-type settlement. If we purchase the
stock at today’s price of $100 and hold it for some period, there is a carrying cost
associated with the investment. If the carrying cost is exactly equal to the expected
return of $1.50, we will just break even. For a long stock position to be profitable, the
stock must appreciate by at least the amount of carrying costs over the holding period.
Therefore, the expected return from the stock must be some positive number. If we
assume that any stock trade will just break even, the expected return must be equal to
the carrying costs.

Some stocks also pay dividends. If the dividend is paid during the holding period,
it will affect the expected return. A trader who buys stock will have to pay out carrying
costs, but he will receive the dividends. If we again assume thata stock trade will break
even, the expected return at the end of the holding period must be identical to the
cartying costs less the dividend. If the carrying cost for the stock over some period is
$3.50, and a $1.00 dividend is expected during this period, the expected return at the
end of the period must be $2.50. A trader who purchases the stock today will incur an
interest debit of $3.50 at the end of the holding period, but this will be exactly offset by
the $1.00 dividend which he receives during the holding period,® as well as the $2.50
expected return at the end of the period.

Inan arbitrage-jree market, where no profit can be made by either buying or selling
acontract, all credits and debits, including the expected return, must exactly cancel out.
If we assume an arbitrage-free market, we must necessarily assume that the forward
price, the average price of the contract at the end of the holding period, is the current
price, plus an expected return which will exactly offset all other credits and debits. If
the holding costs on a $100 stock over some period are $4, the forward price must be
$104, If the stock also pays a $1 dividend, the forward price must be $103. In both
cases the credits and debits will exactly cancel out.

The calculation of a forward price depends on the characteristics of the contract as
well as market conditions. In the case of a stock, the considerations are the price of the

3. The trader can also earn interest on the dividend from the time he receives it until the end of the holding
period. Since this will usually be a very small amount in relation to the other factors, we will ignore it.


Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 43

stock, the length of the holding period, interest rates, and dividends. In the case of a
futures contract, the situation is much simpler. A futures contract requires no initial cash
outlay, since it is subject to futures-type settlement. Moreover, a futures contract does
not pay dividends. This means that the forward price of a futures contract in an
arbitrage-free market is simply the current price of the futures contract. If a trader buys
a futures contract at $100, the break even price for the contract at the end of the holding
period is $100.

Going back to our very simple pricing model, we might make the assumption that
the underlying market is arbitrage-free,4 that there is no money to be made from trading
the underlying contract. The expected return must then be equal to the difference
between the current price of the underlying market and its forward price. In the case of
stock, the expected return will be carrying costs less dividends. In the case of futures,
the expected return will be zero.

Even if we assume an arbitrage-free market in the underlying, with appropriate
probabilities associated with each price outcome, we still have one major problem. In
our simplified model there were only five possible price outcomes, while in the real
world there are an infinite number of possibilities. To enable our model to more closely
approximate real world conditions we will have to construct a probability line with
every possible price outcome and its associated probability. This may seem an impossible
task, but it is the basis for all theoretical pricing models.

We can now summarize the necessary steps in developing a model:

1. Propose a series of possible prices at expiration for the underlying contract
2. Assign an appropriate probability to each possible price

3. Maintain an arbitrage-free underlying market
4

From the prices and probabilities in steps 1, 2, and 3, calculate the expected
return for the option

5. From the option’s expected return, deduct the carrying cost

If we can accomplish all this, we will finally have a theoretical value from which we can
begin to trade.

Prior to 1973, evaluation of options required the solution of complex mathematical
equations. Since such methods were slow and tedious, a trader who tried to use them
quickly found that profit opportunities disappeared faster than the evaluation methods
could identify them. In 1973, concurrent with the opening of the Chicago Board
Options Exchange, Fischer Black and Myron Scholes introduced the first practical
theoretical pricing model for options. The Black-Scholes Model, with its relatively
simple arithmetic and limited number of inputs, most of which were easily observable,
proved an ideal tool for traders in the newly opened U.S. option market. Although other
Models have since been introduced to overcome some of its original deficiencies, the
Black-Scholes Model remains the most widely used of all option pricing models.

4. We need not necessarily asstime an arbitrage free underlying market. But we shall see that this is an
important assumption in most theoretical pricing models.


44 Chapter 3

In its original form, the Black-Scholes Model was intended to evaluate European
options (no early exercise permitted) on non-dividend paying stocks. Shortly after its
introduction, realizing that most stocks do pay dividends, Black and Scholes added a
dividend component. In 1976, Fischer Black made slight modifications to the model to
allow for the evaluation of options on futures contracts. And in 1983, Mark Garman
and Steven Kohlhagen made several other modifications to allow for the evaluation of
options on foreign currencies.° The futures version and the foreign currency version are
known officially as the Black Model and the Garman-Kohthagen Model, respectively.
But the evaluation method in each version, whether the original Black-Scholes Model
for stock options, the Black Model for futures options, or the Garman-Kohthagen Model
for foreign currency options, is so similar that they have all come to be known as simply
the Black-Scholes Model. The various forms of the model differ primarily in how they
calculate the forward price of the underlying contract, and an option trader will simply
choose the form appropriate to the underlying instrument.

The great majority of options currently traded are American options, carrying with
them the right of early exercise. For this reason, it may seem that the Black-Scholes
model, with its assumption of no early exercise, is poorly suited for use in most markets.
However, the Black-Scholes Model has proven so easy to use that many traders do not
believe the more accurate values derived from an American option pricing model, which
allows for the possibility of early exercise, is worth the additional effort. In some
markets, particularly futures options markets, the additional early exercise value is so
small that there is virtually no difference between values obtained from the Black-
Scholes model and values obtained from an American pricing model.

Due to its widespread use and its importance in the development of other pricing
models, we will for the moment restrict ourselves to a discussion of the Black-Scholes
model and its various forms. In later chapters we will consider the question of early
exercise. We will also look at alternative methods for pricing options when we question
some of the basic assumptions in the Black-Scholes Model.

The reasoning which led to the development of the Black-Scholes Model depends
on the five steps we listed earlier in this chapter when we proposed a simple method
for evaluating options. Black and Scholes worked originally with call values, but put
values can be derived in much the same way. Alternatively, we will see in Chapter 11
that in an arbitrage-free market there is a unique relationship between an underlying
contract, and a call and put with the same exercise price and expiration date. This
relationship enables us to derive a put value simply by knowing the associated call value.

In order to calculate an option’s theoretical value using the Black-Scholes Model,
we need to know at a minimum five characteristics of the option and its underlying
contract. These are:

1. The option’s exercise price

2. The amount of time remaining to expiration

5. We are speaking here of options on a physical foreign currency, rather than options on a foreign
currency futures contract. The latter may be evaluated using the Black Model for futures options.


Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 45

3. The current price of the underlying contract
4, The risk-free interest rate over the life of the option
5. The volatility of the underlying contract

The last input, volatility, may be unfamiliar to the new trader. While we will put
off a detailed discussion of this input to the next chapter, from our previous discussion
one can reasonably infer that volatility is related to the speed of the market.

If we know each of the required inputs, we can feed them into the theoretical
pricing model and thereby generate a theoretical value.

Black and Scholes also incorporated into their model the concept of the riskless
hedge. For every option position there is a theoretically equivalent position in the
underlying contract such that, for small price changes in the underlying contract, the
option position will gain or lose value at exactly the same rate as the underlying position.
To take advantage of a theoretically mispriced option, it is necessary to establish a hedge
by offsetting the option position with this theoretically equivalent underlying position.
That is, whatever option position we take, we must take an opposing market position
in the underlying contract. The correct proportion of underlying contracts needed to
establish this riskless hedge is known as the hedge ratio.

Why is it necessary to establish a riskless hedge? Recall that in our simplified
approach an option’s theoretical value depended on the probability of various price
outcomes for the underlying contract. As the underlying contract changes in price, the
probability of each outcome will also change. If the underlying price is currently $100
and we assign a 25% probability to $120, we might drop the probability for $120 to
10% if the price of the underlying contract falls to $80. By initially establishing a riskless
hedge, and then by adjusting this hedge as market conditions change, we are taking into
consideration these changing probabilities.

In this sense an option can be thought of as a substitute for a similar position in the
underlying contract. A call is a substitute for a long position; a put is a substitute for a
short position. Whether it is better to take the position in the option or in the underlying

Figure 3-4

Exercise Price

Time to Expiration

Theoretical » Theoreticai

Underlying Price Pricing Model Value

Interest Rates

Volatility



46 Chapter 3

contract depends on the theoretical value of the option and its price in the marketplace,
If a call can be purchased (sold) for less (more) than its theoretical value, it will, in the
long run, be more profitable to take a long (short) market position by purchasing (selling)
calls than by purchasing (selling) the underlying contract. In the same way, if a put can
be purchased (sold) for less (more) than its theoretical value, it will, in the long run, be
more profitable to take a short (long) market position by purchasing (selling) puts than
by selling (buying) the underlying contract.

Since the theoretical value obtained from a theoretical pricing model is no better
than the inputs into the model, a few comments on each of the inputs will be
worthwhile.

EXERCISE PRICE

There ought never be any doubt about the exercise price of an option, since it is fixed
in the terms of the contract and does not vary over the life of the contract.© A
Deutschemark March 58 call traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange cannot
suddenly turn into March 59 call or a March 57 call. An IBM July 55 put traded on the
Chicago Board Options Exchange cannot turn into a July 50 put or a July 60 put.

TIME TO EXPIRATION

Like the exercise price, the option’s expiration date is fixed and will not vary. Our DM
March 58 call will not suddenly turn into an April 58 call, nor will our IBM July 55 put
turn into a June 55 put. Of course, each day that passes brings us closer to expiration,
so in that sense the time to expiration is constantly growing shorter. However, the
expiration date, like the exercise price, is fixed by the exchange and will not change.
