
40

FIGURE 2.17 Choose the duration
from the dropdown menu to indicate
how much time you want to see in the
graph.

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 2.18 The frequency menu
controls how much time is represented
in each price bar of the graph.

weekend day or a holiday are displayed in red instead of black. To chart
a customized date range, simply select a start date and an end date; then
click Get Chart.
Once you choose a duration, ProphetCharts automatically loads that
amount of data using the frequency it considers appropriate. So choosing
“1 day” will automatically select a frequency of “1m” (that is, one-minute
bars); choosing “5 days” will select “5m” (five-minute bars); choosing “1 Yr”
will choose “D” (Daily) bars, and so on.
You can choose a different frequency, however. Perhaps you want to
see more detail on the chart. For example, if you choose All, the frequency
will automatically be set to M (for Monthly data). Perhaps you want to
see every day instead. You could therefore choose D from the frequency
menu to get more fine-grained information. Or if you chose a 60-day graph,
it would automatically provide the prices in hourly bars, but perhaps you
want 10-minute bars instead—so you would make this selection from the
frequency dropdown, as shown in Figure 2.18.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

41

You may find that the frequency you want isn’t displayed on the dropdown. For instance, you might want to look at a 3-minute bar or a 17-minute
bar. For intraday charts, you can double-click at the top of the frequency
dropdown and manually enter any whole integer you want. This lets you
enter any customized frequency you want for an intraday chart.
As you create charts with different combinations of duration and frequency, you will determine there are certain kinds of charts that work well
for you. Instead of having to make these choices every time you want to see
a certain kind of chart (such as a 5-year-daily chart, a 30-day-minute chart,
and so on), you can create what is known as a chart style to automatically
conjure up a preselected duration, frequency, and other properties (such
as whether the chart streams, whether the volume is shown, and what kind
of graph style it is).

FIGURE 2.19 Chart styles give you
one-click access to a wide variety of settings you establish in advance to control
the appearance of the chart that works
best for you.

FIGURE 2.20 The
Clone
button, located in the lower-left of the
applet, makes another instance of
ProphetCharts where you can create
diﬀerent charts.

42

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

We will explore how to create and save styles in Chapter 4, but it is
valuable to know that this feature is available. As you create different styles
(Figure 2.19), you should give them meaningful names that suggest what
the styles will invoke.

CLONING CHARTS
When you are using ProphetCharts, you are not limited to just one chart
window. You can create multiple windows, and these windows do not have
to correspond to one another in any way. Each can have whatever symbol,
style, study set, or other properties you choose.
Clicking on Clone (Figure 2.20) will create another instance of
ProphetCharts. To create extra charts, click the Clone button located in
the lower-left corner of the applet for each new instance.
The chart created will indeed be a clone of the original chart. Perhaps
you don’t want it to be identical, but instead you want to see the same
symbol with a different style. If you do, instead of clicking on the word
Clone, click the down-pointing arrow next to Clone. This will bring up a list
of all the chart styles you have created, and you can choose any of them.
This can be quite handy if you are closely monitoring a stock. For example, if you are looking at the past five years of daily data on a stock, and
you want to see live market activity on it, you might create a clone of the
past two days on a minute-by-minute basis (Figure 2.21). If you had such

FIGURE 2.21 Multiple charts give you a more complete view of the market’s
activity.

Fundamentals of Chart Creation

43

a chart style available, clicking that style name would create a new chart
with that style.

NEXT UP
We have covered a lot of ground in this chapter, including basic chart properties, different kinds of financial instruments, viewing detailed data on a
chart, searching for symbols, streaming, and cloning. In the next chapter,
we will dig deeper into what else can contribute to a chart style and how
we can save and manage these styles for easier, more productive technical
analysis.

CHAPTER 3

Modules and
Preferences

rophetCharts has four areas that offer control: general settings, modules, menus, and the tool bar. The second of these, modules, will be
covered with this chapter.
The module list is located on the left side of the ProphetCharts applet,
and although it has a variety of functions, the principle is similar for each
of them. That is, each module provides a list of choices, and each module
can be either expanded or collapsed, depending on whether you are interested in it. You therefore can avoid cluttering your screen with items not
currently of interest.
Figure 3.1 shows what the module list looks like when all of the modules are collapsed. The arrows on the extreme left can be clicked to expand
a list (if it is collapsed) or collapse a list (if it is expanded). Clicking anywhere on the module title will perform this action.
Notice the pair of arrows in the upper-right corner of the module list.
This indicates that the entire list of modules can be collapsed in case you
do not want access to any of the modules for the time being. This also
points out the dividing line where you can make the module list wider or
narrower by dragging it.
Figure 3.2 gives an example of resizing. When you point your mouse
to the vertical area to the right of the module list, the cursor becomes
a two-headed arrow. Once it does, you can hold down the mouse button and drag to the right (for a wider module list) or the left (for a narrower list). Doing this is a trade-off between giving the modules plenty
of space (so there is more room for names of technical studies, stock
names, and so on) and reducing your chart space. This figure shows

P

44

Modules and Preferences

FIGURE 3.1 All the module titles are
shown with no content beneath them
when all the modules are collapsed.

45

FIGURE 3.2 By dragging the bar on
the right side of the module pane, you
can resize it to your liking.

a user reducing the size of the modules so that the chart area has
more room.
As mentioned previously, there is a one-click method of instantly
changing the module size: clicking either the left-pointing (“collapse”) or
right-pointing (“revert”) arrows in the division bar. If you click the collapse
arrow, the module will instantly shrink to nothing, maximizing the space
you have for charting. If you click the revert arrow, it will return to whatever size it was before you collapsed it. Figure 3.3 shows what happens
when collapse is clicked: there is no module at all on the left, and only the
arrows within the dividing line remain.

BASIC MODULE BEHAVIOR
As you know already, clicking the title bar of a module will make the module expand (if collapsed) and collapse (if expanded). Typically, only one

FIGURE 3.3 If the left-pointing arrow on the module area is clicked, the entire
module pane collapses, giving you more room for your chart.

46

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 3.4 Holding the mouse pointer over the module’s pin causes a tool tip
to appear. Clicking this pin toggles between forcing the module open or permitting
it to be closed.

module will be open at a time. For instance, if My Watch Lists is open and
you click the Chart Toppers, then My Watch Lists will collapse and Chart
Toppers will expand. This is ProphetCharts’ way of giving you as much information in the module as possible, since it assumes whatever you most
recently clicked is what interests you.
However, you might want more than one module open at the same
time. To do this, you can pin any module you want to remain open, even
if others are opened. You can pin as many modules as you want, up to the
extreme of having every single module open simultaneously.
As shown in Figure 3.4, the pin button is a small circle on the right side
of the module’s title bar. When you put your mouse cursor on top of it, a
tool tip will appear, reminding you that clicking this will keep the module
open. If you click it, it will turn black (and the module will be pinned).
Clicking it again turns it back to an empty circle (and the module will no
longer be pinned open).
In Figure 3.5, you can see four modules open at the same time: Quote,
My Study Sets, Indices, and Quick Toggles. Notice that the pinned-open
modules have the solid black circle on the right part of their title bar. Also
note that the Quote module doesn’t have such a circle. The reason is that
Quote has the special behavior of remaining open even when other modules are open because it’s very common to want to see the quote data, even
if you are looking at other modules.

THE DETAILS OF EACH MODULE
Let’s take a look at each of the modules in detail. Although they have a
number of features in common (collapse/expand, ability to pin), each of
them is unique in both function and features.

Modules and Preferences

47

FIGURE 3.5 By clicking several pins in the module pane, you can keep several of
the modules open at once.

48

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 3.6 The Quote panel shows all the most recent price information, including the time stamp of the last trade.

Quote
The Quote module provides you with streaming price information on the
security you have charted. Whether the quote is real-time or delayed depends on whether you are entitled to receive real-time data. When the
Quote module is on, it will provide you the most recent price information
to which you are entitled.
The information provided in the Quote panel (Figure 3.6) includes:
Last: the most recent quote available to you.
Change: the change in price compared with the prior day’s close.
Bid: the highest price someone is offering for this security.
Ask: the lowest price at which someone is selling this security.
Size: the quantity of shares offered (in 100s) being bought (first) and
sold (second).
Open: the first price of the day for this security.
High: the high price of the day so far.
Low: the low price of the day so far.
Total Vol: the total quantity of shares (or contracts) traded so far today.
Last Trade: the time stamp of the most recent trade; this is most typically in whatever time zone the exchange is located (which, for
stocks, would be EST), but this time stamp will display in your
own time zone if you have set that in preferences (which will be
addressed later in this chapter).

Patterns: Symbols
In Chapter 14, you will learn about the pattern recognition tools that are
built into ProphetCharts. This module is where the symbols resulting from

Modules and Preferences

49

a pattern search are housed. Unless you perform a pattern search, this module will be devoid of content.

Candle Patterns: Symbols
Similarly, this module is specifically used to house the results of a pattern
search—specifically, a candlestick pattern search. You will learn how to
execute this kind of search in Chapter 14 also.

Phase 1 and 2 Scores
Used mainly by fundamental analysts who have been trained with Investools education, the phase 1 and 2 scores represent in a very shorthand
way the fundamental strength or weakness of a particular stock symbol.
You can learn more about this data at www.investools.com.

Currency Pairs
Foreign exchange trading is based on currency pairs, such as the euro versus the U.S. dollar or the Japanese yen versus the Canadian dollar. All of
these figures are ratios of one currency to another, and you can get instant
access to any of the available pairs with the currency pairs module.
The module is simply a list of dozens upon dozens of different currency
pairs. The main benefit to this module is that you need not remember the
arcane symbols that accompany FOREX markets.

Ratio Charts
Ratio charts are covered in Chapter 16. In this module, you can store custom symbols you create with the ratio charts function. This module will be
blank at first, but as you create customized symbols, it is much less timeconsuming to preserve those symbols in this module than to enter them by
hand every time you want to see your chart.

My Watch Lists
Of all the modules, My Watch Lists is probably the most important and
the most frequently used. This is where you can view, modify, and use the
contents of your watch lists in ProphetCharts. (The subject of watch lists
is covered in Chapter 4.)
The content of this module is easy to understand and use. Each watch
list you have created is displayed, and if there are any securities inside the

50

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 3.7 If a plus sign appears next to a watch list name, it has content.
Otherwise, it is an empty list.

watch list, the name of the list will have a plus sign (+) to its left, indicating
the list can be expanded to reveal its contents.
For example, in Figure 3.7 there are a variety of watch lists (Candidate
Options, Candidates Long, and so on). Four of these have a plus next to
them, meaning that any of these four can have their plus sign clicked, which
would reveal the securities contained in each of those lists. Those without
a plus sign are empty watch lists.
Unlike the modules panel, watch lists are not shown one at a time.
When you open a watch list, it will remain open, even if you open others.
You can see the contents of all of your watch lists by clicking each of the
plus signs. You also have a choice whether you want to see the securities
shown by their full name (such as the company’s name, in the case of
stocks) or only as symbols. This is controlled by the Watch Lists menu,
where you can choose either View By Symbol or View By Company Name.
By default, View By Company Name is chosen (and therefore a check
mark is next to it).
One very useful feature in My Watch Lists is the ability to drag-anddrop items between lists. This lets you control the content of the lists so
that your trading world can stay organized.
For example, assume you had three watch lists set up. One was named
Candidates Long (which had stocks you were seriously considering buying), another was named Current Long Positions (which had the stocks
you actually owned), and another was named Stocks I Follow (which was
everything else, neither owned nor being considered for purchase).
Being able to drag-and-drop between these lists is clearly valuable,
since what belongs in these lists changes over time. If Apple Computer
(symbol AAPL) was in your Stocks I Follow list, and you were seriously
considering buying it, you would drag it to the Candidates Long list. Later,

Modules and Preferences

51

FIGURE 3.8 The four diﬀerent kinds of arrows at the bottom of a module let you
easily move the contents of a list up and down within that module.

if and when you actually bought some of this stock, you would drag it to
the Current Long Positions list.
The mechanics of dragging and dropping will be addressed in this chapter, since it applies to other modules as well. Another helpful feature in My
Watch Lists, as well as in most other modules, is the arrows that appear at
the bottom of the module. There is a pair of up-arrows and a pair of downarrows on the left and right, and a single up-arrow and down-arrow in the
middle, as shown in Figure 3.8.
Clicking these arrows while in a module will do the following:

r Double-Up Arrow (keyboard equivalent: Ctrl-Up Arrow): Will either go
to the previous tagged item in the current list or to the top of the list
if no item is tagged. A tagged item is one that shows up in boldface,
and items are tagged by choosing “Tag” when right-clicking a symbol.
If you are at the top of a list, clicking the double-up arrow will go to the
last item in the previous list, if there is one.
r Up Arrow (keyboard equivalent: Up Arrow): Will go to the previous
item in the current list. If you are at the top of a list already, it will go
to the last item in the previous list. For instance, if you have two watch
lists, “list one” and “list two,” and the current selection is the first item
in list two, then clicking the up arrow would select the last item in list
one, since that is the next item “above” your current location.
r Down Arrow (keyboard equivalent: Down Arrow): Moves down to the
next item in the current list. If you are at the bottom of a list, and another list follows, it will open up the next list and choose the first item
on that list.
r Double-Down Arrow (keyboard equivalent: Ctrl-Down Arrow): Moves
down to the next tagged item on the current list or, if there is none,
moves to the bottom of the current list. If you are at the bottom
of a list and another list follows, it will go to the first item in the
subsequent list.
The arrow sets provide a quick and easy way of navigating within lists,
particularly long ones. These arrows are especially useful if you make use
of tagging symbols. For instance, you may have a list of 200 stocks you
follow, but only 20 of them are of great interest and are therefore tagged.
Being able to click through this list-within-a-list is a great time-saver.

52

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

My Portfolios
If you manage your portfolios on Investor Toolbox or Prophet.net, the information you enter is automatically available in ProphetCharts via the My
Portfolios module. Within this module will be displayed the names of all
the portfolios you have created, as well as their contents.
By opening any single portfolio, you can see the symbol, quantity, and
entry price of each item within that portfolio. For instance, if you bought
700 shares of Apple Computer at a price of $72.63, there would be a line
item reading “AAPL 700 @ $72.63” underneath the name of the portfolio
containing that entry.
Deeper information, such as profits and losses and net changes, is not
displayed here, since that information is more appropriate to the MarketMatrix or Portfolio pages. This module provides you a view into your holdings with a single glance, which saves you the trouble of having to refer to
a different page.

My Study Sets
A study set is a collection of one or more technical studies that work together. For instance, you might have put together a series of three different moving averages (15-day, 50-day, and 100-day) plus a MACD study and
called this the “Bullish Breakout” study set. This name would appear in the
list of your study sets for easy access. Creating and naming study sets will
be addressed in Chapter 7.
The module named My Study Sets is simply that—a list of your study
sets that you can double-click to apply to the current chart (and any subsequent symbols you may enter). You can also right-click on any particular study set name to choose “Use this Study Set” (which is the same as
double-clicking) or “Delete this Study Set.” Figure 3.9 shows an example of

FIGURE 3.9 My Study Sets shows the names of the technical study sets you
have created. When you ﬁrst start using ProphetCharts, this will be an empty
module.

Modules and Preferences

53

the expanded module showing four study sets. When you first start using
ProphetCharts, this module will have nothing in it.

My Chart Styles
This module is as easy to understand as My Study Sets, because it is a
simple list of customized objects you have created and can access with a
double-click of the mouse. In this module are your chart styles. (The subject of creating chart styles will be covered in Chapter 4.)
A chart style is a collection of properties that define the appearance
and settings of a chart. For example, suppose you created a chart that had
a duration of 10 days, a frequency of 1 minute, had no volume displayed,
had streaming data, and used the candlestick style of graph. It would take
you time to get this style of chart again later unless you preserved all of
these settings into a chart style. You could save all of these properties (and
there could be many more, for this is just an easy example) and name them
as a chart style.
My Chart Styles displays, in alphabetical order, all of the chart styles
you have created. As with the study sets, when you first start using
ProphetCharts, this module will be empty. But, as in Figure 3.10, you can
create as many useful styles as you like.
This also helps illustrate why it’s important to give meaningful names
to each style and to name them in such a way that they are well ordered. If
some of the names in the figure were “Ten-Year Daily” and “5-Year Daily”
and “10-Minute Graph” and “Single Day Streaming,” the list would be more
jumbled, and it would be harder to locate the style you really wanted.

Chart Toppers
The one module with constantly changing lists throughout any trading day
is Chart Toppers. This is not a list that you construct. Instead, it is a live, upto-date report of the securities that are trading and are doing extraordinary
things; each list contains 10 stocks. This chart module provides live scan
results on:

r Percent Gainers: stocks priced higher than $1 that are up the most for
the present day (or, if you are looking at the chart module on a weekend or holiday, the most recent trading day) on a percentage basis.
r Dollar Gainers: stocks priced at higher than $1 that are up the most in
absolute dollar terms for the present day.
r New 52-Week Highs: stocks that during the present day reached a price
higher than any previous closing price for the past year.

54

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 3.10 The Chart Styles module gives you quick access to all the customized collections of parameters that control the appearance of a chart.

r New 52-Week Lows: stocks that during the present day reached a price
lower than any previous closing price for the past year.

r Dollar Losers: stocks priced at higher than $1 that are down the most
in absolute dollar terms for the present day.

r Percent Losers: stocks priced at higher than $1 that are down the most
for the present day on a percentage basis.

r Most Active: the most actively traded stocks, measured by share
volume.
As you can see in Figure 3.11, the Chart Toppers module covers the
three U.S. stock exchanges: NYSE (New York Stock Exchange), NASDAQ,
and AMEX (American Stock Exchange). Each of these has its own set of
seven live-scan results.
When you open the Chart Toppers module for the very first time, only
the exchange abbreviations will appear. Clicking the plus sign (+) will
