
- 221 -

John Grisham

The Broker

If Dan Sandberg's phone rang before 6:oo a.m., the news was
never good. He was a night owl, a nocturnal creature who often slept until it
was time to have breakfast and lunch together. Everyone who knew him also
knew that it was pointless to phone early.
It was a colleague at the Post. "You got scooped, buddy," he announced
gravely.
"What?" Sandberg snapped.
"The Times just wiped your nose for you."
"Who?"
"Backman."
"What?"
"Go see for yourself."
Sandberg ran to the den of his messy apartment and attacked his desk
computer. He found the story, written by Heath Frick, a hated rival at The
New York Times. The front-page headline read fbi pardon
PROBE SEARCHES FOR JOEL BACKMAN.
Citing a host of unnamed sources, Frick reported that the FBI's cash-forpardon investigation had intensified and was expanding to include specific
individuals who were granted reprieves by former president Arthur Morgan.
Duke Mongo was named as a "person of in

- 222 -

John Grisham

The Broker

terest,' a euphemism often tossed about when the authorities wanted to taint
a person they were unable to formally indict. Mongo, though, was
hospitalized and rumored to be gasping for his last breath.
The probe was now focusing its attention on Joel Backman, whose eleventhhour pardon had shocked and outraged many, according to Frick's gratuitous
analysis. Backman's mysterious disappearance had only fueled the
speculation that he'd bought himself a pardon and fled to avoid the obvious
questions. Old rumors were still out there, Frick reminded everyone, and
various unnamed and supposedly trustworthy sources hinted that the theory
about Backman burying a fortune had not been officially laid to rest.
"What garbage!" Sandberg snarled as he scrolled down the screen. He knew
the facts better than anyone. This crap could not be substantiated. Backman
had not paid for a pardon.
No one even remotely connected with the former president would say a
word. For now, the probe was just a probe, with no formal investigation
under way, but the heavy federal artillery was not far away. An eager US.
attorney was clamoring to get started. He didn't have his grand jury yet, but
his office was sitting on go, waiting on word from the Justice Department.
Frick wrapped it all up with two paragraphs about Backman, historical
rehash that the paper had run before.
"Just filler!" Sandberg fumed.
The President read it too but had a different reaction. He made some notes
and saved them until seven-thirty, when Susan Penn, his interim director of
the CIA, arrived for the morning briefing. The PDB-president's daily
briefing-had historically been handled by the director himself, always in the
Oval Office and normally the first item of the day's business. But Teddy
Maynard and his rotten health had changed the routine, and for the past ten
years the briefings had been done by someone else. Now traditions were
being honored again.
An eight- to ten-page summary of intelligence matters was placed on the
President's desk precisely at 7:00 a.m. After almost two months in office, he
had developed the habit of reading every word of it. He found it fascinating.
His predecessor had once boasted that he read hardly anything-books,
newspapers, magazines. Certainly not

- 223 -

John Grisham

The Broker

legislation, policies, treaties, or daily briefings. He'd often had trouble
reading his own speeches. Things were much different now.
Susan Penn was driven in an armored car from her Georgetown home to the
White House, where she arrived each morning at 7:15. Along the way she
read the daily summary, which was prepared by the CIA. On page four that
morning was an item about Joel Backman. He was attracting the attention of
some very dangerous people, perhaps even Sammy Tin.
The President greeted her warmly and had coffee waiting by the sofa. They
were alone, as always, and they went right to work.
"You've seen The New York Times this morning?" he asked.
"Yes."
"What are the chances that Backman paid for a pardon?"
"Very slim. As I've explained before, he had no idea one was in the works.
He didn't have time to arrange things. Plus, we're quite confident he didn't
have the money."
"Then why was Backman pardoned?'
Susan Penn's loyalty to Teddy Maynard was fast becoming history. Teddy
was gone, and would soon be dead, but she, at the age of forty-four, had a
career left. Perhaps a long one. She and the President were working well
together. He seemed in no hurry to appoint his new director.
"Frankly, Teddy wanted him dead."
"Why? What is your recollection of why Mr. Maynard wanted him dead?"
"It's a long story-"
"No, it's not."
"We don't know everything."
"You know enough. Tell me what you know."
She tossed her copy of the summary on the sofa and took a deep breath.
"Backman and Jacy Hubbard got in way over their heads. They had this
software, JAM, that their clients had stupidly brought to the United States, to
their office, looking for a fortune."
"These clients were the young Pakistanis, right?"
"Yes, and they're all dead."
"Do you know who killed them?"
"No."
"Do you know who killed Jacy Hubbard?"

- 224 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"No."
The President stood with his coffee and walked to his desk. He sat on the
edge and glared across the room at her. "I find it hard to believe that we
don't know these tilings."
"Frankly, so do I. And it's not because we haven't tried. It's one reason
Teddy worked so hard to get Backman pardoned. Sure, he wanted him dead,
just on general principle-the two have a history and Teddy has always
considered Backman to be a traitor. But he also felt strongly that Backman's
murder might tell us something."
"What?"
"Depends on who kills him. If the Russians do it, then we can believe the
satellite system belonged to the Russians. Same for the Chinese. If the
Israelis kill him, then there's a good chance Backman and Hubbard tried to
sell their product to the Saudis. If the Saudis get to him, then we can believe
that Backman double-crossed them. We're almost certain that the Saudis
thought they had a deal."
"But Backman screwed them?"
"Maybe not. We think Hubbard his death changed everything. Backman
packed his bags and ran away to prison. All deals were off."
The President walked back to the coffee table and refilled his cup. He sat
across from her and shook his head. "You expect me to believe that three
young Pakistani hackers tapped into a satellite system so sophisticated that
we didn't even know about it?"
"Yes. They were brilliant, but they also got lucky. Then they not only
hacked their way in, but they wrote some amazing programs that
manipulated it."
"And that's JAM?"
"That's what they called it."
"Has anybody ever seen the software?"
"The Saudis. That's how we know that it not only exists but probably works
as well as advertised."
"Where is the software now?"
"No one knows, except, maybe, Backman himself."
A long pause as the President sipped his lukewarm coffee. Then he rested
his elbows on his knees and said, "What's best for us, Susan? What's in our
best interests?"
She didn't hesitate. "To follow Teddy's plan. Backman will be eliminated.
The software hasn't been seen in six years, so it's probably

- 225 -

John Grisham

The Broker

gone too. The satellite system is up there, but whoever owns it can't play
with it."
Another sip, another pause. The President shook his head and said, "So be
it."
Neal Backman didn't read The New York Times, but he did a quick search
each morning for his father's name. When he ran across Frick's story, he
attached it to an e-mail and sent it with the morning message from Jerry's
Java.
At his desk, he read the story again, and relived the old rumors of how much
money the broker had buried while the firm was collapsing. He'd never
asked his father the question point-blank, because he knew he would not get
a straight answer. Over the years, though, he had come to accept the
common belief that Joel Backman was as broke as most convicted felons.
Then why did he have the nagging feeling that the cash-for- pardon scheme
could be true? Because if anyone buried so deep in a federal prison could
pull off such a miracle, it was his father. But how did he get to Bologna,
Italy? And why? Who was after him?
The questions were piling up, the answers more elusive than ever.
As he sipped his double mocha and stared at his locked office door, he once
again asked himself the great question: How does one go about locating a
certain Swiss banker without the use of phones, faxes, regular mail, or
email?
He'd figure it out. He just needed time.
The Times story was read by Efraim as he rode the train from Florence to
Bologna. A call from Tel Aviv had alerted him, and he found it online.
Amos was four seats behind him, also reading it on his laptop.
Ran* and Shaul would arrive early the next morning, Rafi on a flight from
Milan, Shaul on a train from Rome. The four Italian- speaking members of
the kidon were already in Bologna, hurriedly putting together the two safe
houses they would need for the project.
The preliminary plan was to grab Backman under the darkened porticoes
along Via Fondazza or another suitable side street, preferably

- 226 -

John Grisham

The Broker

early in the morning or after dark. They would sedate him, shove him in a
van, take him to a safe house, and wait for the drugs to wear off. They would
interrogate him, eventually kill him with poison, and drive his body two
hours north to Lake Garda where he'd be fed to the fish.
The plan was rough and fraught with pitfalls, but the green light had been
given. There was no turning back. Now that Backman was getting so much
attention, they had to strike quickly.
The race was also fueled by the fact that the Mossad had good reason to
believe that Sammy Tin was either in Bologna, or somewhere close.
The nearest restaurant to her apartment was a lovely old trattoria called
Nino's. She knew the place well and had known the two sons of old Nino for
many years. She explained her predicament, and when she arrived both of
them were waiting and practically carried her inside. They took her cane, her
bag, her coat, and walked her slowly to their favorite table, which they'd
moved closer to the fireplace. They brought her coffee and water, and
offered anything else she could possibly want. It was mid-afternoon, the
lunch crowd was gone. Francesca and her student had Nino's to themselves.
When Marco arrived a few minutes later, the two brothers greeted him like
family. "La professoressa la sta aspettando," one of them said. The teacher is
waiting.
The fall on the gravel at San Luca and the sprained ankle had transformed
her. Gone was the frosty indifference. Gone was the sadness, at least for
now. She smiled when she saw him, even reached up, grabbed his hand, and
pulled him close so they could blow air kisses at both cheeks, a custom
Marco had been observing for two months but had yet to engage in. This
was, after all, his first female acquaintance in Italy. She waved him to the
chair directly across from her. The brothers swarmed around, taking his coat,
asking him about coffee, anxious to see what an Italian lesson would look
and sound like.
"How's your foot?" Marco asked, and made the mistake of doing so in
English. She put her finger to her lips, shook her head, and said, "Non
inglese, Marco. Solamente Italiano."
He frowned and said, "I was afraid of that."
Her foot was very sore. She had kept it on ice while she was read

- 227 -

John Grisham

The Broker

ing or watching television, and the swelling had gone down. The walk to the
restaurant had been slow, but it was important to move about. At her
mothers insistence, she was using a cane. She found it both useful and
embarrassing.
More coffee and water arrived, and when the brothers were convinced that
things were perfect with their dear friend Francesca and her Canadian
student, they reluctantly retreated to the front of the restaurant.
"How is your mother?" he asked in Italian.
Very well, very tired. She has been sitting with Giovanni for a month now,
and it's taking a toll.
So, thought Marco, Giovanni is now available for discussion. How is he?
Inoperable brain cancer, she said, and it took a few tries to get the translation
right. He has been suffering for almost a year, and the end is quite close. He
is unconscious. It's a pity.
What was his profession, what did he do?
He taught medieval history at the university for many years. They met thereshe was a student, he was her professor. At the time he was married to a
woman he disliked immensely. They had two sons. She and her professor
fell in love and began an affair which lasted almost ten years before he
divorced his wife and married Francesca.
Children? No, she said with sadness. Giovanni had two, he didn't want any
more. She had regrets, many regrets.
The feeling was clear that the marriage had not been a happy one. Wait till
we get around to mine, thought Marco.
It didn't take long. "Tell me all about you," she said. "Speak slowly. I want
the accents to be as good as possible."
"I'm just a Canadian businessman," Marco began in Italian.
"No, really. What's your real name?"
"No."
"What is it?"
"For now it's Marco. I have a long history, Francesca, and I can't talk about
it."
"Very well, do you have children?"
Ah, yes. For a long time he talked about his three children-their names, ages,
occupations, residences, spouses, children. He added some fiction to move
along his narrative, and he pulled off a small mir

- 228 -

John Grisham

The Broker

acle by making the family sound remotely normal. Francesca listened
intently, waiting to pounce on any wayward pronunciation or improperly
conjugated verb. One of Nino's boys brought some chocolates and lingered
long enough to say, with a huge smile, "Park molto bene, signore." You
speak very well, sir.
She began to fidget after an hour and Marco could tell she was
uncomfortable. He finally convinced her to leave, and with great pleasure he
walked her back down Via Minzoni, her right hand tightly fixed to his left
elbow while her left hand worked the cane. They walked as slowly as
possible. She dreaded the return to her apartment, to the deathwatch, the
vigil. He wanted to walk for miles, to cling to her touch, to feel the hand of
someone who needed him.
At her apartment they traded farewell kisses and made arrangements to meet
at Nino's tomorrow, same time, same table.
Jacy Hubbard spent almost twenty-five years in Washington; a quarter of a
century of major-league hell-raising with an astounding string of disposable
women. The last had been Mae Szun, a beauty almost six feet tall with
perfect features, deadly black eyes, and a husky voice that had no trouble at
all getting Jacy out of a bar and into a car. After an hour of rough sex, she
had delivered him to Sammy Tin, who finished him off and left him at his
brother's grave.
When sex was needed to set up a kill, Sammy preferred Mae Szun. She was
a fine MSS agent in her own right, but the legs and face added a dimension
that had proved deadly on at least three occasions. He summoned her to
Bologna, not to seduce but to hold hands with another agent and pretend to
be happily married tourists. Seduction, though, was always a possibility.
Especially with Backman. Poor guy had just spent six years locked up, away
from women.
Mae spotted Marco as he moved in a crowd down Strada Maggiore, headed
in the general direction of Via Fondazza. With amazing agility, she picked
up her pace, pulled out a cell phone, and managed to gain ground on him
while still looking like a bored window shopper.
Then he was gone. He suddenly took a left, turned down a narrow alley, Via
Begatto, and headed north, away from Via Fondazza. By the time she made
the turn, he was out of sight.

- 229 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Spring was finally arriving in Bologna. The last flurries of snow had fallen.
The temperature had approached fifty degrees the day before, and when
Marco stepped outside before dawn he thought about swapping his parka for
one of the other jackets. He took a few steps under the dark portico, let the
temperature sink in, then decided it was still chilly enough to keep the parka.
He'd return in a couple of hours and he could switch then if he wanted. He
crammed his hands in his pockets and took off on the morning hike.
He could think of nothing but the Times story. To see his name plastered
across the front page brought back painful memories, and that was unsettling
enough. But to be accused of bribing the President was actionable at law,
and in another life he would have started the day by shotgunning lawsuits at
everyone involved. He would have owned The New York Times.
But what kept him awake were the questions. What would the attention
mean for him now? Would Luigi snatch him again and run away?
And the most important: Was he in more danger today than yesterday?
He was surviving nicely, tucked away in a lovely city where no

- 230 -

John Grisham

The Broker

one knew his real name. No one recognized his face. No one cared. The
Bolognesi went about their lives without disturbing others.
Not even he recognized himself. Each morning when he finished shaving
and put on his glasses and his brown corduroy driver's cap, he stood at the
mirror and said hello to Marco. Long gone were the fleshy jowls and puffy
dark eyes, the thicker, longer hair. Long gone was the smirk and the
arrogance. Now he was just another quiet man on the street.
Marco was living one day at a time, and the days were piling up. No one
who read the Times story knew where Marco was or what he was doing.
He passed a man in a dark suit and instantly knew he was in trouble. The suit
was out of place. It was a foreign variety, something bought off the rack in a
low-end store, one he'd seen every day in another life. The white shirt was
the same monotonous button-down he'd seen for thirty years in D.C. He'd
once considered floating an office memo banning blue-and-white cotton
button-downs, but Carl Pratt had talked him out of it.
He couldn't tell the color of the tie.
It was not the type of suit you'd ever see under the porticoes along Via
Fondazza before dawn, or at any other time for that matter. He took a few
steps, glanced over his shoulder, and saw that the suit was now following
him. White guy, thirty years old, thick, athletic, the clear winner in a
footrace or a fistfight. So Marco used another strategy. He suddenly stopped,
turned around, and said, "You want something?"
To which someone else said, "Over here, Backman."
Hearing his name stopped him cold. For a second his knees were rubbery,
his shoulders sagged, and he told himself that no, he was not dreaming. In a
flash he thought of all the horrors the word "Backman" brought with it. How
sad to be so terrified of your own name.
There were two of them. The one with the voice arrived on the scene from
the other side of Via Fondazza. He had basically the same suit, but with a
bold white shirt with no buttons on the collar. He was older, shorter, and
much thinner. Mutt and Jeff. Thick 'n' Thin.
"What do you want?" Marco said.
They were slowly reaching for their pockets. "We're with the FBI," the thick
one said. American English, probably Midwest.

- 231 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Sure you are," Marco said.
They went through the required ritual of flashing their badges, but under the
darkness of the portico Marco could read nothing. The dim light over an
apartment door helped a little. "I can't read those," he said.
"Let's take a walk," said the thin one. Boston, Irish. "Walk" came out "wok."
"You guys lost?" Marco said without moving. He didn't want to move, and
his feet were quite heavy anyway.
"We know exactly where we are."
"I doubt that. You got a warrant?'
"We don't need one."
The thick one made the mistake of touching Marco his left elbow, as if he
would help him move along to where they wanted to go. Marco jerked away.
"Don't touch me! You boys get lost. You can't make an arrest here. All you
can do is talk."
"Fine, let's go have a chat," said the thin one.
"I don't have to talk."
"There's a coffee shop a couple of blocks away," said the thick one.
"Great, have some coffee. And a pastry. But leave me alone."
Thick 'n' Thin looked at each other, then glanced around, not sure what to do
next, not sure what plan B entailed.
Marco wasn't moving; not that he felt very safe where he was, but he could
almost see a dark car waiting around the corner.
Where the hell is Luigi right now? he asked himself. Is this part of his
conspiracy?
He'd been discovered, found, unmasked, called by his real name on Via
Fondazza. This would certainly mean another move, another safe house.
The thin one decided to take control of the encounter. "Sure, we can meet
right here. There are a lot of folks back home who'd like to talk to you."
"Maybe that's why I'm over here."
"We're investigating the pardon you bought."
"Then you're wasting a helluva lot of time and money, which would surprise
no one."
"We have some questions about the transaction."

- 232 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"What a stupid investigation," Marco said, spitting the words down at the
thin one. For the first time in many years he felt like the broker again,
berating some haughty bureaucrat or dim-witted congressman. "The FBI
spends good money sending two clowns like you all the way to Bologna,
Italy, to tackle me on a sidewalk so you can ask me questions that no fool in
his right mind would answer. You're a couple of dumbasses, you know that?
Go back home and tell your boss that he's a dumbass too. And while you're
talking to him, tell him he's wasting a lot of time and money if he thinks I
paid for a pardon."
"So you deny-"
"I deny nothing. I admit nothing. I say nothing, except that this is the FBI at
its absolute worst. You boys are in deep water and you can't swim."
Back home they'd slap him around a little, push him, curse him, swap
insults. But on foreign soil they weren't sure how to behave. Their orders
were to find him, to see if he did in fact live where the CIA said he was
living. And if found, they were supposed to jolt him, scare him, hit him with
some questions about wire transfers and offshore accounts.
They had it all mapped out and had rehearsed it many times. But under the
porticoes of Via Fondazza, Mr. Lazzeri was annihilating their plans.
"We're not leaving Bologna until we talk," said the thick one.
"Congratulations, you're in for a long vacation."
"We have our orders, Mr. Backman."
"And I've got mine."
"Just a few questions, please," said the thin one.
"Go see my lawyer," Marco said, and began to walk away, in the direction of
his apartment.
"Who's your lawyer?"
"Carl Pratt."
They weren't moving, weren't following, and Marco picked up his pace. He
crossed the street, glanced quickly at his safe house, but didn't slow down. If
they wanted to follow, they waited too long. By the time he darted onto Via
del Piombo, he knew they could never find him. These were his streets now,
his alleys, his darkened doorways to shops that wouldn't open for three more
hours.
