
THE

PROBLEM

OF

INDUCTION

107

following irony. Newtonian physics is scientific because it allowed us to
falsify it, as we know that it is wrong, while astrology is not because it
does not offer conditions under which we could reject it. Astrology
cannot be disproved, owing to the auxiliary hypotheses that come into
play. Such point lies at the basis of the demarcation between science and
nonsense (called "the problem of demarcation").
More practically to me, Popper had many problems with statistics
and statisticians. He refused to blindly accept the notion that knowledge
can always increase with incremental information - which is the
foundation of statistical inference. It may in some instances, but we do
not know which ones. Many insightful people, such as John Maynard
Keynes, independently reached the same conclusions. Sir Karl's
detractors believe that favorably repeating the same experiment again
and again should lead to an increased comfort with the notion that "it
works". I came to understand Popper's position better once I saw the
first rare event ravaging a trading room. Sir Karl feared that some type
of knowledge did not increase with information - but which type we
could not ascertain. The reason I feel that he is important for us traders
is because to him the matter of knowledge and discovery is not so much
in dealing with what we know, as in dealing with what we do not know.
His famous quote:
These are men with bold ideas, but highly critical of their own ideas;
they try to find whether their ideas are right by trying first to find
whether they are not perhaps wrong. They work with bold
conjectures and severe attempts at refuting their own conjectures.
"These" are scientists. But they could be anything.
Putting the master in context, Popper was rebelling against the growth
of science. Popper intellectually came to the world with the dramatic
shifts in philosophy as attempts were made to shift it from the verbal and
rhetorical to the scientific and rigorous, as we saw with the presentation
of the Vienna Circle in Chapter 4. These people were sometimes called
the logical positivists, after the movement called positivism pioneered in
France in the nineteenth century by Auguste Comte, where positivism
meant scientification of things (literally everything under the sun). It was
the equivalent of bringing the industrial revolution into the soft sciences.

108

SOLON'S

WARNING

Without dwelling on positivism, I have to note that Popper is the antidote
to positivism. To him, verification is not possible. Verificationism is
more dangerous than anything else. Taken to the extreme, Popper's ideas
appear naive and primitive - but they work. Note that his detractors call
him a naive falsificationist.
I am an exceedingly naive falsificationist. Why? Because I can survive
being one. My extreme and obsessive Popperism is carried out as
follows. I speculate in all of my activities on theories that represent some
vision of the world, but with the following stipulation: no rare event
should harm me. In fact, I would like all conceivable rare events to help
me. My idea of science diverges with that of the people around me
walking around calling themselves scientists. Science is mere
speculation, mere formulation of conjecture.

open

society

Popper's falsificationism is intimately connected to the notion of an
open society. An open society is one in which no permanent truth is held
to exist; this would allow counterideas to emerge. Karl Popper shared
ideas with his friend, the low-key economist Von Hayek who endorsed
capitalism as a state in which prices can disseminate information that
bureaucratic socialism would choke. Both notions of falsificationism
and open society are, counterintuitively, connected to those of a
rigorous method for handling randomness in my day job as a trader.
Clearly, an open mind is a necessity when dealing with randomness.
Popper believed'that any idea of Utopia is necessarily closed in the fact
that it chokes its own refutations. The simple notion of a good model for
society that cannot be left open for falsification is totalitarian. I learned
from Popper, in addition to the difference between an open and a closed
society, that between an open and a closed mind.

n o b o d y is p e r f e c t

I have some sobering information about Popper the man. Witnesses of
his private life find him rather un-Popperian. The philosopher and

THE

PROBLEM

OF

INDUCTION

109

Oxford don Brian Magee6 who befriended him for close to three
decades depicts him as unworldly (except in his youth) and narrowly
focused on his work. He spent the last 50 years of his long career
(Popper lived 92 years) closed to the outside world, insulated from
outside distractions and stimulation. Popper also engaged in giving
people "firm sounding advice about their career or their private life,
though he had little understanding of either. All this, of course, was in
direct contravention of his professed (and indeed genuine) beliefs, and
practices, in philosophy."
He was not much better in his youth. Members of the Vienna Circle
tried to avoid him, not because of his divergent ideas, but because he
Was a social problem. "He was brilliant, but self-focused, both insecure
and arrogant, irascible and self-righteous. He was a terrible listener and
bent on winning arguments at all costs. He had no understanding of
group dynamics and no ability to negotiate them". 7
I will refrain from commonplace discourse about the divorce between
those who have ideas and those who carry them in practice, except to
bring out the interesting genetics problem; we like to emit logical and
rational ideas but we do not necessarily enjoy this execution. Strange as
it sounds, this point has only been discovered very recently (we will see
that we are not genetically fit to be rational and act rationally; we are
merely fit for the maximum probability of transmitting our genes in
some given unsophisticated environment). Also strange as it sounds,
George Soros, obsessively self-critical, seems to be more Popperian than
Popper in his professional behavior.

pascal's

wager

I conclude with the exposition of my own method of dealing with the
problem of induction. The philosopher Pascal proclaimed that the
optimal strategy for humans is to believe in the existence of God. For
if God exists, then the believer would be rewarded. If he does not
exist, the believer would have nothing to lose. Accordingly, we need to
accept the asymmetry in knowledge; there are situations in which
using statistics and econometrics can be useful. But I do not want my
life to depend on it.

110

SOLON'S

WARNING

Like Pascal, I will therefore state the following argument. If the
science of statistics can benefit me in anything, I will use it. If it poses a
threat, then I will not. I want to take the best of what thej?ast can give
me without its dangers. Accordingly, I will use statistics and inductive
methods to make aggressive bets, but I will not use them to manage my
risks and exposure. Surprisingly, all the surviving traders I know seem to
have done the same. They trade on ideas based on some observation
(that includes past history) but, like the Popperian scientists, they make
sure that the costs of being wrong are limited (and their probability is
not derived from past data). Unlike Carlos and John, they know before
getting involved in the trading strategy which events would prove their
conjecture wrong and allow for it (recall that Carlos and John used past
history both to make their bets and measure their risk). They would then
terminate their trade. This is called a stop loss, a predetermined exit
point, a protection from the black swan. I find it rarely practiced.

Thank You Solon
Finally, I have to confess that upon finishing my writing of Part I that
writing about the genius of Solon's insight has carried an extreme effect
on both my thinking and my private life. The composition of Part I
made me even more confident in my withdrawal from the media and my
distancing myself from other members of the business community,
mostly other investors and traders for whom I am developing more and
more contempt. I am currently enjoying a thrill of the classics I have not
felt since childhood. My mind, by escaping the news pollution, allowed
me to evade the bull market that prevailed over the past 15 years (and
professionally benefit from its demise). I am now thinking of the next
step: to recreate a low-information, more deterministic ancient time, say
in the nineteenth century, all the while benefiting from some of the
technical gains (such as the Monte Carlo engine), all of the medical
breakthroughs and all the gains of social justice of our age. I would then
have the best of everything. This is called evolution.

PART II
'h

:onkeys on

typewriter:

survivorship and

OTHE:

f one puts an infinite number of monkeys in front of (strongly built)
typewriters, and lets them clap away, there is a certainty that one of
them would come out with an exact version of the Iliad. Upon
examination, this may be less interesting a concept than it appears at
first: such probability is very low. But let us carry the reasoning one step
beyond. Now that we have found that hero among monkeys, would any
reader invest his life's savings on a bet that the monkey would write the
Odyssey next?

I

In this story, it is the second step that is interesting. How much can
past performance (here the typing of the Iliad) be relevant in forecasting
future performance? The same applies to any decision based on past
performance, merely relying on the attributes of the past time series.
Think about the monkey showing up at your door with his impressive
past performance. Hey, he wrote the Iliad. Quickly, sign him up for the
sequel.
The major problem with inference in general is that those whose
profession is to derive conclusions from data often fall into the trap
faster and more confidently than others. The more data we have, the
more likely we are to drown in it. For common wisdom among people
with a budding knowledge of probability laws is to base their decisionmaking on the following principle: it is very unlikely for someone to

114

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

perform considerably well in a consistent fashion without his doing
something right. Track records therefore become preeminent. They call
on the rule of the likelihood of such a successful run and tell themselves
that if someone performed better than the rest in the past then there is a
great chance of him performing better than the crowd in the future and a very great one at that. But, as usual, beware the middlebrow: a
small knowledge of probability can lead to worse results than no
knowledge at all.

it depends o n t h e number o f

monkeys

I do not deny that if someone performed better than the crowd in the
past, there is a presumption of his ability to do better in the future. But
the presumption might be weak, very weak, to the point of being useless
in decision making. Why? Because it all depends on two factors: the
randomness content of his profession and the number of monkeys in
operation.
The initial sample size matters greatly. If there are five monkeys in the
game, I would be rather impressed with the Iliad writer, to the point of
suspecting him to be a reincarnation of the ancient poet. If there are a
billion to the power one billion monkeys I would be less impressed - as a
matter of fact I would be surprised if one of them did not get some well
known (but unspecified) piece of work, just by luck (perhaps
Casanova's Memoirs of My Life). One monkey would even be expected
to provide us with former Vice President A1 Gore's Earth in the Balance,
perhaps stripped of the platitudes.
This problem enters the business world more viciously than other
walks of life, owing to the high dependence on randomness (we have
already belabored the contrast between randomness-dependent business
with dentistry). The greater the number of businessmen, the greater the
likelihood of one of them performing in a stellar manner just by luck. I.
have rarely seen anyone count the monkeys. In the same vein, few count
the investors in the market in order to calculate, instead of the
probability of success, the conditional probability of successful runs
given the number of investors in operation over a given market history.

115 MONKEYS ON T Y P E W R I T E R S

vicious r e a l

life

There are other aspects to the monkeys problem; in real life the other
monkeys are not countable, let alone visible. They are hidden away, as
one sees only the winners - it is natural for those who failed to vanish
completely. Accordingly, one sees the survivors, and only the survivors,
which imparts such a mistaken perception of the odds. We do not
respond to probability, but to society's assessment of it. As we saw with
Nero Tulip, even people with training in probability respond
unintelligently to social pressure.

this

section

Part I described situations where people do not understand the rare
event, and do not seem to accept either the possibility of its occurrence
or the dire consequences of such occurrence. It also set out my own
ideas, those that do not seem to have been explored in the literature. But
a book on randomness is not complete without a presentation of what
possible biases one might have aside from the deformations caused by
the rare event. The business of Part II is more pedestrian; I will rapidly
provide a synthesis of the biases of randomness as discussed in the now
abundant literature on the subject.
These biases can be outlined as follows: (a) the survivorship biases
(a.k.a. monkeys on a typewriter), arising from the fact that we see only
winners and get a distorted view of the odds (Chapters 8 and 9, Too
Many Millionaires and Fry an Egg), (b) the fact that luck is most
frequently the reason for extreme success (Chapter 10, Loser Takes All),
and (c) the biological handicap of our inability to understand
probability (Chapter 11, Randomness and Our Brain).

Three illustrations of the survivorship bias. Why very few
people should live on Park Avenue. The millionaire next door
has very flimsy clothes. An overcrowding of experts.

How To Stop the Sting of Failure
somewhat

happy

arc lives on Park Avenue in New York City with his wife Janet
and their three children. He makes $500,000 a year, give or take
a boom or a recession - he does not believe that the recent spurt in
prosperity is here to last and has not mentally adjusted yet to his recent
abrupt rise in income. A rotund man in his late forties, with spongy
features that make him look ten years older than his age, he leads the
seemingly comfortable (but heckled) life of a New York city lawyer. But
he is on the quiet side of Manhattan residents. Marc is clearly not the
man one would expect to go bar-hopping or attend late night Tribecca
and Soho parties. He and his wife have a country house and a rose
garden and tend to be concerned, like many people of their age,

M

118

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

mentality, and condition, with (in the following order) material
comfort, health, and status. Weekdays, he does not come home until
at least 9.30 p.m. and, at times, he can be found in the office at close to
midnight. By the end of the week, Marc is so fatigued that he falls asleep
during their three-hour drive to "the house"; and Marc spends most of
Saturday lying in bed recovering and healing.
Marc grew up in a small town in the midwest, the son of a quiet tax
accountant who worked with sharp yellow pencils. His obsession with
sharpness was so strong that he carried a sharpener in his pocket at all
times. Marc exhibited very early signs of intelligence. He did extremely
well in high school. He attended Harvard College, then Yale Law
School. Not bad, one would say. Later his career took him to corporate
law, where he started working on large cases for a prestigious New
York law firm, with barely enough hours left for him to brush his teeth.
This is not too much an exaggeration, for he ate almost all of his
dinners in the office, accumulating body fat and Brownie points
towards his partnership. He later became a partner within the usual
seven years, but not without the usual human costs. His first wife
(whom he met in college) left him, as she was tired of an absentee
lawyer husband and weary of the deterioration in his conversation but, ironically, she ended up moving in with and later marrying another
New York lawyer, probably with a no-less flat conversation, but who
made her happier.

t o o

much

work

Marc's body became progressively flabbier, and his tailored suits needed
periodic visits to the tailor, in spite of his occasional crash diets. After he
got over the depression of the abandonment, he started dating Janet, his
paralegal, and promptly married her. They had three children in quick
succession, bought the Park Avenue apartment, and the country house.
Janet's immediate acquaintance is composed of the other parents of
the Manhattan private school attended by their children, and their
neighbors at the co-operative apartment building where they live. From
a materialistic standpoint, they come at the low end of such a set,
perhaps even at the exact bottom. They would be the poorest of these

TOO

MANY

MILLIONAIRES

NEXT

DOOR

119

circles, as their co-op is inhabited by extremely successful corporate
executives, Wall Street traders, and high-flying entrepreneurs. Their
children's private school harbors the second set of children of corporate
raiders, from their trophy wives - perhaps even the third set, if one takes
into account the age discrepancy and the model-like features of the other
mothers. By comparison, Marc's wife Janet, like him, presents a homely
country-home-with-a-rose-garden type of appearance.

you're a

failure

Marc's strategy of staying in Manhattan may be rational, as his
demanding work hours would make it impossible for him to commute.
But the costs on his wife Janet are monstrous. Why? Because of their
relative nonsuccess - as geographically defined by their Park Avenue
neighborhood. Every month or so, Janet has a crisis, giving in to the
strains and humiliations of being snubbed by some other mother at the
school where she picks up the children, or another woman with larger
diamonds by the elevator of the co-op where they live in the smallest type
of apartments (the G line). Why isn't her husband so successful? Isn't he
smart and hard working? Didn't he get close to 1600 at the SAT? Why is
this Ronald Something whose wife never even nods to Janet, worth
hundred of millions when her husband went to Harvard and Yale and
has such a high I.Q., and has hardly any substantial savings?
We will not get too involved in the Chekovian dilemmas in the
private lives of Marc and Janet, but their case provides a very common
illustration of the emotional effect of survivorship bias. Janet feels that
her husband is a failure, by comparison, but she is mis-computing the
probabilities in a gross manner - she is using the wrong distribution to
derive a rank. As compared to the general U.S. population, Marc has
done very well, better than 99.5% of his compatriots. As compared to
his high-school friends, he did extremely well, a fact that he could have
verified had he had time to attend the periodic reunions, and he would
come at the top. As compared to the other people at Harvard, he did
better than 90% of them (financially, of course). As compared to his law
school comrades at Yale, he did better than 60% of them. But as
compared to his co-op neighbors, he is at the bottom! Why? Because he

120

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

chose to live among the people who have been successful, in an area that
excludes failure. In other words, those who have failed do not show up
in the sample at all, thus making him look as if he were not doing well at
all. By living on Park Avenue, one does not have exposure to the losers,
one only sees the winners. As we are cut to live in very small communities, it is difficult to assess our situation outside of the narrowly
defined geographic confines of our habitat. In the case of Marc and
Janet, this leads to considerable emotional distress; here we have a
woman who married an extremely successful man but all she can see is
comparative failure, for she cannot emotionally compare him to a
sample that would do him justice.
Someone would rationally say to Janet: "go read this book, Fooled by
Randomness by one mathematical trader on the deformations of chance
in life; it would give you a statistical sense of perspective and would
accordingly make you feel better". As an author, I would like to offer a
panacea for $27.95, but I would rather say that in my best hopes it may
provide an hour or so of solace. Janet may need something more drastic
for relief. I have repeated that becoming more rational, or not feeling
emotions of social slights is not part of the human race, at least not with
our current DNA code. There is no solace to be found from reasoning as a trader I have learned something about these unfruitful efforts to
reason against the grain. I would advise Janet to move out, and go live in
some blue-collar neighborhood where they would feel less humiliated by
their neighbors and rise in the pecking order beyond their probability of
success. They could use the deformation in the opposite direction. If
Janet cares about status, then I would even recommend some of these
large housing blocks.

Double Survivorship Biases
more

experts

I recently read a bestseller called The Millionaire Next Door, an
extremely misleading (but almost enjoyable) book by two "experts", in

TOO

MANY

MILLIONAIRES

NEXT

DOOR

121

which the authors try to infer some attributes that are common to rich
people. They examined a collection of currently wealthy people and
found out that these are unlikely to lead lavish lives. They call such
people the accumulators; persons ready to postpone consumption in
order to amass funds. Most of the appeal of the book comes from the
simple but counterintuitive fact that these are less likely to look like very
rich people - it clearly costs money to look and behave rich, not to count
the time demands of spending money. Leading prosperous lives is time
consuming; shopping for trendy clothes, becoming conversant in
Bordeaux wines, getting to know the expensive restaurants. All these
activities can put high demands on one's time and divert the subject
from what should be the real preoccupation, namely the accumulation
of nominal (and paper) wealth. The moral of the book is that the
wealthiest are to be found among those less suspected to be wealthy. On
the other hand, those who act and look wealthy subject their net worth
to such a drain that they inflict considerable and irreversible damage to
their brokerage account.
I will set aside the point that I see no special heroism in accumulating
money, particularly if, in addition, the person is foolish enough to not
even try to derive any tangible benefit from the wealth (aside from the
pleasure of regularly counting the beans). I have no large desire to
sacrifice much of my personal habits, intellectual pleasures, and
personal standards in order to become a billionaire like Warren Buffett,
and I certainly do not see the point of becoming one if I were to adopt
Spartan (even miserly) habits and live in my starter house. Something
about the praise lavished upon him for living in austerity while being so
rich escapes me; if austerity is the end, he should become a monk or a
social worker - we should remember that becoming rich is a purely
selfish act, not a social one. The virtue of capitalism is that society can
take advantage of people's greed rather than their benevolence, but
there is no need to, in addition, extol such greed as a moral (or
intellectual) accomplishment (the reader can easily see that, aside from
very few exceptions like George Soros, I am not impressed by people
with money). Becoming rich is not directly a moral achievement, but
that is not where the severe flaw in the book lies.
As we said, the heroes of The Millionaire Next Door are the
accumulators, people who defer spending in order to invest. It is
