
Chapter 2: Understanding the Swing Trader’s Two Main Strategies
day after. Some companies’ shares stay undervalued for weeks, months,
or even years. That’s why long-term investors rely so heavily on fundamental analysis — they can afford to be patient.
 Technical analysis, because it relies more on charts and indicators,
involves less subjectivity than fundamental analysis. A fundamental
analyst can have all relevant information and still come to the wrong
conclusion.
Despite the major advantages of technical analysis, my goal is to convince
you to use both strategies in your swing trading plan — you tend to get the
best investment results when a security’s fundamentals line up perfectly with
the technicals. Neither fundamental analysis nor technical analysis is perfect,
and neither is superior to the other. In fact, many top swing traders use fundamental analysis to trade short term. Why? Because as a swing trader, you
need to understand what drives price movements in the securities you trade.
Fundamental analysis helps you understand how news impacts the market
and the shares you’re trading. After all, what drives oil stocks higher is quite
different from what drives technology stocks higher. Moves out of such securities can be powerful and longer lasting than securities that pop or fall due
solely to technical considerations.
You can integrate technical analysis and fundamental analysis without much
difficulty, but don’t integrate them for the sake of integration. If you feel more
comfortable with one type of analysis (likely technical analysis), then use that
method. If you’re attracted to using fundamental analysis to the exclusion of
technical analysis, then excel at it. You can be a successful swing trader by
using one type of analysis alone — as long as you use a strict risk management
system (see Chapter 10).

Scope approach: Top down or bottom up?
Regardless of which approach you take, you should also think about whether
you want to be a top-down swing trader or a bottom-up swing trader (I don’t
recommend using both approaches in this case). A top-down trader finds
securities by beginning at a macro level and drilling down to an industry and
then to a particular company. A bottom-up trader finds securities by beginning at the bottom (that is, with individual companies) and then selecting the
company that has the best industry group and macro-level fundamentals.
Recognizing that you can use technical analysis or fundamental analysis
with the top-down or bottom-up approach is important. For example, you
can select undervalued securities using fundamental screens (a bottom-up
approach, as explained in Chapter 8) and then vet those securities for strong
or weak chart patterns. Alternatively, you can identify strong or weak stocks
using industry chart patterns (a top-down approach, covered in Chapter 8)
and then investigate those securities to find the candidates that are most compelling to buy or short.

27

28

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things

Styles of trading: Discretionary
versus mechanical
Discretionary swing traders evaluate potential trades based on their trading
plan. They use either fundamental or technical analysis to determine whether
each trade meets their requirements. Although the discretionary trader’s
rules are written down, he or she may pass on or take trades based on experience or gut. The discretionary swing trader doesn’t follow a program such
as, “If A, then B.” Instead, he or she synthesizes all available info, weighs
items, and then makes a call.
Mechanical swing traders are much different. They map out trading strategies that a computer can execute. The mechanical system can be based on
technical inputs (like price, indicators, and so on) or fundamental ones (such
as earnings surprises, sales growth rates, and other corporate events). The
strategies are programmed into a computer software program that tests
them on historical market data. The mechanical swing trader analyzes those
results to determine whether the strategy is worth pursuing — if it produces
higher profits than the overall market, for example.
As you may’ve guessed, the two approaches both have advantages and
disadvantages:
 Discretionary trading allows for a fresh look at each situation and the
ability to pass on trades when external data that may not be easily captured in a computer program indicates decreased chances of success.
However, because the discretionary trader must make a decision on
each buy or sell, he or she is more prone to falling in love with trades,
becoming emotionally attached, or failing to follow the trading plan.
 Mechanical trading largely takes the human out of the equation. A computer program, barring some kind of catastrophe, executes the trades
as programmed. The only input on the swing trader’s part is the amount
of capital devoted to each position, the entry signals, and the exit rules.
After those factors are determined, the mechanical trader can step back
and watch the computer work its magic. But mechanical trading systems
also have their drawbacks. Can a system be designed to capture all contingencies or possibilities that may arise? Of course not. And when losses
occur, the mechanical swing trader must determine whether the setback
is a temporary part of the system or whether it represents a fundamental
failure of the strategy.
This text is geared toward discretionary traders. Although hard data on the
proportion of swing traders who are discretionary or mechanical is hard to
come by, my experience and anecdotal evidence point to discretionary trading as the more common approach. After all, some things, such as recognizing
chart patterns, can’t be easily programmed into a computer. And most swing
traders feel more in control when they evaluate each trade instead of relying
on a computer to execute transactions.

Chapter 2: Understanding the Swing Trader’s Two Main Strategies

Wrapping Your Mind around
Technical Theory
Technical analysis is the art of reading a security price chart with volume and
determining the security’s likely direction based on the strength of buyers
and sellers. Technical analysis can range from the simple (interpreting a chart
pattern) to the complex (performing intermarket analysis and interpreting
indicators based on differential equations). Basic chart interpretation is an
important skill, but swing traders typically rely on indicators and intermarket
analysis.
The technical analyst is principally concerned with the following questions:
 Is this security in a bull or bear market in the short and long term?
 Is the security trending or in a trading range?
 Who’s in control of the market — buyers or sellers?
 Is the strength of the buyers/sellers increasing or waning?
 What price point indicates a reversal or failure?
 What signals the time to enter?
 What signals the time to exit?

Understanding how and why
technical analysis works
So why does technical analysis work? How can examining past price history
possibly provide insight into future price movements?
 Market participants, acting alone, react similarly to major news.
Technical analysis is partly based on the psychology of crowds. Even
though all investors may not be congregated in a single room, they’re
all human. Hence, they’re susceptible to the same emotions all humans
share: greed, fear, hope, and the like. Security prices would be very difficult to analyze if everyone trading were Spock-like — perfectly logical
with no emotions getting in the way.
 Market participants have memory. Traders, investors, and other
market participants have reference points when they buy or sell securities. The price they pay when they buy a security affects when they’re
likely to sell that security (even though it should have no bearing on
that decision). They remember their purchase price and, naturally, want
to either make a profit or break even. If the security price swoons after

29

30

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
they purchase shares, they’re likely to feel pain. And if the price recovers to their original purchase price, many will be happy to sell to break
even. What these traders and investors often don’t realize is that hundreds, if not thousands, of others are experiencing these same emotions.
This fact is why certain price levels are more significant than others.
Securities tend to find support (a level at which security prices stop falling and begin to rise) and resistance (a level at which security prices
stop rising and begin to fall) at round numbers.
I’m amazed at how often traders place buy limit or sell limit orders at
round price figures. Don’t they realize that many other traders may be
doing the exact same thing, and that their actions may prevent the price
from ever reaching that level? Quite simply, a sell limit of $100 isn’t too
bright, because other traders or investors likely placed orders at that
same round number. And their orders may prevent yours from ever getting executed (the overwhelming supply of shares at that level will force
the stock to retreat before reaching $100). On the other hand, a sell limit
of $98.71 is smart, because it’s unlikely that other traders placed an
order at that specific price, and you have a much better chance of your
order getting executed.
 Smart investors’ actions show up on the chart. Smart money often
refers to investment money made by institutional investors who buy
or sell securities based on sound, reasoned analysis. These investors
have the resources to call the suppliers and customers of firms they
invest in and can determine with a high degree of confidence whether a
company’s earnings are on- or off-track. Smart money also constitutes
insiders at a firm who have an information advantage over other market
participants and may trade on that information.
Dumb money, on the other hand, refers to investment money made by
amateurs who buy or sell securities for the thrill of investment. Dumb
money can include retirement plans or corporate plans that divest
securities that no longer meet the plans’ criteria. This selling pressure
pushes prices down for no good reason. Dumb money can also include
institutional investors who buy or sell stocks because they fall in love
with their investments. Believe it or not, institutional investors are subject to the same whims and emotional swings experienced by all traders.
 Folks with knowledge of a company’s prospects can only take advantage of that knowledge by trading on the open market. Their trading
shows up on the ticker tape (it’s the law). So if you know that Microsoft
is going to have a blowout quarter (by legal means, of course, and not
through insider knowledge), you can’t profit from that knowledge except
by buying shares. And your buying is going to show up as volume on a
price chart. Others who may not know about the blowout quarter can,
nonetheless, infer that something is up when they see Microsoft’s shares
rising on heavy volume.

Chapter 2: Understanding the Swing Trader’s Two Main Strategies

Sizing up the technical advantages
and disadvantages
Because the price chart shows all available public and private information,
technical analysis can really shine bright when prices diverge from their fundamentals. Opportunity is greatest when you’re in the minority, but right. If
everyone, including you, expects shares of Coca-Cola to do well, you won’t
make much money because everybody else has already come to the same
conclusion as you. However, if you think something is terribly wrong at a company and everyone else is on the other side, you stand to make a large profit if
you’re right and the crowd has to correct its collective opinion by selling stock.
For example, shares of Enron were tumbling in late 2000 despite what
appeared to be stellar fundamentals. Price drops were met by upgrades and
buy recommendations by Wall Street analysts who, using all available public
data, determined that shares represented a major value.
But prices kept falling. A swing trader using technical analysis would conclude that something wasn’t right. If everything was peachy, why were shares
falling? Something must be up. And sure enough, something was up — something mischievous indeed. Investors using fundamental analysis, on the other
hand, are often alerted of underlying cracks in a company’s financial position
after it’s too late.
Despite the advantage technical analysis has of signaling information that you
may not know, this strategy isn’t a cure-all for your trading woes. Reading a
chart involves a degree of interpretation, and sometimes whipsaws or indications can give you one signal, only to reverse a short while later. Moreover,
a major event can occur that no one knows about. For these reasons, you’ll
never know with certainty that a particular chart pattern or indicator will yield
a profitable signal. Swing traders (indeed, all traders) have to learn to live with
this uncertainty, which also exists in fundamental analysis (or any analysis
technique, for that matter). Some swing traders are actually wrong the majority of the time, but still extremely successful. Why? Because the many losers
are small, whereas the few winners are huge.
Some of the major advantages of technical analysis are that it
 Applies consistently across time and markets
 Can be used on a single security in a short period of time
 Incorporates the psychology of the crowd, whether rational or irrational
 Allows for support and resistance levels for exits and entries
 Involves low levels of subjectivity in the analysis of charts

31

32

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things

Is technical analysis valid?
Despite being viewed by portfolio managers as useful in some respect, charting has
largely been rejected in the world of academia.
Professors generally believe that chart reading
is a lot of smoke and mirrors and hocus pocus.
Academics and some portfolio managers hold
the belief that Peter Lynch, the legendary Fidelity
mutual fund manager, succinctly expressed:
“You can’t see the future through a rearview
mirror.” I couldn’t agree more. I wouldn’t drive
my car looking in the rearview mirror — unless,
of course, I had the car in reverse.
Burton Malkiel, professor of economics at
Princeton University, is a proponent of the
notion that investors can’t outperform the
market using technical analysis (in fairness, he
also feels that fundamental analysis won’t help
you outperform the market either). So are Lynch
and Malkiel correct in their conclusions against
technical analysis? Is technical analysis a fool’s
game? I think not. Of course, my voice doesn’t
carry the same weight as Lynch’s or Malkiel’s,
so I’ll consult my own expert, who comes to a
very different conclusion.
Professor Jeremy Siegel of the Wharton School
of Business finds that chart reading and technical analysis can assist in the timing of buying

and selling securities. Others have come to
similar conclusions: Technical indicators can
be shown to add value to trading.
Many successful mutual fund and hedge fund
managers use charts to profit on a short-term
and long-term basis. And as a portfolio manager
overseeing assets of exceeding $1 billion, I can
tell you firsthand that chart reading can and does
work. (This in no way means that other techniques — such as fundamental analysis, which I
cover in Part III of this book — don’t work.)
So just why does technical analysis work?
Because it
 Helps you identify areas of support and
resistance: When breached, these areas
often signal important changes in security prices. The areas can be horizontal (to
identify stationary levels of support or resistance), rising, or falling.
 Highlights the commitment of traders
through volume: The higher the volume, the
more committed bulls or bears are to the
position in question. Light volume indicates
indifference or agreement on a security’s
value. Heavy volume can signal the beginning or end of a trend.

But technical analysis also has some glaring weaknesses. For example, it
 Ignores a security’s fundamentals
 Allows traders to be on the side of irrationality
 Assumes the market is always right
 Fails to incorporate major corporate events (earnings, acquisitions, and
so on)

Chapter 2: Understanding the Swing Trader’s Two Main Strategies

The two main aspects of technical analysis
This book covers the two major aspects of technical analysis: charting and
using technical indicators. Reading charts and using indicators are of equal
importance to the swing trader who uses technical analysis, so you should be
adept at both. (Keep in mind that technical indicators are largely unhelpful if
you don’t understand basic chart pattern interpretation.)

Reading charts
Charting, which I cover in Chapter 4, is the analysis of securities based on
patterns, which security prices trace, as well as volume. The appeal of stock
charts for many is their ease of use. Even fundamentals-based investors who
don’t believe in or use technical analysis bring up a stock chart before buying
a new position just to see where the security has been recently. Managers
with no background in charting whatsoever still use it to some extent. As a
swing trader, you can use dozens of chart types, including line charts, bar
charts, and candlestick charts.
In this book, I break the discussion of patterns in two, though I cover both
topics in the same chapter:
 Popular chart patterns: The patterns you’ll find most useful in your
swing trading, like head-and-shoulders and cup-and-handle formations,
may show up whether you’re using a line, bar, or candlestick chart.
 Candlestick-specific chart patterns: These chart patterns, like morning
and evening stars and bearish engulfing patterns, are easily detected
when using candlestick charts

Using technical indicators
A technical indicator is like a compass: It helps steer you in the right direction. The act of using technical indicators, which I cover in Chapter 5, is a
two-step process:
1. Apply technical indicators to security prices.
Technical indicators are mathematical formulas that, when applied to
security prices, clearly flash either buy or sell signals. They largely
remove subjectivity from the analysis of chart patterns. Technical indicators primarily fall into two categories: trending and non-trending.
• Trending indicators are designed to look for significant changes
in direction and allow you to ride through noise (unimportant
changes in security prices) that may happen over the course of
a few days. They measure the strength of these trends and signal
reversals, so you should apply trending indicators to securities
that are consistently rising or falling.

33

34

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
• Non-trending indicators measure the strength of buyers and sellers
where changes in direction occur frequently. They often standardize recent price history — say, by establishing the high and low
prices during the period — and measure the security’s relative
position within that standardized range. Non-trending indicators
also generate overbought and oversold signals. Overbought simply
means the security has risen too high and is due for a course correction, and oversold means the security has fallen too low and is
due for a reversal. You should apply non-trending indicators to
securities that oscillate between two price levels, when the market
participants largely agree on the security’s value and the swings
between the two price extremes.
Not all indicators tell you whether a security is in trending mode or nontrending mode, but relying on the ones that do is useful. Not all indicators are appropriate at a single point in time. Technical indicators are
subject to user inputs. These questions partly explain why no indicator
is always going to give the correct signal. Many swing traders seek out
the Holy Grail indicator or system that yields the correct signals every
time, but no such indicator exists. You must rely on your understanding
of the security in question and apply indicators judiciously.
2. Analyze the strength of the security relative to the overall market.
Relative strength analysis involves comparing the performance of a security to an overall market or industry by looking for divergences between
the price of the security and the overall market, which you can see after
applying technical indicators. A divergence occurs when a security’s
price moves to new highs or new lows, and the technical indicator
doesn’t confirm that strength or weakness. The indicator is signaling
that the security price isn’t telling the whole story. Divergences are
powerful signals because they communicate information contrary to the
perceived trend.

Appreciating the Value of the Big
Picture: Fundamental Theory
If you start to sweat when you hear the phrase fundamental analysis and get
anxious when you consider all the tough work that goes into analyzing a company, don’t worry. I follow the K.I.S.S. (Keep It Simple, Stupid) approach when
it comes to fundamental analysis.

Chapter 2: Understanding the Swing Trader’s Two Main Strategies
The material on fundamental analysis that I present in this book won’t prepare you for your MBA. Rather, it will guide you through the key parts of a
firm’s fundamentals that have the biggest impact on share prices.
The fundamental analyst is constantly asking the following questions:
 What is this company’s value relative to its peers?
 What is this company’s growth rate?
 What are this company’s returns on capital and debt levels?
When you find the answers to these questions, you begin to get an idea of
what price the company’s shares should reasonably trade at. You’re not
going to arrive at the intrinsic values that Wall Street analysts slave over
calculating (intrinsic value refers to the true value of a company and is distinguished from market value, which is the value the market is currently assigning to the firm). But you don’t need to know the value of the shares you trade
down to the cent. If shares are valued at $15, and you know shares should be
between $25 and $32, do you really need to spend dozens of hours calculating the exact figure? Nope.

Understanding how and why
fundamental analysis works
Understanding how fundamental analysis works is a bit easier than understanding how technical analysis works. Here’s why this strategy is effective:
 The higher the earnings of a company, the more others will pay for
a piece of that company. If you own a condo that produces $1,000 in
income each month, how much would you value that cash flow? Different
people would value the condo differently, depending on their risk tolerance levels and the certainty of that cash flow continuing. But obviously, if
the condo were producing income of $2,000 per month, it would be worth
double what it was worth when it was producing $1,000 per month.
Fundamental analysis isn’t that different, except that instead of producing rental income of $1,000 per month, companies produce earnings and
report them quarterly. Of course, shareholders don’t usually receive a
firm’s entire income because much of it is reinvested in the business.
But the point is, fundamental analysis works because it measures a company’s value based on its expected future earnings.
