
7

T HE S T O C K M A R K ET IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS P E CTIVE

50

18
1981

2000

16

40

14

35

1929

12

Price-earnings ratio

30
1901

25

2014

1966

8

20

6

15
10
5

10

Long-term interest rates

Price-earnings ratio (CAPE, P/E10)

45

4
Long-term interest rates

0
1860

2

1921
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

0
2040

Figure 1.3
U.S. Cyclically Adjusted Price‑Earnings Ratio (CAPE) and Interest Rates,
1881–2014
Price‑earnings ratio, monthly, January 1881 to June 2014. Numerator: real
(inflation‑corrected) S&P Composite Stock Price Index. Denominator: moving
average over preceding ten years of real S&P Composite earnings. Years of peaks
are indicated. Source: Author’s calculations using data shown in Figure 1.1. Interest
rate is the yield of long-term U.S. government bonds (nominal), January 1881 to June
2014 (author’s splicing of two historical long-term interest rate series). See also note 7.

Certainly, expansive talk about the new millennium at the time encouraged such a story. But it would have been more reasonable, judging from
the cyclical behavior of earnings throughout history, to predict a reversal
of such earnings growth.
The bust in corporate profits between 2000 and 2001, the biggest drop in
profits in percentage terms since 1920–21, is certainly part of the story about
the drop in the market. This drop certainly diminished support for the notion
that the new high-tech economy was infallible. But there is a question of how
to interpret the drop in earnings. As we shall discuss in Chapter 5, the drop
in earnings could be seen in many dimensions, and in part, as just an indirect
consequence of the changes in investor psychology that produced the decline
in the market. Part of the crash in earnings after 2000 was also just a technical
accounting reaction to the stock price decline, since companies were required
by accounting rules to deduct from earnings the impairment in value of some

8

TH E S TO CK MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

of their stock market holdings, holdings that were far reduced in value after
the crash in the stock market.

Other Periods of High Price Relative to Earnings
There have been three earlier times when the price‑earnings ratio as shown in
Figure 1.3 attained high values, though never as high as the 2000 value. The
first time was in June 1901, when the price‑earnings ratio reached a high of
25.2. This might be called the “Twentieth Century Peak,” since it came around
the time of the celebration of the new century. (The advent of the twentieth
century was celebrated on January 1, 1901, not January 1, 1900.)10 This peak
occurred as the aftermath of a doubling of real earnings within five years,
following the U.S. economy’s emergence from the depression of the 1890s.11
The 1901 peak in the price‑earnings ratio occurred after a sudden spike in the
ratio, which took place between July 1900 and June 1901, an increase of 43% in
eleven months. A turn‑of‑the‑century optimism appeared—associated with
expansive talk about a prosperous and high‑tech future.
After 1901, there was no pronounced immediate downtrend in real prices,
but for the next decade, prices bounced around or just below the 1901 level
and then fell. By June 1920, the stock market had lost 67% of its June 1901 real
value. The average real return in the stock market (including dividends) was
3.4% a year in the five years following June 1901, barely above the real interest
rate. The average real return (including dividends) was 4.4% a year in the ten
years following June 1901, 3.1% a year in the fifteen years following June 1901,
and –0.2% a year in the twenty years following June 1901.12 These returns are
lower than we generally expect from the stock market, though had one held
on into the 1920s, returns would have improved dramatically.
The second instance of a high price‑earnings ratio occurred in September
1929, the high point of the market in the 1920s and the second‑highest ratio
of all time. After the spectacular bull market of the 1920s, the ratio attained a
value of 32.6. As we all know, the market tumbled from this high, with a real
drop in the S&P Index of 80.6% by June 1932. The decline in real value was
profound and long‑lasting. The real S&P Composite Index did not return to
its September 1929 value until December 1958. The average real return in the
stock market (including dividends) was –13.1% a year for the five years following September 1929, –1.4% a year for the next ten years, –0.5% a year for
the next fifteen years, and 0.4% a year for the next twenty years.13
The third instance of a high price‑earnings ratio occurred in January 1966,
when the ratio as shown in Figure 1.3 reached a local maximum of 24.1. We
might call this the “Kennedy‑Johnson Peak,” drawing as it did on the prestige
and charisma of President John Kennedy and the help of his vice‑president
and successor, Lyndon Johnson. This peak came after a dramatic bull market

T HE S T O C K M A R K ET IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS P E CTIVE

9

and after a five‑year real price surge of 52% from May 1960. This surge, which
took the price‑earnings ratio to its local maximum, corresponded to a surge
in real earnings of 36%. The market reacted to this earnings growth as if
it expected the growth to continue, but of course it did not. Real earnings
increased little in the next decade. Real prices bounced around near their
January 1966 peak, surpassing it somewhat in 1968, then falling sharply back
after 1973. Real stock prices were down 56% from their January 1966 value
by December 1974 and would not be back up to the January 1966 level until
May 1992. The average real return in the stock market (including dividends)
was –2.6% a year for the five years following January 1966, –1.8% a year for
the next ten years, –0.5% a year for the next fifteen years, and 1.9% a year
for the next twenty years.
We see evidence in these past episodes of temporarily high price that
irrational exuberance is not a new thing, and that such episodes do not end
well. The high CAPE—higher than any peaks save 1929, 2000, and 2007 as of
this writing in 2014—warrants some concern, though we do not yet know the
aftermath of this time. We will return to a discussion of the predictive power
of the price-earnings ratio in Chapter 11.

Worries about Irrational Exuberance
As reflected in the first edition of this book, in 2000 I thought that most people
I met, from all walks of life, were puzzled over the apparently high levels of
the stock market. It seemed that they were unsure whether the market levels
made any sense, or whether they were indeed the result of some human tendency that might be called irrational exuberance. They wondered whether the
high levels of the stock market might have reflected unjustified optimism, an
optimism that might have pervaded our thinking and affected many of our
life decisions. They seemed unsure what to make of any small market downturn, wondering whether the previous market psychology could ever return.
Even Alan Greenspan seemed unsure. He made his “irrational exuberance”
speech two days after I had testified before him and the Federal Reserve Board
that market levels were irrational, but a mere seven months later he reportedly
took an optimistic “new era” position on the economy and the stock market.
In fact, Greenspan has always been very cautious in his public statements,
and did not commit himself to either view. A modern version of the prophets
who spoke in riddles, Greenspan likes to pose questions rather than make
pronouncements. In the public exegesis of his remarks it was often forgotten
that, when it comes to such questions, even he did not know the answers.
Years after its 2000 peak, the market is back up near its peak levels in real
terms. The news media in 2007 and 2014 seemed to relish trumpeting new
records set (in nominal terms) by the stock market. And yet, deep down,

10

TH E S TO CK MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

people know that the market was then and is now highly priced, and they
are uncomfortable with this fact.
Lacking answers from our wisest experts, many are inclined to turn to the
wisdom of the markets to answer our questions, to use the turns of the stock
market as fortune tellers use tea leaves. But before we begin assuming that the
market is revealing some truth about this new era, it behooves us to reflect on
the real determinants of market moves and how these market moves, in their
effects, filter through the economy and our lives.
Many of those real determinants are in our minds. They are the “animal
spirits” that John Maynard Keynes thought drove the economy, and that were
the subject of my 2009 book Animal Spirits with George Akerlof.14 These same
animal spirits drive other markets, such as the bond market and the real estate
market, to which we now turn as other case studies of speculative behavior,
before we begin our analysis of the causes of such behavior in Part One of
this book.

Two

The Bond Market in
Historical Perspective

T

he path of interest rates through time has
been a matter of intense public concern,
for interest rates are viewed as central to everything in the economy. Interest
rates are viewed as something abstract and fundamental, the price of time
itself. And yet they show fluctuations through time that reveal a speculative
and human component, not entirely unlike that of the stock market, discussed
in the previous chapter.
There are both short-term interest rates, rates on loans or bills for a year or
less, and long-term interest rates, rates on bonds, mortgages, or loans extending over decades. Prices of long-term bonds, once issued in the market­place,
move opposite the general level of long-term interest rates: when long-term
interest rates fall, prices of still-outstanding long-term bonds previously
issued rise, since, unless their price increases, investors would prefer those
older bonds bearing higher interest to the newer ones. Thus, changes in the
outlook for future interest rates can cause booms or crashes in the long-term
bond market.
For over a century, central banks (in the United States, the Federal Reserve)
have exerted control over short-term rates. It is well known that these rates
are easily set, at least approximately, by central banks. Long-term interest
rates, however, are more speculative and more difficult to control, since, just
as with the stock market, the public’s demand for them depends on comparisons with the outlook for the distant future, which is dependent on things
central banks cannot control today. Since the 2007–9 financial crisis, central
banks have adopted important new policies to influence long-term interest
11

12

TH E BO N D MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC T IVE

rates, with names like “quantitative easing,” “operation twist,” and “forward
guidance,” but they still today do not really control this market.1
Discussions over the past century have sometimes used the phrase “bond
bubble” to describe upswings in the bond market. Certainly, the bond market
has something akin to bubbles in it from time to time, occurring when long
rates are falling and so people are excited by the rise in bond prices, just as
they are by stock prices in a stock market bubble. And bubbles in these two
markets might sometimes be related to each other.

Interest Rates and CAPE
Interest rates are one of the most discussed terms relating to the level of
the stock market. During the stock market boom of the 1990s, it was widely
noted that long-term interest rates were falling. This can be seen from
Figure 1.3 in the previous chapter, which includes, along with the CAPE, a
plot of interest rates, long-term government bond yields. The idea that the
decline in interest rates can explain the rise in the stock market was widely
expressed during the 1990s.
The Monetary Policy Report that was submitted in conjunction with Alan
Greenspan’s testimony before Congress in July 19972 showed evidence of a noticeable negative correlation between the ten-year bond yield and the price-earnings
ratio since 1982. Indeed, there did appear to be a relation between interest rates
and the price-earnings ratio at that time. In fact, between the mid-1960s and the
early 1980s, interest rates were rising and the price-earnings ratio was declining.
Between the early 1980s and the late 1990s, when Greenspan spoke, interest rates
were falling and stock prices were rising. This relation between the stock market
and the ten-year interest rate came to be known as the “Fed Model.” In the late
1990s and the early 2000s, it became fashionable to use the Fed Model to justify
the level of the market. Indeed, with declining interest rates, one might well think
that stock prices should be rising relative to earnings, since the prospective longterm return on a competing asset, bonds, was declining, making stocks look more
attractive in comparison. In the late 1990s, it sometimes seemed that one heard
reference to the Fed Model almost ad nauseam on the television business shows.
However, the evidence for the Fed Model is rather weak.3 Over the whole
period shown in Figure 1.3, no strong relation is seen between interest rates
and the price-earnings ratio. In the Great Depression, interest rates were
unusually low, which, by the Fed Model, would imply that the stock market
should have been very high relative to earnings; that was not the case.
Interest rates continued to decrease after the peak in the market after 2000,
and then we saw the opposite of the predictions of the Fed Model: both the
price-earnings ratio and the interest rates were declining. Since this happened,
one has heard a lot less about the Fed Model.

T HE B O N D M A R K E T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS P E CTIVE

13

Although interest rates must have some effect on the market, stock prices
do not show any simple or consistent relation with interest rates. Still, investors looking at a very high CAPE when long-term government bond yields are
very low, as they have been especially since the financial crisis of 2008, will
not be as discouraged from investing in stocks because of the poor alternative.
The CAPE has come under some criticism since the second edition of this
book. Bill Gross, founder of PIMCO and now at Janus Capital, complained
that discussions of the ratio often do not take into account the very low interest rates since the crisis. Indeed, the ten-year U.S. Treasury yield to maturity
in July 2012 fell to a historical low of 1.43% per year, and while higher today,
remains very low by historical standards. In such circumstances, perhaps
investors will not want to switch from stocks to bonds even if the CAPE is
high. Moreover, the U.S. bond market, showing such low yields, looks as if it
may have been going through something of a bubble, too, and may collapse
further eventually, especially given the imminent withdrawal of the support
of quantitative easing from the Federal Reserve and a likely increase in inflation. Gross, with his “new normal” or “new neutral” pessimistic view of the
economy, gives lower probability to such a collapse than I would, but he is
right that the apparent overpricing of the stock market—whenever it occurs—
has to be compared with the possible overpricing of other markets as well.4

Inflation and Interest Rates
Figure 2.1 shows a plot of U.S. government long-term interest rates (the tenyear Treasury rate since 1953) and inflation rates since 1881. Two inflation
rates are shown. One is the annual rate of increase of a price index (Consumer
Price Index since 1913) for the preceding ten years. The other is the annual
rate of increase of the same price index for the succeeding ten years. The two
inflation rate curves are the same, but one is shifted relative to the other by
ten years. Both are plotted here to make a point. It is easy to see a positive
contemporaneous relation between interest rates and preceding long-term inflation rates for much of the time—especially the most recent half century—but
there appears to be practically no relation between long-term interest rates and
future long-term inflation. It is the future inflation that ought to matter more
if investors successfully priced long-term bonds to protect their real returns
from inflation over the future life of the bond they are investing in, just the
opposite of what we see. Jeremy Siegel and I documented this in 1977, and
linked this observation to descriptions of earlier observers A. H. Gibson in
1923 and John Maynard Keynes in 1930.5
The relation between long-term interest rates and long-term inflation that
can be seen in Figure 2.1 for the last half century is not the kind that a simple
assumption of human rationality would lead one to expect. If investors are

14

TH E BO N D MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC T IVE

20

1981

Percent per year

15

10

Long-term interest rate
Next ten years’
inflation rate

1921

5

0
1860

Preceding ten years’ inflation rate
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

2040

–5

Figure 2.1
U.S. Long-Term Rates and Inflation, 1871–2014
U.S. government long-term interest rate (thick dark solid line), average inflation
rate over preceding ten years (thin solid line), and average inflation rate over the
succeeding ten years (thin gray line). Source: Author’s calculations from same
data used in Figure 1.3.

rational (have rational expectations), they should be employing past data on
inflation in such a way as to adjust nominal bond yields to successful predictions of the future. We see that they did seem to respond to past data, but in
a way that was very unsuccessful in predicting the future.
The fluctuations in yields that we do see in the long-term bond market
cannot be well described as resulting from information about future inflation, nor are they well described as resulting from information about future
short-term interest rates. They have a speculative component that is hard to
pin down in terms of objectively rational behavior.6

Real Interest Rates
Over most of the period shown in Figure 2.1, many investors perhaps had no
idea about what the relation between nominal interest rates and inflation rates
should be. It was not until 1895 that Columbia University economics professor
John Bates Clark introduced to the world the concept of real interest rates.7 He
wrote about this then-new concept, because he discerned widespread public

T HE B O N D M A R K E T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS P E CTIVE

15

confusion about interest rates at the time of the national debate on the proposed bimetallic standard. The real interest rate on any debt instrument, he
said, is the interest rate minus the inflation rate over the life until maturity of
the instrument. If the inflation rate is greater than the interest rate, the bond
would be producing less than nothing in real terms for the investor, since the
buying power of money would be reduced by more than the increase in the
money the instrument provides to its investor. A search on Google Ngrams
shows that the phrase “real interest rate” was never used before 1895, began
to appear incrementally from that time, and did not really become common
until after 1960—after a very long gestation period for Clark’s idea.
One might think, if investors have good information, are rational, and are
interested in the real interest that they will receive, that market-determined
bond yields would stay just a steady amount above the subsequent inflation
rate. One can see from Figure 2.1 that this has never been true for the United
States, although, since around 1960, it became somewhat true for backwardlooking rather than forward-looking inflation.
The significance of movements in long-term interest rates over time, as
seen for the United States since 1871 in Figure 2.1, is not clear. Clearly, people
were not pricing bonds as if they were just reacting to rational expectations
about future inflation rates. Theorists often say that ratios like the priceearnings ratio in the stock market ought to be more closely related to expected
real (inflation-corrected) long-term interest rates, which have been largely
unknown, than to nominal rates. But that is based on the assumption that
investors routinely see through nominal rates to real rates.
Inflation-indexed bond markets, which directly reveal real interest rates,
did not exist in any major country in the early 1980s, but since then they have
begun to appear. These bonds promise to pay a constant real return. Figure
2.2 shows the behavior over time of inflation-indexed long-term government
bond yields for four countries that have had these markets for a long time.
All these countries show a long-term downtrend in real interest rates—
down to amazingly low levels by 2012. As can be seen in Figure 2.2, in some
of the most recent data, in both the United States and the United Kingdom the
real bond yields have reached negative values. It is quite striking that in 2012
in the United States, people were willing to tie up their money for thirty years
at an essentially guaranteed negative real return.8 This fact would certainly
seem to have implications for the stock market, impelling it toward higher
valuation. Financial theorists, such as John Campbell and Luis Viceira, have
spoken of the long-term indexed bond yield as the true riskless rate, against
which all risky asset returns should be compared, and which should figure
into every long-term investor’s most fundamental calculations.9
But most investors just do not seem to see the centrality of the indexed bond
yield that theorists often seem to attribute to it. They often do not even seem

16

TH E BO N D MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC T IVE

Inflation-indexed bond yield (percent per year)

10

8

Chile

Australia
6

4

2

United Kingdom

0
1980

1985

1990

United States

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

–2

Figure 2.2
Inflation-Indexed Bond Yields for Four Countries, 1985–2014
United Kingdom: twenty-year inflation-indexed bond yield January 1985–
June 2014; Australia: ten-year inflation-indexed bond yield July 1985–July 2014;
Chile: ten-year inflation-indexed bond yield, April 1992–May 2014; United States:
thirty-year inflation-indexed bond yield, April 1998–August 2014. Source: Global
Financial Data (https://www.globalfinancialdata.com/index.html).
