
JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

208

Page 208 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

Figure 10.4 shows how to compare the reward to the risk. A trader is
considering entering near the close of the bullish engulfing pattern at
the right edge of the chart. There is an area of resistance overhead that
offers a reasonable target for a swing trade. The low of the bullish
engulfing pattern is the failure point for this setup. The distance to the
target (reward) is about 2.5 times the distance to the failure point (risk).

FIGURE 10.4

Reward versus risk

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Example

Figure 10.5 shows a daily chart of Pier 1 Imports Inc. (PIR). The stock
was in a downtrend during July 2007. Price accelerated to the downside
in late July and early August, moving far away from the 20-period SMA.
That short-term oversold condition was alleviated by a rally from
August 6 to 9. On August 9, a spinning top formed after the prior day’s
long bullish candle creating a bearish star pattern and alerting that the
rally may be running out of steam. It was followed in the next session by
a strong bearish engulfing pattern. A swing trader might use the
engulfing setup to initiate a short position. The swing target (reward)
would be to resistance at the August low. The failure point (risk) would
be to the high of the engulfing candle. The reward-to-risk ratio would
be only about 1.5, not enough to justify the trade.

(continues)

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 209 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work
Example

209

(continued )

FIGURE 10.5

Reward-to-risk ratio of less than 2

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Swing trading strategies typically call for determining the failure point
and price target. Thus, determining the reward-to-risk ratio in advance of initiating a trade is part of a swing trader’s work when evaluating the viability of a
setup.
Trend-following strategies may not call for determining price objectives
since the goal is to enter a trending stock and ride the trend until it reverses.
Even if a trader does not have a specific price objective for a trade, it is still prudent to enter where the initial stop would not be prohibitively far away.
Don’t Forget about Volatility

Even if a setup provides an adequate reward-to-risk ratio, it does not necessarily mean it merits an entry. Using the example of PIR in Figure 10.5, if a
short position were entered near the close of market, with the protective
buy-to-cover stop a little bit above the high of the bearish engulfing pattern,
the stop would be about 10 percent away. For swing trades, I have a general
risk control rule that my stop should never be more than 10 percent away
from the current price of the stock. Thus, the PIR entry would be right at
my maximum allowed for a stop. I prefer to trade setups that offer an entry
that is closer to the failure point to minimize the potential loss and improve
the reward-to-risk ratio.

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

210

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 210 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

I look at both the reward-to-risk ratio and how far, percentage-wise, the
stop would be from my entry price. If a stock is quite volatile, even if the rewardto-risk ratio is adequate, the stop may be too far away. In such a case, I’ll either
skip the trade or shift to an intraday strategy to trade the stock. Remember, the
10 percent maximum for a swing trade is not to be used as an arbitrary
stop level. The stop should be placed at the failure point, but not to exceed 10
percent.

Reversal Patterns May Reinforce
Other Setups
Rather than entering trades based solely on the presence of candlestick reversal
patterns, traders may look for patterns that form in conjunction with larger
price setups. For example, a bullish candlestick reversal pattern may form the
second bottom of a larger Western double bottom pattern as shown in several
examples throughout this book. I refer to these setups as a “pattern within a
pattern.” This is one of the uses for candlestick patterns that I favor.
The presence of a candlestick pattern within a larger pattern, such as the
hammer that formed the potential double bottom in the STJ example (Figure
10.6), provides an opportunity for an assertive entry into a long position for
traders who prefer not to wait for the larger double bottom pattern to confirm.
(For a double bottom to confirm, price must close above the peak between the
two bottoms.) Bottoming patterns often form as a long downtrend is coming to
an end, or at that completion of a correction of a long-term uptrend, and vice
versa for topping patterns. Traders wishing to get aboard a new trend, or a resumption of the trend, as early as possible, may favor setups such as the STJ example. Protective stops should be used to limit loss in the event the bottoming
pattern is not successful at reversing the trend.
Support and Resistance

Another application for the candlestick reversal patterns is to choose setups that
form at support (bullish patterns) or resistance (bearish patterns). As discussed in
Chapter 9, price often finds support (or resistance) at prior price peaks and bottoms, strong moving averages, and at the beginning of a gap window.
Some traders (myself included) may feel more comfortable entering bullish patterns, such as those shown in the FLR example (Figure 10.7), where
there is support below rather than if they form during a decline in which there
is no visible support that will attract the attention of market participants. This
approach works well for swing trading strategies, but also can be employed for
entry into longer-term positions.

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 211 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

211

Example

Figure 10.6 shows a daily chart of Saint Jude Medical Inc. (STJ). In
February–March 2007, price declined and found support at the 200period simple moving average (SMA) on March 14. Another test of the
200-period SMA occurred on March 30, setting up the potential for a
Western double bottom reversal pattern (dotted line). The March 30
candle was a hammer.

FIGURE 10.6 Hammer formed at support at the prior bottom
and the 200-period simple moving average
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Convergence of Signals

The setup shown in Figure 10.6 was very desirable because there was a convergence of signals. Signals converge when there are two or more bullish (or bearish)
events that intersect. In this case, not only was there a candlestick reversal signal
(hammer) within a Western reversal pattern (double bottom), but there was
support below provided by the 200-period SMA. Figure 10.7 also provided a
convergence of signals.
Even with a convergence of signals there is no guarantee that the setup
will follow through as anticipated; however, with several signals present many
traders will notice the setup increasing the likelihood of a successful outcome.

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

212

Page 212 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

Figure 10.7 shows a daily chart of Fluor Corp. (FLR). After a price
decline, price gapped down open on June 8 to near the 50-day SMA,
reversed direction, and closed well into the prior black candle’s real body
leaving a bullish piercing pattern. In addition to the strong moving
average just below, the horizontal line drawn on the chart shows that
there was additional support provided by prior minor peaks and
bottoms that formed in April–May. Another swing up followed the
piercing pattern ending with a northern doji near the June high. Price
pulled back again from June 18 to 26. Price gapped down open on June
27, tested support again at the 50-day SMA and the prior bottoms, and
closed the session as a bullish engulfing pattern.

FIGURE 10.7

Bullish reversal patterns formed at support

Source: TeleChart 2007®

In summary, although I will periodically trade a candlestick pattern in isolation, it is my preference to trade those that form where there is additional ammunition for a move in the anticipated direction. As long as there are many trade
opportunities to choose from, I’ll always gravitate toward the setups that offer a
higher likelihood of following through. When I do trade based strictly on the appearance of a candlestick signal, I look for confirmation from other technical

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 213 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

213

tools, such as volume and/or the stochastic oscillator. Even traders who wish to
run computerized scans looking for specific candlestick patterns can apply these
Western techniques in order to isolate the most promising setups.

Reversal Patterns can Provide
Warnings
Another effective way to utilize the candlestick reversal signals is for warnings to
lighten up, or exit, an open position. This is especially helpful for swing traders
who hold positions for a few days to a few weeks. Rather than holding on as the
market zigs and zigs like a longer-term investor may do, the swing trader exploits the short-term moves within a trend.
Candlestick reversal signals can be used to exit a trade, or at least take a
defensive stance, for those who do not wish to hold through a potential pullback or period of consolidation. Swing traders holding long positions should
watch for bearish reversal signals. Those holding short positions should watch
for bullish reversal signals.
A challenge with utilizing the reversal signals in this manner is that you
won’t know until the close of the trading session that the pattern is present. As
discussed in Chapters 2 and 4, the candlestick can change shape throughout the
session so a close is necessary in order to identify the pattern. For some reversal
patterns, that means price may have moved significantly against your position
by the session’s end (for example, a dark cloud cover or an engulfing pattern) as
you wait to see how the candle looks by the end of the session. Recall from discussion in Chapter 8, though, that many times a reversal pattern will begin as
an opening gap. Swing traders may elect to exit a position that gaps after a directional move. By the end of the session, it won’t matter if a strong reversal
candlestick pattern has formed because you’ll have used the gap to exit early in
the day. Another option is to lighten up by selling part of the position on the
opening gap (or in pre-market trading) and maintain a protective stop on the
balance of the position.

Short Selling
Several times in this book you’ve seen reference to “shorting” a stock. For instance, some traders may utilize bearish candlestick signals to initiate short positions. Shorting is a confusing concept for many novice traders, but it really need
not be. Selling short is the opposite of going long. Instead of buying and then
selling, the trader is selling and then buying. When a trader enters a long position,

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

214

11:41 AM

Page 214 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

shares of the stock are purchased in anticipation that the price will rise and
the stock will be sold at a higher price. When a trader enters a short position,
the shares are sold in anticipation of a price decline. If the stock declines, the
shares can be bought at a lower price, which is referred to as covering.
Example

If a long position is taken on a stock at $50 and the stock rises to $60
and is sold, the trader recognizes a gain of $10 per share. If a stock is
sold short at $60 and covered at $50, the trader recognizes a profit of
$10 per share.

Short selling has some restrictions:
• The shares must be borrowed from the brokerage firm in order to sell
short. The broker may not have shares in their inventory to lend, so
traders should not assume they’ll always be able to execute a short position. If demand is high to short the stock, the broker may not have
shares available at the time you wish to borrow them. You may be notified later by the broker when shares do become available; however, in
some cases, by the time that occurs, the trade is no longer desirable.
• A margin account is required in order to sell short because the shares
must be borrowed. Therefore, short selling is not allowed in tax-deferred
retirement accounts because they are nonmargin accounts.

margin
account
A brokerage
account that
permits an
investor to buy
or sell
securities on
credit and to
borrow against
securities held
in the account.

Until recently, there was an uptick rule for shorting
stocks. That meant price must trade higher than the last
price before an order to sell short could be filled. The rule,
which was implemented by the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) back in the 1930s in order to curtail a
bear raid on a stock, was eliminated in July 2007.
Novice traders often shy away from shorting due
to lack of understanding and a sense that it is a risky
practice. Some traders cite the concern that there is
no limit to how high the stock’s price could rise, thus
setting up the potential for unlimited loss. However,
traders should not find themselves in this position if
they implement proper risk and money management
rules. It is not the practice of shorting that is risky,
but rather the actions of the trader who fails to

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 215 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

215

protect his capital. Just like with a long position, a protective stop order can
be used to limit loss on a short position. A protective stop-loss order for a
long position is called a sell stop. It is placed below the current price at a level
where the trader would no longer wish to hold a position in that stock. For
a short position, a buy stop (or buy-to-cover stop) is placed above the current price at a level where the trader would no longer wish to be short the
stock.
Short selling offers traders the opportunity to take advantage of a declining market. I once heard it said that “the bull walks up the stairway but
the bear jumps out the window.” This is a clever way of saying that prices
tend to fall faster than they rise. Experienced traders can profit handsomely in
a down market. For new traders, though, it is usually best if they become
skilled at trading the long side first and then begin to develop their shorting
skills.
ProShares ETFs

Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) have become increasingly
popular with investors over the past decade or so. Originally designed to track a stock index, such as the S&P
500 Index, ETFs have expanded and now track commodities, sectors, and so on.
There are now ETFs available that offer an alternative to shorting. ProShares offers a unique breed of ETFs
that are designed to go up when their underlying indexes
go down (and vice versa). In other words, a long position
is taken in the ETF while the market is declining because
the ETF moves the opposite direction of the market.
These inverse ETFs offer a solution to market participants who want to take advantage of a declining market
but do not wish to short stocks, or cannot do so in their
tax-deferred retirement accounts.
ProShares has introduced several such ETFs in recent
years. The first inverse ETFs introduced correspond to
the major averages. Traders have a choice of short or ultrashort ETFs. The ultra-short ETFs are designed to double
the performance of the index. The short and ultra-short
symbols for the market averages are listed below:
Dow Jones Industrial Average: DOG and DXD
S&P 500 Large-Cap Index: SH and SDS
S&P 400 Midcap Index: MYY and MZZ

exchangetraded fund
(ETF)
A security that
tracks an index,
a commodity,
or a speciﬁc
group of
stocks, for
example,
semiconductors.
An ETF
represents a
basket of
stocks, like an
index fund
does, but it is
traded like a
stock.

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

216

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 216 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Nasdaq 100 Index: PSQ and QID
Russell 2000 Small-Cap Index: RWM and TWM
ProShares has since designed several more such ETFs that correspond to
sectors and industry groups, such as DUG that is the symbol for the ProShares
UltraShort Oil & Gas ETF. For more information on these ETFs, visit the
ProShares web site at www.proshares.com.

Trading Requires Commitment
The markets do not hand out riches easily. The odds of winning are stacked
against the novice trader. Becoming a successful trader requires persistence and
discipline, and the willingness to commit to learning how the markets work.
This book, because of its “getting started in” focus, provides novice traders a
foundation from which to get started with candlestick charting as well as Western technical analysis. If you wish to survive in this competitive business, be
tenacious; continue your study beyond these pages, and develop experience
through lots of practice with real-world chart analysis and trading. If you
would like to pursue further training with me, please visit my web site at
www.tinalogan.com. I have dedicated many years to developing training materials and methods to help traders succeed.

JWBK100-Ch11.qxd

2/21/08

11:42 AM

Page 217 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

11
Chapter

Practice Sets

ow that you have been introduced to both Eastern candlesticks and
Western technical analysis, and realize how powerful they are when
blended, it is time to recap and reinforce what you have learned.

N

Pattern Recognition Quiz
Let’s start with a quick test of your recall of the primary reversal patterns introduced in Chapter 3. The arrows in the chart examples (Figures 11.1 through
11.8) point to reversal patterns. See how many of the patterns you can identify.
Record your answers below each chart or on a separate sheet of paper. Don’t
worry if you don’t remember some of them at first glance. With practice, you
will soon know them all. The answers are included following the set of charts,
but try to figure out the patterns on your own before checking the answers. Refer to the quick reference guide in Appendix A if needed.

217

JWBK100-Ch11.qxd

2/21/08

218

11:42 AM

Page 218 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 11.1

Chart Example 1

FIGURE 11.2

Chart Example 2

FIGURE 11.3

Chart Example 3

FIGURE 11.4

Chart Example 4

JWBK100-Ch11.qxd

2/21/08

11:42 AM

Page 219 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Practice Sets

FIGURE 11.5

Chart Example 5

FIGURE 11.7

Chart Example 7

219

FIGURE 11.6 Chart Example 6

FIGURE 11.8

Chart Example 8

JWBK100-Ch11.qxd

220

2/21/08

11:42 AM

Page 220 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

Answer Key for Pattern Recognition Quiz

Figure 11.1: A = southern doji; B = northern doji; C = piercing pattern; D =
bullish engulfing pattern
Figure 11.2: A = piercing pattern (but not quite to the half-way point of
the prior black real body); B = hanging man; C = bearish engulfing pattern
Figure 11.3: A = hammer; B = bullish engulfing pattern; C = hammer
Figure 11.4: A = inverted hammer; B = bearish harami cross (second candle is also a dragonfly doji)
Figure 11.5: A = shooting star; B = evening star (middle candle is also a
hanging man)
Figure 11.6: A = bullish harami; B = morning star (middle candle is also
an inverted hammer)
Figure 11.7: A = bearish harami cross (second candle is also a near dragonfly doji); B = dark cloud cover
Figure 11.8: A = hanging man; B = bearish engulfing pattern; C = hammer; D = bearish harami

Detailed Chart Analysis
Now it is time for you to analyze some charts in more detail. Three case studies
follow that incorporate candlestick lines and reversal patterns covered in Part I
of this book, as well as Western technical occurrences presented in Part II.
Analyze each numbered event and record your observations below the
chart or on a separate sheet of paper. Each number on the chart may refer to a
distinctive candle line or a reversal pattern, and/or a Western technical event
such as a test of support-resistance or an overextended condition. Volume bars
with a 30-day simple moving average of volume, and the stochastic oscillator
(12-3-3 setting), are plotted in the panels below each chart example to assist
with your analysis. Once you have finished evaluating each chart, compare your
analysis to the commentary at the end of the chapter to see the author’s perspective of the same set of charts.
The goal of this exercise is to guide you toward the significant technical
occurrences on the charts so that you can condition what you have learned. Numerous technical incidents may occur on a daily chart over a period of a few
months or more. Not every single event on every chart (Figures 11.9 through
11.11) was singled out, so you may observe some technical events that are not
numbered. And don’t worry if you aren’t able to identify every event at first;

JWBK100-Ch11.qxd

2/21/08

11:42 AM

Page 221 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Practice Sets

221

with continued practice you’ll be amazed at how quickly and thoroughly you’ll
be able to evaluate a chart.
One of the challenges inherent with visual analysis is that there will be a
certain amount of subjectivity. Traders may have different interpretations of the
same chart. For instance, one trader may feel that a bullish hammer with a
lower shadow of less than two times the length of the body still generates a valid
signal, while another trader may argue that the shadow should be longer. When
determining the validity of a reversal pattern, don’t forget to consider the context in which it formed. Keep in mind these two questions:
1. What price action preceded the event?
2. Are there Western technical occurrences present on the chart that may
have an impact on the direction of price?

Example

A nonideal candlestick reversal pattern may form within a larger
Western pattern; when a strong ceiling or floor is tested; or after price
has become overextended. There’s a good chance in these instances that
the pattern will follow through in spite of falling short of meeting the
criteria of an ideal pattern.

JWBK100-Ch11.qxd

222

2/21/08
