
88

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

forgot to get him out and the market opened the next day
and went straight down for three days and he got wiped out!
So he quit and went back to teaching! He lost $360,000 in
just two or three days. I felt so sorry for him.
A: When was that?
GL: Oh, that was in 1948 or 1949.
A: So that was real money then!
GL: Yeah, that was huge money! And he was a damned good
trader. He was using stochastics very well.
A: What did you call stochastics back then, %D?
GL: As soon as Computrac came out with their software and
called it stochastics, I had no choice but to call it stochastics. But I called it %D until Computrac gave it a name.
The most popular oscillators are stochastics, RSI, and
MACD. RSI is damn near as good as stochastics except that
it is a one-line indicator and it is much easier with stochastics because it has two lines and it can give you two signals to do something. MACD is a very fine oscillator but it’s
quite late. By the time you get signals to do something with
MACD, it’s already gone.
Those are the three most popular. I think that Computrac
did some research and asked about 9,000 of their members
and I think that stochastics was number one and RSI was
30 points behind that and then MACD was 50 points behind
that in popularity.
Do you know that every mutual fund is using stochastics? I hear from some of them every once in a while. They
call me up and thank me for inventing this marvelous indicator and they use it all the time.
I think that it is the most universally used because it is in
every software program.
A: Any other comments you can pass on to us?
GL: We’ve just developed the methodology of trading. We trade
three-minute bars on the Swiss franc and the S&P and stuff
like that. We use stochastics and volume and normal charting techniques and patterns and we find that those three
things together are almost awesome. They will sometimes
go two or three weeks without a loss.
A: Doing day trades?
GL: We trade an average of four times a day. I traded the oneminute bars one day and it gives you a lot more signals. I
think I had 38 trades.
I think I made money. I know the broker did.

Stochastics

89

A: I know one thing and that is that the broker always wins!
GL: Isn’t that wonderful! When you win, he wins. When you lose,
he wins.
A: Well, George, now I know why you were in the brokerage
business for so long!

THE BOTTOM LINE
Stochastics are an interesting technique. It is amazing that they are so popular yet are so misused. I think that George Lane and I have shown you
how to use them properly and profitably!

CHAPTER 6

Pattern
Recognition

o a certain extent, all analysis is pattern recognition. In technical analysis, things such as head and shoulders is a pattern. Every technique
that I have taught you previously is the recognition of patterns and
then acting on those patterns. Even fundamental analysis is pattern recognition. Money supply expansion is a pattern that leads us to act.
However, pattern recognition usually refers only to short-term patterns
of price action and then acting on that. For example, the market closes
higher then lower then higher. What does the market do the following day?
That would be a short-term pattern.
I want to highlight several profitable price patterns that you can use to
create daily profits. I’m going to show you my spin on two classics, inside
days and reversal days, and show you a unique concept called riding the
rejection rule, or RRR.
All of the core techniques that I have discussed so far have focused on
position trades (trades we hope to hold for days and weeks). The patterns
that I describe in this chapter are basically short-term patterns (trades we
will hold for 24 hours or less).

T

INSIDE DAYS
The first pattern is called an inside day. This pattern is a classic pattern
that has been around for decades. It’s like a mini version of the channel
breakout.

91

92

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

Let’s first take a look at what an inside day is. In Figure 6.1, I’ve placed
three arrows on the chart. Let’s start with the one on the left side of the
chart. The arrow is pointing to March 3. This is a good example of an inside
day. An inside day is any day that has its whole range inside the range of
the previous day. In other words, the high of the inside day is lower than
the high of the previous day and the low of the inside day is higher than the
low of the previous day. Take a look at March 3. Note that its high is much
lower than the high of the previous day and the low is modestly higher than
the previous day’s low. The whole range of March 3 is within the range of
the previous day. Thus, it is an inside day.
Take a look at the other two days with arrows pointing to them. The
arrows are pointing at inside days. In all cases, the range of the inside day
is inside the range of the previous day. That makes it pretty easy to spot on
a chart.
An inside day is a day of balance. It is a day when the bulls and bears
have fought to a draw. Neither side has enough power to push the market
in any direction with any force. In fact, the bulls don’t even have enough
power to push the market above the high of the previous day and the bears
don’t have the power to push the market below the low of the previous day.
Balance! (Inside days are often short-term turning points, but that’s a story
for another time.)
What we want to do is to follow whoever wins the battle. We want to
get long if the bulls win and go short if the bears win. We want to go with
the power flow.
We first identify which days are inside days. We have to wait until the
end of the day before we know that. We then place a buy stop order just
above the high of the inside day and place a sell stop order just under the
low of the inside day. Your protective stop order for the long position, if
filled on the long side, places a protective stop just under the low of the
inside day. If filled on the short position, then place a protective stop just
above the high of the inside day. If your trading platform allows you to
place contingent stop orders then put in the protective stops when you put
in your original entry orders. Otherwise, enter the protective orders after
you get filled on the entry order.
Now let’s follow what happens when we get filled. Let’s use the trade
on March 4 as an example. In this case, the market opens near the low end
of the inside day of March 3 and then moves higher until it finally moves
above the high of the inside day where it triggers a buy order. We are now
long. Put in a protective stop at just below the low of the inside day (if you
have not put it in when you entered the original entry order).
Let’s stop for a minute and consider where our orders are. We are long
and have a protective stop order just under the low of the inside day. We
also still have an order to go short on a break of the low of the inside

93

FIGURE 6.1 Euro with Inside Days Marked

94

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

day. Keep this in mind because it plays an important role in our upcoming
discussion.
Okay, we are long. The exit of the position will always be the close
of trading on the breakout day. So, in this case, we make a modest profit
because the close of trading turns out to be higher than the high of the
inside day.
Let’s now look at a losing trade. Go over to March 20 in Figure 6.1. Here
we see another inside day. We put in our orders just as described earlier.
The price breaks to the upside and we get long. Unfortunately, the price
sags back and closes below the high of the inside day, which means that
the trade is a modest loser. In this case, the bulls had some strength but
not enough to keep the price above the high of the inside day.

DOUBLE WHAMMY
Now we come to the double whammy. Take a look at the arrow pointing to
the inside day on March 17 in Figure 6.1. This day is very interesting. Pay
close attention because this will get a little complicated. Recall how we put
in the various orders.
In this case, the price dropped and broke the low of the inside day.
That gets us short. Don’t forget that we have a buy order just above the
high of the inside day and also a protective stop order for our new short
position.
The bears don’t maintain their control of the market. In fact, the bulls
come roaring back and push the price back up through the whole range of
the inside day and break up through the high of the inside day. This last
fact causes the stop loss to be triggered on the short position to ring up a
loss on the trade. But it also triggers a buy order that we put in at the end
of the inside day. This entry order gets triggered and we get long.
We hold the long position until the end of the day when we liquidate the
long position for a profit. Even though we had a loss on the initial position,
we gained a profit on the second trade for slightly less than breakeven for
the day. This type of day is called a double whammy because we end up
trading twice during the day instead of the usual once.
I call the second trade of the day a lemonade trade because we took
the lemons of the initial losing trade and turned it into the lemonade of the
second profitable trade.
This lemonade concept is a critical component to making money in the
markets. It is an attempt to turn unprofitable trades into profitable trades
or at least less unprofitable trades. This is a concept that is never spoken
about. Everybody talks about the initial trade. Many books and articles

Pattern Recognition

95

have been written about buy and sell signals. Virtually every book is on
how to use a system to create profitable trading. But nobody talks about
what to do after the original trade is over. In particular, nobody tells you
what to do when the trade fails.
A very old trading precept says that a failed signal is a signal. So every
trade that is a losing trade might be setting up a winning trade. Take a
look at every technique you are using and see if it is profitable for you to
reverse your position when you get stopped out of a trade. So, for example,
suppose you are short using the super-duper widget system and you get
stopped out. What would happen if you were to reverse your position to
the long side? And perhaps hang on just until the end of the day? I’ll bet
you have a new profitable system!
In this case, we are reversing our position whenever we get stopped
out using inside days. A stopped-out inside day trade is always a double
whammy.
Inside days tend to be profitable in about 55 percent of trades with
the average winning trade much larger than the average losing trade. But
lemonade trades are profitable at a rate of about 70 to 75 percent and the
average winning trade is still much larger than the average losing trade.
More conservative traders may even want to trade only the lemonade
trade and skip the initial trade. You’ll only be able to identify the potential
for a lemonade trade after you see the price break one end of the inside
day’s range. You then place an entry order in on the opposite side of
the inside day’s range. So, for example, put in a buy order once you see the
price break down through the low of the inside day.
You will have far fewer trades if you only trade the lemonade trade but
you will have a much higher percentage of winning trades. Lemonade
trades account for almost 50 percent of the total profits from trading inside
days. I trade both the initial trade and the lemonade trade because I am
willing to take the additional psychological heat in return for the additional
profits.

MULTIUNIT TACTIC
There is another way that we can enhance the profitability of inside days.
I call it the multiunit tactic. I’ve been writing about this since my book on
spread trading in 1983.
So far, in this book, we have talked about every technique assuming
that we are going to enter a position with only one contract. But, of course,
there is no reason to assume that we have to trade only one contract for
every position. Yes, a person with limited funds in their account will only

96

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

be able to trade one contract if they are using proper risk management
techniques (see Chapter 7 for more information). But most traders will be
able to put on two or more contracts when they enter a position. You can
use the multiunit technique as long as you can enter two or more contracts.
Virtually all written material, including this book, assumes that you
will only have one contract on. Even if more contracts are assumed, it is
assumed that the entry and exit are the same for both positions. But why
should each contract have the same tactic? Why not change it up a little?
In this case, let’s assume that we have enough money in our account to
buy or sell two contracts. Let’s say that we get a buy signal using the inside
day technique. We would buy two contracts at that point. But instead of
holding both positions until the close of trading, which is the standard exit,
we liquidate one of the two contracts when there is a 20-pip profit. We
carry the second position to the end of the trading day just as described
in the standard rules for this method. Does the multiunit tactic enhance
profits? Yes!
Let’s look at the three trades in Figure 6.1. On the first trade, on the
left, we make more money because we take off one of the two positions
near the high of the day and then the price sags back down to the close. We
enhanced profits slightly here.
Let’s take a look at the double whammy day in the middle. Here, we
short two contracts and take profits on one of them quickly. The market
then reverses and moves up through the high of the inside day. This gets us
long but only on one contract since we have already eliminated one of our
contracts. So our losing trade is on one of the two contracts but we have
made money on the first contract. We then kick in the lemonade trade on
one contract, which gives us a nice profit. The net result of these trades is
that we end up about breakeven for the day!
The final trade is the losing trade on the right side of the chart. Here,
we get long two contracts when the price penetrates the high of the inside
day. We quickly take profits of 20 pips on one contract and then carry the
second contract to the close of trading for a loss. The bottom line is that
the profit on the first contract essentially covers the loss on the second
contract.
The multiunit tactic enhanced the profit of each trade in these common
examples. Every so often we will get into a position and then the market
immediately turns around and you get stopped out with twice the size. That
will hurt, but it will be a rare occurrence.
And, of course, you will kick yourself when you take off one contract
and the trade would have made a ton of money. This is really the cost of the
multiunit tactic. You will occasionally miss a big trade with two contracts
but the multiunit tactic will enhance your profits most of the time for a
net gain.

Pattern Recognition

97

REVERSAL DAYS
My second pattern recognition method is another classic: reversal days.
This is another technique that has been around for decades. And, once
again, I’ll provide some enhancements for it.
The reversal day concept comes from the idea that it is important to
watch for situations when the market starts off in one direction on a given
day but then turns around and moves sharply in the other direction.
Let’s take a look at a typical Reversal Day. Figure 6.2 shows four
different reversal days marked with arrows. Let’s take a look at the
first one.
A Reversal Day occurs when a pair makes a lower low than the previous day and closes higher. On the bear side, a Reversal Day is a day where
the market makes a higher high than the previous day and closes lower.
The first arrow on the left is pointing to a bullish Reversal Day. You can
see that it made a lower low than the previous day but closed higher on
the day. Now, take a look at the day before the inside day. On this day, the
market opened then traded up to the highs, showing that the bulls were
in control of the market early in the day. But the market closed near its
lows, showing that the bears had taken control of the market. This bearish
control continues at the beginning of the inside day on February 20. The
market moves lower on a continuation of the bearish price action of the
February 19.
But then the bulls start to take control. They come in with enough
power that they are able to move above the previous day’s close and close
higher for the day. In fact, they were so powerful that they were able to
even break above the high of February 19, though they weren’t able to
maintain that level. Still, it took a lot of buying power for the bulls to be
able to turn the tide of the bears from that day and bull the market higher.
We must always pay attention to markets that do unusual things. In
this case, the bulls were able to reverse the trend of the previous day and
move the market higher.
Our trading strategy is to buy at the close of trading of the inside day
and hold the position until the close of trading the next day. Our protective
stop loss is just below the low of the inside day. We will also lemonade that
stop loss and go short if we get stopped out. The lemonade trade will still
be liquidated on the close of the day following the inside day. So, in this
case, the market moves somewhat higher after we enter the long position
and we make a little money.
There is one filter for this method. I like to take trades in the direction
of the trend. In this case, the short-term trend was higher so I took the
trade. I don’t put on reversal days against the trend. What this means is that
the reversal day is actually signaling that the short-term correction against

98

FIGURE 6.2 Euro with Reversal Days Marked

Pattern Recognition

99

the main trend is over and that the true underlying trend has reasserted
itself. We are getting back in tune with the market. We are not fighting the
market.
The first trade on the chart was a resumption of the bull trend that had
been in force prior to the downward action that occurred on the February
19 and early on the February 20. And, as a result, we had a modest winner.
Let’s go to the 25th of February and we see a large downward pointing
reversal day. Here, the market makes a higher high than the previous day
but closes lower on the day. This is an interesting bar. We had been in a
bull market to that point. Clearly, this is a powerful down day and the high
of the day failed to make a new high on the swing so we get two pieces
of evidence that the trend is turning down at that point. We don’t know
that it will be much of a down trend but at least we know that the market
is heading lower over the short run. So we take that bearish reversal day
trade on February 25 but it turns into a modest loser the next day.
Note that the day that we have a modest loser is also a reversal day
to the upside. We don’t take that trade because, at that point, we are now
considering that we are in a bear mode and so we will only take bearish
reversal day trades.
The next bearish reversal day is March 5. Once again, we make a higher
high but close lower on the day. We go short on the close of the day with
a protective stop at the high of the day. In fact, we get stopped out and we
also get long on a lemonade trade that also fails! Our original reversal day
trade would have been profitable if we did not have a protective stop in,
but you can’t have everything.
Notice that the market ended up closing lower on the day after making
a higher high than the previous day. Once again, we have a reversal day
created on March 6. Fortunately, the market follows the normal pattern
and collapses, creating a huge profit for us. That takes the sting out of the
previous day!
The next reversal day is the very lowest bar on the chart: March 11.
Go back over your charts and you will often see that significant highs and
lows are actually reversal days. We don’t take this trade because we still
believe that it is a bear market and we only take trades in the direction of
the market. Too bad, it would have been a profitable trade. By the way, it is
profitable to take all reversal bars regardless of whether they are congruent
with the trend. However, you don’t get much more total profit and you have
to suffer through a lot more losing trades, thus making it psychologically
more difficult to stick to the system.
At the end of trading on March 18, we can see clearly that the shortterm trend has switched to bullish. That day was a powerful day because it
showed that the trend had changed. It is also a reversal day so we get long
with a protective stop just under the low of the day. Bingo! Another nice

100

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

profit as the power of the big reversal day carries through and moves the
market much higher.
This sample of trades shows every circumstance that you will encounter in trading reversal bars. Most trades will be winners. Some will
be losers. You will be stopped out only rarely and thus will not be putting
on many lemonade trades. In this chapter, I showed such a trade but it
will only happen rarely. Most trades are small winners or small losers with
the occasional big winner putting you into the profit column for the year.
You can also use the reversal days technique as a trend indicator. Generally speaking, reversal days move in the direction of the dominant trend.
In this chapter, we had several downward pointing reversal days during
the late February/early March period and, in fact, the market was generally
heading lower. We switched to mainly upward pointing reversal days starting with the low bar on the chart on March 11 and going forward. This was
a period of bullish reversal days and a bull market in the price.
I also use the reversal bars technique to get me into longer-term position trades. Let’s say that you missed your long-term position entry based
on the techniques discussed previously. Those methods are nearly all
breakout trend-following techniques of some type. Or, perhaps, you are
already in a market and want to add to your position. For whatever reason,
reversal days are a great way to enter a longer-term position.
One reason why reversal days are so great is that they get you into a
trending market at the end of a countertrend move. For example, the market has been moving higher but sets back for several days. This is usually
when the reversal day kicks in as a signal. It usually triggers after a shortterm correction in a market. You are therefore getting into a market at a
very advantageous point. You can then use some other exit strategy to protect the position. For example, use a three-bar low from trend analysis as
the protective stop when you enter a position using reversal bars.
Notice that every single losing trade would have been mitigated by using the multiunit tactic. You would have been able to create a small profit
on every trade even before moving to a loss or getting stopped out.
One way to modify the original trade idea is not to carry the trade to
the close of the following day but to simply take a quick 20- to 40-pip profit
after entering the trade. You are surfing the initial momentum of the trade
and taking a quick profit. You are taking the momentum that the reversal
bar is identifying and riding that to a profit. You are not assuming that the
momentum runs until the end of the day. You are assuming that you should
bail out right away.
Note that almost all your trades will be winners using the multiunit tactic here because the momentum of the reversal bar creates its own profits.
Losses will be uncommon and getting stopped out will be rare. However,
note that your losses will likely be larger than your winners and getting
