
* Agap is essentially a vacuum or hole ina bar chart. Ex-dividend and area
gaps have little significance. Breakaway gaps develop at the beginning of
a move, runaway gaps in the middle of a move, and exhaustion gaps at
the end.

° Island reversals are small price patterns or congestion areas isolated from

the main price trend by two gaps. They often signal the termination of
an intermediate move.

One- and Two-Bar
Price Patterns

Background

The price patterns we have considered so far take some time to a
usually at least 15 bars. They all reflect changes in the relationship are
buyers and sellers, which tells us that there has been a reversal in psycho! oe
Historically, the patterns described in this chapter were called 1- ro

day patterns or 1- and 2-week patterns. With the advent of intraday charts,
the title “inside days, outside days,” and so on is no longer a generic term.
Therefore, I have chosen to use the term “bar” with these patterns since it
applies to all charts from 1-minute bars up to monthly ones.

nd -two-bar patterns reflect
ry short-term influence on prices.

We have already established that a key factor influencing the significance
ofa pattern is its size. Since these one- and two-bar patterns do not take ind
long to form, they are, by definition, only of short-term significance. -
example, a 1-day pattern would only be expected under normal circum
stances to affect the price over a 5- to 15-day period. A two-bar pattern il
ated from 10-minute bars would influence the trend over the course of the
Hext 50 minutes to an hour or so. Even so, the more I study these patterns,
the more impressed I become with their capability to reliably signal short-
term trend reversals.

111



112 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Notall one- and two-b: ‘patterns are therefore created equal. What we are
doing is hunting for clues as to the degree of exhaustion being signaled by
a particular reversal phenomenon. I could say the word “help,” for example,
but if I shout it from the rooftop, you will get the message that I need help
far more clearly. The same principle operates,in, the marketplace. For exam-
ple, ifan outside bar (discussed later) encompagses the trading range of three
or four bars, it is likely, other things being equal, to be more significant than
if it barely encompasses the trading range of one, and so forth.

There are a couple of ground rules to bear in mind when interpreting
one- and two-bar patterns:

° They generally signal an exhaustion point, In the case of an uptrend, such
formations develop when buyers have temporarily pushed prices up too
far and need a rest. In the case of downtrends, there is little if any sup-
ply, because sellers have completed their liquidation. Such patterns are
almost always associated with a reversal in the prevailing trend.

In order for these formations to be effective, there must be something to
reverse. This means that top reversals should be preceded by a meaningful
rally, and bottom formations should be preceded by a sharp sell-off.

¢ Itis important to interpret these patterns not so much as black and white,
but as shades of gray, because not all patterns are created equal. Some
show all of the characteristics I will be describing later in a very strong
way. Others will reflect just a few characteristics in a mild way. What we
might call a five-star pattern, with all the characteristics, is more likely to
result in a strong reversal than, say, a two-star pattern that has mild char-
acteristics. It is therefore necessary to apply a certain degree of common
sense to their interpretation rather than jumping to an immediate con-
clusion that the presence of one of these patterns guarantees a quick, prof
itable price reversal.

Outside Bars

Outside bars are those in which the trading range totally encompasses that
of the previous bar. They develop after both downtrends and uptrends, and

113
One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns

represent a strong signal of exhaustion. An example of a top ges
shown in Figs. 7-1(a) and (6) and a bottom reversal in Figs. 7-2(a) an ‘hie

For those not familiar with bar charts, the top of the bar represents a
high, and the bottom, the low. The tick to the left indicates the 0Pe™!"8
price, and that to the right, the closing price.

the previous bar and then some!

1
Alt 7

(b)

Encompasses the trading range of | 1

Figure 7-1 Outside bars at tops.



114 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

tlt

+——— Outside bar

(a)

Encompasses the trading range of
the previous bar and then some!

(b)

Figure 7-2 Outside bars at bottoms:

There are several guidelines for deciding on the potential significance of
an outside bar. They are as follows:

° The wider the outside bar relative to the preceding ones, the stronger the
signal.

¢ The sharper the rally (reaction) preceding the outside bar, the more sig-
nificant the bar.

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 115

¢ The more bars encompassed, the better the signal.

© The greater the volume accompanying the outside bar relative to previ-
ous bars, the stronger the signal.

* The closer the price closes to the extreme point of the bar away from the
direction of the previous trend, the better. For example, if the previous
trend is down and the price closes very near to the high of the outside
bar, this is more favorable than if it closes near the low and vice versa.

Some comparative examples of strong and weak outside bars are featured
in Fig. 7-3.

When considering outside bars or any of the other 1- and 2-bar price pat-
terns, it is important to ask yourself the question: What is the price action
of this bar telling me about the underlying psychology? Wide bars, sharp
preceding rallies or reactions, and high volume all suggest a change in the
previous trend of sentiment.

Chart 7-1 features an example of an outside bar for Merrill Lynch. It rep-
resents what I would call a five-star signal since it has pretty well all of the
characteristics of a strong reversal.

The price was in a persistent downtrend for the afternoon of the 21st.
Then, a strong bar develops, totally encompassing the trading range of the
previous bar. This is a pretty strong statement because the bar opens close
to its low and closes almost at its high. Note also the very high volume that
accompanies this outside bar.

Several outside bars are apparent in Chart 7-2. Example A is a good one
because it is preceded by a relatively strong rally and is reasonably wide.

3.The more bars it
encompasses, the better

1.The wider the bar relative to
preceding bars, the better

{ tH
Th ren

2.The sharper the preceding rally (reaction
for a down reversal), the better {

t
Weak + Pal Son

Figure 7-3 Assessing the significance of outside bars.



116 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 7-1 Merrill Lynch's 10-minute outside:bar. (From Pring Research.)

60.04

oH Ms aaa +
a |
z 1 oi
o. 1. Outside bar —tytl

2. Good volume

tl

|
1AM 2PM [4PM 2PM

In

100] eee | |
‘20

(1AM [12PM

Chart 7-2 S&P Composite 5-minute outside bars. (From Pring Research.)

[Ft

[30:45 oo [16 ]30_ [48:00:16 [30 [46-00-16 Es
7 _13;00 kL Ee 16:00

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 117

Example B completely fails. The reasons lie in the fact that the close is right
on the low, the bar is not much larger than the previous one, and is not pre-
ceded by much of a decline. Thus, while in a strict technical sense it is an
outside bar, it is not signaling much in the way of a change in sentiment.

Even though Example C is not really successful and it is preceded by a
decline, it is a reasonable size larger than its predecessor, and closes at its
high. I purposely put in this example to show that even when a substantial
number of the requirements are present, this does not guarantee the suc-
cess of a pattern.

Finally, Chart 7-3 shows two more examples of outside bars for the Dow
Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) in March 2001. The first represents a rever-
sal from a downtrend to an uptrend. The second marks the top of a very
sharp rally. Note that it is very wide, encompasses the three previous bars,

Chart 7-3 DJIA 60-minute outside bars. (From Pring Research.)

1006 3

i 3 Whipsaw breakout
995 3 i u, HI |
3 {
9764 | it] iy ly!

usr { |
ut My
}

Outside bar

BI Be pg TT pg TT TT Be TTT pg TTT Bg TTB TTT TTT GT

5001 April



118 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

and also violates a good up trendline. Add to this the fact that it also expe-
riences a whipsaw break to the upside and you have all the ingredients of a
dramatic change in sentiment.

Inside Bars

Inside bars are the opposite of outside bars in that they form totally within
the trading range of the preceding bar. An outside bar indicates a strong
reversal in sentiment, but an inside one reflects a balance between buyers
and sellers following a sharp up- or down-move, which is usually later
resolved by a change in trend. During the period preceding the second bar
of this formation, buyers or sellers have everything going their way depend-
ing on the direction of the trend. Then a more even balance sets in during
the formation of the inside bar, which then gives way to a trend in the oppo-
site direction. Examples of inside bars are shown in F igs. 7-4(a) and (6) and
Figs. 7-5(a) and (8).

The guidelines for determining the significance of an inside bar are as
follows:

* The sharper the trend preceding the pattern, the better.

* The wider the first bar and its immediate predecessors in relation to pre-
vious bars, the better. This brings the strong underlying momentum of
the prevailing trend to a sort of climax. — 3, 9! ,

¢ The smaller the inside bar relative to the outside bar, the more dramatic the
change in the buyer/seller balance and therefore the stronger the signal.

* Volume on the inside bar should be noticeably smaller than that of the
preceding bar since it indicates a more balanced situation.

Chart 7-4 shows two examples of inside bars. The first marks the end of
< the sharp September/ November decline. Note the substantial width of the
~ « first bar and the paltry range of the actual inside bar. During the formation
of the first bar, volume is very heavy and the price declines sharply. No doubt
here that sentiment is strongly on the bearish side. Then, on the second day,
volume dries up appreciably and the trading range is dramatically reduced,
thereby indicating a fine balance between buyers and sellers. Although this
marks the bottom of the move, the next short-term trend is essentially a side-
ways one. Quite often we find that with inside bars there is a change as
opposed to a reversal in trend.
The second inside pattern develops just under halfway up the rally and
is followed by a sideways trading range. The move is topped off by a two-bar
reversal, which is discussed in the next section.

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 119

(a)

Second bar is
encompassed
by the first

(b)

Figure 7-4 Inside bars at tops.

Chart 7-5 shows some more inside bars, this time on an intraday chart.
Example A is followed by a pretty good rally, though the quality of the sig
nal is not that great since there is not much of a contrast between the actu:
inside bar and its predecessor. Example B is an outright failure since the
Price continues to advance. This shows that when a strong trend is under-
Way, price patterns can and do fail. Indeed, their very failure can often be
4 clue to the strength of that trend.



120 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

if |
ne Ty

Second bar is
encompassed

ee by the first

(a)

hy |
‘Ke TH,

Second bar is
encompassed

a by the first bar

(b)
Figure 7-5 _ Inside bars at bottoms.

Finally, example Cis a classic. The two final bars expand considerably in
size. The actual inside bar is relatively small. Note also how the open and
close develop at almost identical pri

ices, thereby confirming the idea of a
very fine balance between supply and demand.

21
One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 1

Chart 7-4 Oxford Industries’ 2000-2001 two-bar reversal and inside bars. (From Pring
Research.)

27 “fn,

rt a

19-5 ””
bar an

184 ten Inside

1 "y a!
a7 24 pets, ued ee th
vv z !

Two-bar reversal ———>
Heese

}
Inside bar |p

| FH De OPOG | OPI TNT PNT VOTO eel | TT UU PT

Chart 7-5 The S&P Composite’s 5-minute inside bars. (From Pring Research.)

425 FEL poh,
¢
id het
i pe :
7 ts, rid
if;

470+ L g

TE 2 E q : (4500 [76 [30 [46 [00 [16 30
= is An - = ian0 Sere "6:00. :



122

Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Two-Bar Reversal

A two-bar reversal is a classic way in which charts signal exhaustion. These
patterns develop after a prolonged advance or decline. Examples are shown

in Figs. 7-6 to 7-8.

be bar of the formation develops strongly in the direction of the then
prevailing trend. For a five-star signal in an uptrend, we need to see the close

First bar opens near the low
1 and closes near the high
| < Second bar opens near the

tt malepementoere
t i ; Le 1

Figure 7-6 Two-bar reversals at tops.

Both bars are of

..and usually
larger than those
of the preceding

Figure 7-7 Two-bar reversals at the rally peak.

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 123

' 1
{ 11

near the low
™e Second bar opens near
<————_ the low and closes near
the previous opening

Figure 7-8 Two-bar reversals at bottoms.

of the bar at, or very close to, its high. At the opening of the next period,
buyers come in expecting more of the same. This means the price should

open very close to the high of the previous bar. However, the whole point of

the two-bar reversal is that a change in psychology takes place as the bar
closes slightly above or slightly below the low of the previous bar. Hence, the

high expectations of participants at the opening of the bar are totally dashed ~

at the end of the period, indicating a reversal in sentiment. To be effective,
this has to be a climactic experience. This means that the two-bar reversal
should contain as many of the following elements as possible:

* Itneeds to be preceded by a persistent trend—the sharper the better.

© Both bars should stand out as having exceptionally wide trading ranges
relative to previous bars (see Fig. 7-7 for an uptrend).

* The openings and closings of both bars should be close to the extreme
points of the bar.

* An expansion of volume on both bars enhances the concept of a change
in sentiment.

Chart 7-6 shows a two-bar reversal for June gold in March of 2001. In many
cases, such patterns will be followed by an immediate advance. In this case,
the advance was delayed a day as an additional piece of evidence indicated
a trend reversal. This came in the form of an inside bar that developed on
the day after the two-bar reversal. I have noticed that such “double” patterns
are often quite effective in signaling reversals. Note also that the second bar

we


124 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 7-6 June 2001 Gold Futures’ two-bar reversal. (From Pring Research.)

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 125

Chart 7-7 US Bancorp 2000 two-bar reversal. (From Pring Research.)

a +1 I }t a
eT iy
zi li

2604 Two-bar reversal ———————>- it

i! i

Bet ie 2 2 E 3 bo 6 E fiz
February (March

in the two-bar reversal encompasses the first bar. In effect, this is an outside
bar. The two-bar reversal pattern rule does not require an outside bar, but
its very presence reinforces the idea that sentiment has definitely reversed.
If we are looking at the quality of a signal, I would certainly add points for
this and the inside bar.

Chart 7-7 shows a two-bar reversal at the climax of a rally in US Bancorp
in the fall of 2000. Note how the volume expands dramatically. Also, volume
on the second day is slightly higher than that on the first, thereby provid-
ing an additional clue that the tide has turned in favor of the sellers.

These one- and two-bar price patterns generally have an effect for a very
short period of time. They are not therefore suitable for long-term investors.

However, for traders who are looking for clear-cut entry and exit points, they
can be of immense value.

ws os
-_
Key Reversal Bars

A key reversal bar is one that develops after a prolonged rally or reaction.

Often the trend will be accelerating by the time the price experiences the
key reversal bar. The classic pattern has the following characteristics:

ie ft {

Fn Dae OD
he

L, 1
5

[September jOctober

* The price opens strongly in the direction of the prevailing trend.

© The trading range is very wide relative to the preceding bars.

* The price closes near or below the previous close (or near or above the
previous close in a downtrend reversal).

* Volume, if available, should be climactic on the key reversal bar.

An example of a key reversal bar is featured in Fig. 7-9. In many cases, a
retracement move (see Fig. 7-10) follows a key reversal bar (see Fig. 7-11),
especially if the initial reversal in trend is unduly sharp. Normally, the
extreme point of the reversal bar is not exceeded. Figure 7-11 shows a key
feversal bar at a bottom.

Chart 7-8 shows a classic example beginning in September 1999, as the
short-term rally is climaxed by an explosion of volume and a wide key rever-
sal bar. Quite often a key reversal is followed by a sharp change in trend and
a subsequent retracement. That is exactly what happens in this case as the
Price rallies in the fourth and fifth sessions following the key reversal. Note
that the termination of this brief collective advance is signaled by an out
side day. Even though these one- and two-bar patterns only have short-term
Significance as a general rule, quite often they can prove to be the first
domino in a major trend reversal. It all depends on the maturity of the trend
in question together with the position of the longer-term indicators.


126 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Opens well up On ——-—yp ~- i
previous close Wide trading range

Must be preceded T \N

bya strong advance { Cioses close to or below

ifs
Ary

Lots of volume
hihi mn an
Figure 7-9 Key reversal bar at tops. ;

ae AN

prt
babel i

Figure 7-10 Key reversal bar and retracement moves,

The second example of a key reversal to the right is also a good one in
that volume expands along with the trading range. However, it is not pre

ceded by much ofa rally and would not therefore earn as many stars as the
first one.

eT iH,

Key reversal ————$—-—__—— p>

cht tiithain

Figure 7-11 Key reversal bar at bottoms.

Chart 7-8 Barrick Gold, 1999-2000 two-bar reversals. (From Pring Research.}

2! +—— 1. Key reversal bar
2 | Kt
20+ ul ih, oy

Att
13 gl

2. Key re" al bi
Wea dhe - th
it Wht A, Pg Ment, A Ml

m4 ilk, Uy, only,

8000 5
ae fill | ll saab tl yall. Hing alusful a [tai mh Lau ugh
is

eptember lOctober__ [November [December [2000 |February March

Chart 7-9 features the 1998 bottom for Merrill Lynch. Note that the actual
day of the bottom experiences a classic key bar reversal. The volume also
COoperates by expanding as the stock bottoms. It is also possible to construct
4 small down trendline, the violation of which confirms the signal being
8iven by the reversal bar.


128 Part J: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 7-9 Merrill Lynch 1998 key reversal bar. (From Pring Research.)

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 129

Chart 7-10 S&P Composite 5-minute pinocchio bar. (From Pring Research.)

Heron en
100 4 pee PG
}

sul

‘ys !

idl ba

[September |October November

hs wall

ull gu wall
ae uly TAugust

The intraday example in Chart 7-10 almost meets all of the qualifications,
except that the opening is only slightly above the previous close. Even so,
this bar does indicate exhaustion. One tip-off is the fact that the upper end
of the bar sticks out like a sore thumb above the previous two sessions. In
other words, the price broke out strongly to the upside, but was unable to

hold its gains, and by the close it had given up ground over the previous
period.

Exhaustion Bars

Exhaustion bars develop after a really sharp up- or down-move. They are a
form of key reversal, but differ sufficiently enough to warrant their own cat-
egory.

The requirements for an exhaustion bar are as follows:

* The price opens with a large gap in the direction of the then-prevailing
trend,

* The bar is extremely wide relative to previous bars.

* The opening price develops in the lower half of the bar in a downtrend
and in the upper half in an uptrend.

Emotional trading —>
61275

| i
mel wud aa

. ¥ 5 5 = F 5 oo [46 (30 (46 [00 Cf:
oe 15:00

* The closing price should be both above the opening and in the top half
of the bar in a downtrend and in the lower half and below the opening
in an uptrend. _

* The bar is completed with a gap to the left still in place.

Examples of exhaustion bars for both a bottom and top are featured in
Figs. 7-12 and 7-13. They differ from the one-bar island reversal in that there
is no gap between the exhaustion bar and its successor. Examples of one-
bar island reversals are shown in Fig. 7-14. . ;

What we are looking for here is for an extreme movement in the price
that is preceded by an already strong move. The idea that the bar opens with
a huge gap and closes in the opposite direction reflects the concept ofa
reversal in psychology. The large gap and wide trading range also point out
the kind of frenzied activity associated with a turn.

Chart 7-11 shows an example of the daily price action of Kellwood. It was
followed by a 10-day rally, a stark reminder that all these one- and two-bar
formations have short-term significance.

The exhaustion bar in Chart 7-12 does prove to be the actual bottom.
Note how the termination of the test in mid-October was signaled by an
inside day. ;

You will find that gaps almost always develop on the intraday charts at
the open due to some overnight change in psychology. This means that


130 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

1 Closes more than
halfway up the bar
Closes higher —

than the opening —,

Figure 7-12 Emotional bar at bottoms.

Close is more than

halfway down the bar
a

Opening is higher ——_______—p>-
than the close

fa Nae

tty
met

exhaustion bars tend to be more prevalent in these very short term charts.
Chart 7-13 shows an exhaustion bar for the NYSE Composite. It has all the
characteristics: a large gap, a close higher than the opening, a wide range,
and so on. It is also followed by an inside bar that adds a further piece of
evidence that the trend had changed.
