
percentage hands. You don't just play every hand and stay through every card, because if you do,
you will have a much higher probability of losing. You should play the good hands, and drop out of
the poor hands, forfeiting the ante. When more of the cards are on the table and you have a very
strong hand—in other words, when you feel the percentages are skewed in your favor—you raise
and play that hand to the hilt.
If you apply the same principles of poker strategy to trading, it increases your odds of winning
significantly. I have always tried to keep the concept of patience in mind by waiting for the right
trade, just like you wait for the percentage hand in poker. If a trade doesn't look right, you get out
and take a small loss; it's precisely equivalent to forfeiting the ante by dropping out of a poor hand
in poker. On the other hand, when the percentages seem to be strongly in your favor, you should be
aggressive and really try to leverage the trade similar to the way you raise on the good hands in
poker.
Bielfeldt's story provides an inspiring example of what is attainable given patience on the one hand
and an aggressive trading style on the other. Here is an individual who, starting with a minuscule
amount of money, working independently, and without benefit of staff or elaborate technology,
became one of the world's most successful traders. Moreover, because of his long-term goals and
actions, his ultimate success positively impacted an entire community.
The portion of Gary Bielfeldt's interview that I found most insightful was his analogy between
poker and trading. It is also interesting to compare Bielfeldt's key point in this analogy to the
similar advice offered by James Rogers: Have the patience to wait for the right trade to come along.

75

Ed Seykota-Everybody Gets What They Want
Although completely unknown, not only to the public, but to most of the financial community as
well, Ed Seykota's achievements must certainly rank him as one of the best traders of our time. In
the early 1970s, Seykota was hired by a major brokerage firm. He conceived and developed the
first commercial computerized trading system for managing clients' money in the futures markets.
His system proved quite profitable, but interference and second-guessing by management
significantly impeded its performance. This experience provided the catalyst for Seykota going out
on his own.
In the ensuing years, Seykota applied his systematized approach to trading a handful of accounts
and his own money. During that period, the accounts Seykota managed have witnessed an
absolutely astounding rate of return. For example, as of mid-1988, one of his customer accounts,
which started with $5,000 in 1972, was up over 250,000 percent on a cash-on-cash basis.
(Normalized for withdrawals, the account theoretically was up several million percent.) I know of
no other trader who has matched this track record over the same length of time.
I had never heard of Seykota when I first began working on this book. Seykota's name had come up
several times during my interview of Michael Marcus as the person who was most influential in
transforming him into a successful trader. After our interview, Marcus said reflectively, "You
know, you really should interview Ed Seykota. He is not only a great trader; he is a mind."
Marcus provided an introduction over the phone, and I briefly outlined the concept of my book to
Seykota. Since I was already out West, it was most convenient for me to interview Seykota on the
same trip by rerouting my return to New York via Reno. Seykota was agreeable to participating,
but seemed skeptical of my ability to complete the inter-vie w in the space of two hours (the time
available in order for me to make my flight connections). I assured him that, although it was tight, I
had done a few other interviews in that space of time. "It is feasible as long as our conversation
remains very focused," I explained.
I cut my arrival at the airport extremely close, having forgotten to revise my ticket to reflect the
change in itinerary. After a vociferous argument with a ticket agent who insisted I didn't have
enough time to catch my flight—a contention she nearly made self-fulfilling—I raced through the
airport, reaching the gate with only seconds to spare. By the time I arrived in Reno, the tension
from my near-missed flight had just about dissipated. The drive to Seykota's house was too far for a
cab, so I rented a car. It was very early morning, and the highway winding up into the mountains
offered spectacular vistas below. The classical music station I found on the radio was playing
Mozart's Clarinet Concerto. The combination was glorious.
Seykota works from an office in his house, which borders Lake Tahoe. Before beginning the
interview, we took a brief walk out onto the beach behind his house. It was a cold, clear morning,
and the view was idyllic. The contrast between his workplace and my own—an office in the Wall
Street area, with a prominent view of an ugly building—could hardly have been more striking. I
plead guilty to jealousy.
In contrast to virtually all the other traders I had interviewed, Seykota's desk is not flanked by an
array of quote screens, or, for that matter, even a single screen. His trading is largely confined to
the few minutes it takes to run his computer program which generates signals for the next day.
In my conversation with Seykota, I was struck by the intensity of both his intelligence and
sensitivity—an odd combination I thought. He has a way of looking at things from a unique
vantage point. At one moment, he could be talking about analytical techniques and would appear as
the consummate scientist (he holds a degree in electrical engineering from MIT), bringing up a
three-dimensional diagram on the computer screen, generated by one of the many programs he had
designed. Yet, in another moment, when the conversation turned to the psychology of trading, he
would reveal great sensitivity and insight into human behavior.
Indeed, in recent years, Seykota has become very involved in the field of psychology. It appeared
to me that psychology, and its application in helping people solve their problems, had become a
more important element in his life than market analysis and trading. I suspect that Seykota would
probably find this contrast somewhat artificial, in that to him, trading and psychology are one and
the same thing.
76

Our conversation was not as focused as I had intended it to be. In fact, it went off in so many
directions that we had barely scratched the surface by the time the two hours had elapsed. I
continued on, assuming that I would merely catch a later flight. As it turned out, the flight that I had
missed was the last direct one from Reno to New York.
Seykota later told me that he knew in our first phone conversation that I would end up spending the
day. He is extremely perceptive about people. For example, at one point in our conversation,
Seykota asked me, "How many minutes fast do you set your watch?" I found this question
particularly striking in that in our brief time together, he had been able to pick up on one of my
basic character traits. The question was also particularly timely, given my near-missed flight earlier
that morning.
Seykota's success goes well beyond his trading. He impressed me as someone who had found
meaning in his life, and was living exactly the life he wanted to be living.
How did you first get involved in trading?
In the late 1960s, I decided that silver had to rise when the U.S. Treasury stopped selling it. I
opened a commodity margin account to take full advantage of my insight. While I was waiting, my
broker convinced me to short some copper. I soon got stopped out and lost some money and my
trading virginity. So I went back to waiting for the start of the big, inevitable bull market in silver.
Finally, the day arrived. I bought. Much to my amazement and financial detriment, the price started
falling!
At first it seemed impossible to me that silver could fall on such a bullish deal. Yet the price was
falling and that was a fact. Soon my stop got hit. This was a very stunning education about the way
markets discount news. I became more and more fascinated with how markets work.
About that time, I saw a letter published by Richard Donchian, which implied that a purely
mechanical trend-following system could beat the markets. This too seemed impossible to me. So I
wrote computer programs (on punch cards in those days) to test the theories. Amazingly, his
theories tested true. To this day, I'm not sure I understand why or whether I really need to.
Anyhow, studying the markets, and backing up my opinions with money, was so fascinating
compared to my other career opportunities at the time, that I began trading full time for a living.
What was your first trading-related job?
I landed my first job on Wall Street in the early 1970s as an analyst with a major brokerage house. I
was assigned to cover the egg and broiler markets. [Broilers are young chickens up to 2'<i pounds
dressed weight. The futures markets for both broilers and eggs have since disappeared as waning
trading activity prompted their delisting by the parent exchanges.] I found it interesting that an
entry level guy like me was immediately placed in charge of dispensing trading advice. I once
wrote an article recommending that traders stay away from the market for a while. Management
censored that comment from the market letter— likely because it didn't promise to motivate much
trading.
I wanted to start applying computers to the business of analysis. Remember, in those days
computers were still typically punch card devices used for accounting. The guy who was running
the computer department seemed to see me as a threat to his job security, and he repeatedly chased
me off his turf. After about a month at that job, I announced that I was going to quit. The head of
the department called me in to find out why. It was the first time he had ever been interested in
talking to me.
I went to work for another brokerage house, which was going through a reorganization. There was
a lot less management, so I took advantage of the lack of supervision by using the accounting
computer to test trading systems during the weekends. They had an IBM 360 which took up a large
air conditioned room. Over the course of about a half year, I was able to test about a hundred
variations of four simple systems for about ten years of data on ten commodities. Today, the same
job takes about one day on a PC. Anyway, I got my results. They confirmed there was a possibility
of making money from trend-following systems.
I take it that computer testing of systems was not part of your job, since you did it on
weekends. What were you actually hired to do?
During the week, my normal Clark Kent type job was to load new rolls of paper onto the Reuters
77

machine when the margin turned pink. I was also responsible for tearing off the news in strips and
hanging them up on the wall behind the machine. The trick was to tear between line-feeds so as to
get a smooth edge. The funny thing was that hardly anyone would read the news since they'd have
to lean way over the machine to see the pages. So I started reading the news and personally
delivering it to the brokers. One bonus of this job was that I got to observe a lot of brokers' trading
styles.
Your official position sounds like a glorified office boy. Why did you accept such a menial
job?
Because I knew I wanted to be in the business, and I didn't care what I did, or what I got paid.
Why didn't you stay at your original position? At least there you were an analyst.
Because it was a stultifying environment. I disapproved of management pressures to recommend
trades when I thought there were no trading opportunities. Also, I saw that being allowed access to
the company computers for testing trading systems (my real desire) was a dead issue.
Did you know that you could have access to the computer at your new job?
No, but since the company had just gone through a major shake-up and most of the management
had been fired, I figured there wouldn't be very much of a bureaucracy to interfere with my use of
the computer.
What became of your work on computerized trading systems?
Eventually, management got interested in using my research results for managing money. I
developed the first large-scale commercial computerized trading system.
What do you mean by large scale?
The program was marketed by several hundred agents of the firm, and the equity under
management was several million dollars—a large amount of money in the early 1970s.
How did you get management to support you to that extent?
They were familiar with Richard Donchian, who was a pioneer in developing trend-following
trading systems, although, at the time, he was doing everything by hand. Because of that exposure,
they were already favorably disposed to the concept of using trading systems to manage money.
Also, at the time, computers were so new that "computer system" was a great buzzword.
How did your trading program do?
The program did fine; the problem was that management couldn't keep from second-guessing the
signals. For example, I remember one time the program generated a buy signal for sugar when it
was trading around 5 cents. Management thought that the market was already overbought and
decided not to take the signal. When the market kept on going higher, they came up with the rule
that they would buy on the first 20-point pullback [ 100 points equal 1 cent]. When no such
pullback developed, they modified the rule to buying on the first 30-point reaction.
As the market kept moving higher without any meaningful retracements, they changed the rule to
50 points and eventually 100 points. Finally, with sugar prices around 9 cents, they finally decided
that it was a bull market, and that they had better buy before prices went much higher. They put the
managed accounts long at that point. As you might guess, the sugar market peaked shortly
thereafter. They compounded the error by ignoring the sell signal as well—a signal which also
would have been very profitable.
The bottom line was that because of this interference, the most profitable trade of the year ended up
losing money. As a result, instead of a theoretical return of 60 percent for the year, quite a few
accounts actually lost money. This type of meddling was one of the main reasons why I eventually
quit.
What were the other reasons?
Management wanted me to change the system so that it would trade more actively, thereby
generating more commission income. I explained to them that it would be very easy to make such a
change, but doing so would seriously impede performance. They didn't seem to care.
What did you do after you quit?
78

I just quit the research department, but I stayed on as a broker managing accounts. After about two
years, I gave up brokerage to become a money manager. That shift allowed me to get away from
earning my living from commissions, which I think can be a counterproductive incentive to making
money for clients. I switched to a pure profit incentive fee arrangement.
Did you continue trading the system after you left?
Yes, although I substantially revised the system over the years.
What is the performance track record?
I do not publicize my track record other than my "model account," which is an actual customer
account that started with $5,000 in 1972 and has made over $15 million. Theoretically, the total
return would have been many multiples larger had there been no withdrawals.
With performance like that, how come you haven't been deluged with word-of-mouth
requests to manage money?
I do receive requests, but I very rarely accept new accounts. If I do, it is only after considerable
interviewing and screening to determine the motivations and attitudes of the client. I have found
that the people I associate with have subtle, yet very important, effects on my performance. If, for
example, they are able to support me and my methods over the long term, then they tend to help
me. If, however, they get too concerned with the short-term ups and downs of their account, they
can be a hindrance.
How many accounts did you originally start out with?
About a half dozen back in the early 1970s.
How many of those accounts are still with you?
Four. One client made about $15 million and decided to withdraw his money and manage it
himself; another made over $10 million and decided to buy a house on the beach and retire.
What source did you learn from before designing your first system?
I was inspired and influenced by the book Reminiscences of a Stock Operator and also by Richard
Donchian's five- and twenty-day moving average crossover system and his weekly rule system. I
consider Donchian to be one of the guiding lights of technical trading.
What was your first trading system?
My first system was a variation of Donchian's moving average system. I used an exponential
averaging method because it was easier to calculate and computational errors tended to disappear
over time. It was so new at the time that it was being passed around by word of mouth as the
"expedential system."
Your reference to a first system implies that you eventually changed systems. How did you
know when your system needed to be changed?
Systems don't need to be changed. The trick is for a trader to develop a system with which he is
compatible.
Were you incompatible with your original system?
My original system was very simple with hard-and-fast rules that didn't allow for any deviations. I
found it difficult to stay with the system while disregarding my own feelings. I kept jumping on and
off—often at just the wrong time. I thought I knew better than the system. At the time, I didn't
really trust that trend-following systems would work. There is plenty of literature "proving" they
don't. Also, it seemed a waste of my intellect and MIT education to just sit there and not try to
figure out the markets. Eventually, as I became more confident of trading with the trend, and more
able to ignore the news, I became more comfortable with the approach. Also, as I continued to
incorporate more "expert trader rules," my system became more compatible with my trading style.
What is your trading style?
My style is basically trend following, with some special pattern recognition and money
management algorithms.
Without divulging trade secrets, how have you been able to so spectacularly outperform
79

standard trend-following systems?
The key to long-term survival and prosperity has a lot to do with the money management
techniques incorporated into the technical system. There are old traders and there are bold traders,
but there are very few old, bold traders.
Witty and true, but the question remains, albeit in translated form: There are many trendfollowing systems with money management rules; why have you done so much better?
I seem to have a gift. I think it is related to my overall philosophy, which has a lot to do with loving
the markets and maintaining an optimistic attitude. Also, as I keep trading and learning, my system
(that is the mechanical computer version of what I do) keeps evolving. I would add that I consider
myself and how I do things as a kind of system which, by definition, I always follow. Sometimes I
trade entirely off the mechanical part, sometimes I override the signals based on strong feelings,
and sometimes I just quit altogether. The immediate trading result of this jumping around is
probably breakeven to somewhat negative. However, if I didn't allow myself the freedom to
discharge my creative side, it might build up to some kind of blowout. Striking a workable ecology
seems to promote trading longevity, which is one key to success.
How would you compare the relative advantages and disadvantages of systems trading versus
discretionary trading?
Systems trading is ultimately discretionary. The manager still has to decide how much risk to
accept, which markets to play, and how aggressively to increase and decrease the trading base as a
function of equity change. These decisions are quite important—often more important than trade
timing.
What percentage of your trading is systems based? Has this percentage changed over time?
Over time, I have become more mechanical, since (1)1 have become more trusting of trend trading,
and (2) my mechanical programs have factored in more and more "tricks of the trade." I still go
through periods of thinking I can outperform my own system, but such excursions are often selfcorrecting through the process of losing money.
What are the present and future prospects for trend-following systems? Do you think the
growing prevalence of their use will doom them to eventual failure?
No. All trading is done on some sort of system, whether or not it is conscious. Many of the good
systems are based on following trends. Life itself is based on trends. Birds start south for the winter
and keep on going. Companies track trends and alter their products accordingly. Tiny protozoa
move in trends along chemical and luminescence gradients.
The profitability of trading systems seems to move in cycles. Periods during which trend-following
systems are highly successful will lead to their increased popularity. As the number of system users
increases, and the markets shift from trending to directionless price action, these systems become
unprofitable, and undercapitalized and inexperienced traders will get shaken out. Longevity is the
key to success.
What are your thoughts about using fundamental analysis as an input in trading?
Fundamentals that you read about are typically useless as the market has already discounted the
price, and I call them "funny-mentals." However, if you catch on early, before others believe, then
you might have valuable "surprise-a-mentals."
Your answer is a bit facetious. Does it imply that you only use technical analysis?
I am primarily a trend trader with touches of hunches based on about twenty years of experience. In
order of importance to me are: (1) the long-term trend, (2) the current chart pattern, and (3) picking
a good spot to buy or sell. Those are the three primary components of my trading. Way down in
very distant fourth place are my fundamental ideas and, quite likely, on balance, they have cost me
money.
By picking the right spot to buy, do you mean determining a reaction point at which you will
buy? If so, how do you avoid sometimes missing major price moves?
Oh no. If I were buying, my point would be above the market. I try to identify a point at which I
expect the market momentum to be strong in the direction of the trade, so as to reduce my probable
80
