
Most of the setups used by Warren Buffett, as well as some of those
used by William O’Neil, are business fundamentals. We’ll be discussing those in the next section. These might include fundamentals such as: What are the earnings? What is the yield? What are
sales? What are profit margins? What are the stock owner’s earnings? How many shares are outstanding? What is the book value
and what are the earnings per share? How has the business grown?
All of this sort of information is quite different from price data.
Management

Information

Who is running your potential investment and what is that person’s track record? Warren Buffett has several tenets for management. And whether you buy a stock or a mutual fund, the track
record of the person behind your investment is probably critical to
the success of that investment.
There are probably other types of data that are also useful. For
example, if you can find some data that are reliable and that few
other people have access to, then you probably can create some
very valuable setups for your trading.
Now that you understand that useful setups come from data
other than price data, you have the basis to create your own setups.
That might be one of the keys to your Holy Grail system.
Don’t get caught up in the importance of setups. They will
help you increase the reliability of your winners. However, you can
still have a highly reliable system that will give you a negative

expectancy because you have some very big losers. Spend at least
as much time on your system stops and exits as you do on setups
and entry. And spend more time on the money management portion of your system than on all the rest of your system put together.
If you do that, you’ll have a chance to find your Holy Grail.
SETUPS USED BY WELL-KNOWN SYSTEMS
Stock Market Setups

In this discussion of stock market setups, I have no intention of giving you an exhaustive collection of possible setups for use in the
stock market. Instead, I think it’s much more useful to examine
three different approaches that make money in the market. Each
method is quite different from the others. And by comparing the
setups that are used in each, you’ll get a much better understanding of them and be able to invent your own. If any of the systems
interests you, I suggest that you study the original source material.
All my comments simply reflect my opinions about the various
models.
William O’Neil’s CANSLIM Model
One of the most successful and widely followed models for trading
has been promoted by William O’Neil and David Ryan-the
CANSLIM model. O’Neil has presented the model in his book, H OW
to Invest in Stoda5 The model is also promoted through his newspaper, Investor’s Business Daily, and his chart service, DaiZy Graphs.
Many people have also attended seminars that O’Neil and Ryan
have given all over the United States. My purpose here is not to
present their model or even evaluate their model. Instead, I’ll refer
you to one of O’Neil’s own fine sources for those purposes. My
purpose here is to use the CANSLIM model to illustrate the setups
involved in a commonly followed model.
CANSLIM is an acronym-with all the letters standing for
setups.

C

stands for current earnings per share, with O’Neil’s
criterion being an increase of 70 percent over the same
quarter a year ago. Therefore, current earnings per share
is the first setup criterion for O’Neil.

is for annual earnings per share. O’Neil believes that the
annual earnings per share over the last 5 years should
show at least a compounded 5-year rate of about 24
percent. Again, this is another setup.
stands for something new about the company. This new
factor could be a new product or service, a change in
management, or even a change in the industry. It also
means that the stock has reached a new high price. Thus,
“N” would really be two setups for entry. However, the
new high price might actually be the entry trigger signal
as discussed in Chapter 8.
refers to shares outstanding. O’Neil did a study of the
s best-performing stocks and found that their average
capitalization was under 12 million shares, with a
median capitalization of only 4.8 million shares. Thus,
another setup criterion for O’Neil is a small number of
outstanding shares-less than 25 million.
means leader. O’Neil believes in a relative strength
model of the market. People who use relative strength
typically rank the change in the price of all stocks over
the last 12 months. A stock in the top 75 to 80 percent
would probably be one to consider. Some people also
give more weight to the amount of change that has
occurred in the last 30 days. O’Neil’s ranking is probably
something of that nature. He says to only pick stocks that
he rates above 80 percent-so that’s another setup.
represents institutional sponsorship. It usually takes
some institutional sponsorship to produce a leading
stock. But a lot of sponsorship is not desirable, since
there would be a lot of selling if anything went wrong. In
addition, by the time all the institutions have found it,
it’s probably too late to expect a good move. However,
some institutional sponsorship is another setup for O’Neil.
in the formula stands for what the overall market is
doing. Most stocks-75 percent or more-tend to move
in the direction of the market averages. As a result, you
want to have positive signs for the overall market as a
setup, before you buy your stocks.

A
N

L

I

M

I’ve just given you the entire O’Neil Acronym, and it consists
entirely of setup criteria. You know very little about the actual
entry into the market except that the “N” criterion also includes the
stock making a new high. In addition, you know nothing about the
protective stops, nothing about how to get out of the market, and
nothing about the most critical part of a
system-position sizing. What most
people think of as O’Neil’s trading systern just consists of his setups. Isn’t that
interesting? We’ll talk more about
O’N ei‘1 ‘s criteria for other parts of the
system when we get to them.
The Warren Buffett “Value” Model
Warren Buffett has been one of the most successful investors in the
world over the last several decades. Buffett has never really written
about his approach to the market, but many books have been written about Warren Buffett and his approach to the market. Some of
the better ones include Of Perrnnnenl Value, by Andrew Kilpatrick,
Warren Bufieett by Andrew Kilpatrick, Buffett: The Making of m
American Capitalist by Roger Lowenstein, and The Wnrre?t Buffctt
Way by Robert Hagstrom, Jr. This last book includes a detailed
explanation of the author’s understanding of Buffett’s philosophy
of investing. All these books are listed in the Recommended
Reading list in Appendix I.
Once again, this is not meant to be a detailed discussion of
Buffett’s strategy, but simply an overview of the setups that Buffett
appears to use. I’d suggest that you go to Hagstrom’s book if you
are interested in a detailed account of Buffett’s strategy Buffett was
selected simply because he has been one of America’s most successful investors and his methodology is somewhat unique.
Buffett’s real strategy is to buy a business-he does not consider that he is buying stock. Most times, when you buy a business,
you have no intention of selling it-and Buffett likes to keep the
rumor going, in my opinion, that he ~doesn’t sell most of his holdings Buffett would advise anyone who wants to learn about investing to learn about every company in the United States that has publicly traded securities and store that knowledge in your head in a

way so that it is always available. If you are overwhelmed because
there are over 25,000 publicly traded companies, Buffett’s advice
would be to “start with the A’s”
Few people would be willing to do the kind of preparation
that Buffett suggests. In fact, most people don’t do anything like the
research Buff&t recommends, even with the few companies they
select to actually buy, so you can understand what an advantage
Buffett has in finding undervalued companies.
Buffett, according to researcher Robert Hagstrom, has 12 criteria that he looks for before buying any company. Nine of the criteria amount to setups, and the remaining three might be considered entry criteria. Indeed, the entry criteria might also be
considered setups. Buffett really isn’t concerned about timing since
most of his investments are lifetime investments. However, we will
discuss his entry criteria briefly in Chapter 8. In this chapter, we
look at the nine setups used by Buffett.
The first three setups have to do with the nature of the business. Basically, (1) Buffett needs to be able to understand any business he might own and it must be simple. He’s not willing to invest
in great high-technology stocks, because he does not understand
that sort of business or the risks involved. In addition, (2) the company needs to have a consistent operating history. He wants a longterm track record and tends to avoid companies that are going
through any sort of severe change. Buffett believes that severe
change and exceptional returns don’t mix.
The last business setup that Buffett looks for is that (3) the
company can raise prices regularly without any fear of losing business. The only companies that can do this are those that have a
product or service that is needed and desired, that has no close substitute, and that has no problems with regulations.
The next three setups that Buffett uses have to do with the
management of the company. Running a business, Buffett understands, is a psychological enterprise and depends entirely upon the
strength of the management. As a result, Buffett demands that (4)
management must be honest with the public. Buffett deplores managers who hide weaknesses in their business behind generally
accepted accounting principles. In addition, he believes that managers who are not frank with the public are not likely to be honest

CHAPTER 7 Using Setups

with themselves. And self-deception definitely leads to sabotage of
their leadership and their company
The most important task that management does, according to
Buffett, is to allocate capital. Buffett’s next criterion is to look for (5)
managers who are rational in their allocation of capital. If the company reinvests its capital in the company for a return that is less
than the average cost of that capital, a very common practice
among business managers, then it is being completely irrational.
Buff&t avoids those companies completely.
Buffett’s last management criterion is (6) to avoid managers
who tend to be conformists and constantly compare themselves
with other managers. These people tend to resist change, develop
projects just to use up available funds, imitate peer companies’
behavior, and have yes-men working for them who will find reasons to justify whatever their leader wants. Obviously, this type of
setup involves intensive study and research into the workings of
the company.
Buffett’s setups for buying a company also include four financial setups. The first financial setup is that (7) the business must
achieve good returns on equity while employing little debt. Return
on equity is basically the ratio of operating earnings (earnings less
unusual items such as capital gains or losses, etc.) to shareholder
equity, where shareholder equity is valued at cost rather than at
market value.
Next, Buffett is very concerned about (8) owner earnings.
Owner earnings consist of net income plus depreciation, depletion,
and amortization less capital expenditures and the working capital
necessary to run the company. Buffett says that about 95 percent of
American companies require capital expenditures that are equal to
their depreciation rates, so that should be considered when estimating owner earnings.
Buffett is very concerned with (9) profit margins. Consequently, he’s looking for managers who are in tune with the idea of
systematic cost cutting to increase margins. Buffett’s market entry
is based upon the belief that if you purchase something that’s
undervalued then the market price will eventually catch up to it so
your returns will be superior. We’ll be discussing Buffett’s market
entry in Chapter 8.

189

Once again, notice that Buffett is like William O’Neil. Most of
his thought process goes into the decision to enter the market.
However, since Buffett seldom sells a company, once he buys it, his
criteria are justified-and his track record adds credence to that justification.
The Motley Fool “Foolish-Four” Approach6
I’ve selected the Motley Fool “Foolish Four” approach as the last
stock market model, because it is a very simple approach that eti~one can follow. Yet it is a good model. Most people can make money
using it, and the amount of time required to do so is negligible. It
still involves some setup conditions. The setup conditions are in
sharp contrast to those of the other two models, so it is again a good
illustration of what we are discussing.
The foolish-four approach is derived from some studies popularized by Michael O’Higgins and John Dowries in their book,
Beating the Doz~.~ It requires little work. The trading involves few
commissions, and the method has very low risk. O’Higgins found
that when one invests in the ten Dow Jones Industrials* stocks with
the highest yield (or five with the highest yield and lowest price),
one can almost double the rate of return of investing simply in the
index. That’s all there is to it.
The foolish-four approach is based on more research by
O’Higgins that suggests that the highest-yielding Dow stock is
often a dog, but the second best-yielding stock often yields as much
as 30 percent per year. As a result, the foolish-four approach allocates 40 percent of your capital to the second best-yielding stock,
and 20 percent of your capital to the third, fourth, and fifth highestyielding Dow stocks, respectively That’s the whole approach.
Let’s look at the setups on this approach, because there are
two important ones. First, you have an index criterion. A stock has
to be among the Dow Jones 30 Industrials stocks to qualify. Second,
you have a setup that consists of uncovering the second through
fifth highest dividend yields. That’s all there is to the method.
In this case, I’ll give you the entry trigger as well, since I won’t
be discussing a trigger like this one in Chapter 8. The entry is simply to buy the stocks on the first trading day in January-or you
could also decide to buy on the day that you decide to implement

the technique, such as today. O’Higgins does suggest that you
might consider buying stock on November 1 and selling it on the
first of May, since those are the best months for the stock market.
In this case, the technique has no stop-loss procedure. It has a
profit-taking procedure, which I’ll discuss in Chapter 10. And it
also has a money management procedure (to allocate 40 percent, 20
percent, 20 percent, and 20 percent of your capital to the second
through fifth highest-yielding stocks, respectively). I’ll discuss this
style of money management in Chapter 11.
The technique is obviously very simple-as are most techniques that work. And it consists mostly of setups, so you can definitely improve upon it by adding other, more critical components.
Futures Market Setups
Now, let’s look at some models that have been used for futures
trading. Once again, I have no intention of giving you an exhaustive collection of possible setups for use in the futures market.
Instead, we’ll examine several different approaches that make
money in the market and look at the setups involved in those
approaches. Once again, I’ve selected methods that I believe to be
sound, and my comments simply reflect my opinions about these
methods.
Perry Kaufman’s Market Efficiency Model
Perry Kaufman, in his book, Smarter Trading,9 gives some interesting adaptations of trend-following methods. He says that trading
in the direction of the trend is a safe, conservative approach to the
markets. But trend following must be able to separate the trend
from the random noise of the market--the random activity of the
market at any given time.
Kaufman argues that longer trends are the most dependable,
but they respond very slow&to changing market conditions. For
example, long-term moving averages barely reflect a large, shortterm price move. Furthermore, w~hen they do provide some sort of
signal for action, the price move usually has finished. Thus,
Kaufman argues that an adaptive method is necessary for trend following. You need a methodology that speeds up entry when the

markets are moving and does nothing when the markets are going
sideways. Kaufman’s solution to this is to develop an adaptive
moving average. I’ll refer the interested reader to Perry Kaufman’s
book (and the brief discussion in Chapter 8) to learn more about
this average. Here, we’ll just present his “market efficiency” filter,
which probably can be adapted to work with almost any type of
entry.
Basically, the fastest “trend” that one can use is limited by the
amount of noise that is present in the market. As the market gets
more volatile (noisy), one must use a slower trend to avoid getting
whipsawed in and out of the market. For example, if the average
daily volatility is about 3 points, then a 4-point move is not that significant. It could easily “retrace” back into the noise. In contrast, a
30.point move, which might occur over a month or so, is very tradable within a daily background noise of 3 points.
However, at the same time, the faster prices are moving, the
less significant the factor of noise becomes. If the market moves 20
points in a single day, then a background noise of 3 points per day
is not that significant. Thus, you need some measure of market efficiency that includes both noise and the speed of movement in the
direction of the trend. A price move that is either “cleaner” or
“faster” can take advantage of a short time frame for entry, whereas
a price move that is “noisy” or “slow” must use a longer time frame
for entry.
Kaufman’s efficiency ratio combines noise and speed. It essentially divides the net price movement between two time periods by
the sum of the individual price movements (with each movement
assumed to be a positive number). This is essentially a ratio of the
speed of the movement to the noise of the market. Kaufman only
uses 10 days in which to constantly update the ratio, but the reader
could select a larger number.
Here are the formulas for the efficiency ratio:
Movement speed = close yesterday minus close 10 days ago
Volatility
= X absolute value [close today minus close
yesterday] over the 10 days
Efficiency ratio
= movement speed/volatility
The efficiency ratio essentially is a number that ranges from 1 (no

noise in the movement) to 0 (noise predominates throughout the
movement). This efficiency ratio is an excellent filter that can be
mapped onto a range of speeds for a number of different entry signals. Doing so is slightly tricky. Kaufman gives a great example of
how to do so with different moving averages. However, you could
simply require that this number be above some particular value
(i.e., 0.6) as a required setup prior to taking an entry signal.
More details of how Kaufman might trade the markets will
follow in subsequent chapters as we explore the effect of other components of a system when added to this method of trading.
However, I strongly recommend that you read Kaufman’s book if
the method interests you.
William Gallacher’s Fundamental
Trading Method
Gallacher, in his book, Winner Take All, provides a scathing critique
of system tradinglo and then goes on to show how someone with a
fundamental approach can make a lot of money. In this section, I’ll
show the setups in Gallacher’s fundamental trading methodology.
First, Gallacher says that you must select markets according to
value-meaning that they are historically “cheap” or “expensive.”
He says that this can be done for certain markets (i.e., a pound of
bacon is cheap at $0.75 and expensive at $3.49), but not for other
markets (e.g., gold has gone from $35 an ounce to $850 an ounce to
$280 an ounce-so what is expensive and what is cheap?). Thus,
the market selection phase of entry is an important part of
Gallacher’s methodology.
Second, Gallacher says that the trader must develop a critical
eye for what is “important” fundamental information to a particular market. He says that what’s important is constantly changing,
but presents his current opinion about important fundamentals for
various futures markets.
For example, he says that annual variations in supply are the
big movers in corn. Generally, the corn produced in the United
States is the main grain for hog production. Most of it is consumed
domestically, with only about 25 percent being exported. The
demand is fairly constant. Th?s, variations in supply are the major
determinants of value for corn. Gallacher says that previous bad
markets were sheltered by large carryover stocks from previous

harvests. However, he says that when such carryover is historically
low, then a bad crop could push prices to very high levels. Thus, for
corn the critical fundamental setups would be “carryover” and the
amount of supply in the “new crop.”
Gallacher goes on in this manner, covering soybeans, wheat,
cocoa, sugar, cattle, pork bellies, precious metals, interest rate
futures, stock index futures, and currencies. If you are interested in
this type of fundamental information, take a look at Gallacher’s
book. My overall conclusion from this was that it is very difficult to
get any precise setups from fundamentals. The only thing you
really get is a bias that says (1) neutral, (2) bullish, or (3) bearishbased upon a lot of information which is different for each market.
One’s real setup, therefore, is simply the opinion you develop after
looking at the data.
Once you develop an opinion, Gallacher still believes in using
a price entry signal, limiting losses, taking profits systematically,
and practicing sound position sizing-all techniques described in
later chapters of this book.
Ken Roberts’ Method”
Ken Roberts has been marketing commodity trading courses to
thousands of beginners all over the world. The primary method
taught, although several systems are given in his course, is quite
simple and involves what I consider to be rather subjective setups.
Essentially, the setups require that the market make a major high or
low and then show a reversal hook pattern. You open a position
when it’s “clear” that the major trend is reversing.
