
200

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

was the May 2001 sale of the eToys.com web address to KB Toys, which in
turn filed for bankruptcy in January 2004.
The valuation the market placed on such stocks as eToys at the peak of the
market in 1999 and 2000 appears absurd to many observers, and yet the in­­fluence
of these observers on market prices does not seem to correct the mispricing.
What could they do that would have the effect of correcting it? Those who
doubt the value of these stocks could try to sell them short, and some do, but
their willingness to do so is limited, partly since there is always a possibility
that the stock will be bid up even further by enthusiastic investors. We will see
other reasons later. Absurd prices sometimes last a long time.
It seems obvious that investors in these stocks are not thinking very clearly
about long‑run investment potential, and also that there are no forces in the
market to prevent these investors from causing substantial overpricing. Doesn’t
such evidence clearly speak against market efficiency, at least for some stocks?
And if some stocks can be overpriced, then does it not follow that the market
as a whole can be overpriced, given that those stocks are part of the market?

Short-Sales Constraints and the
Persistence of Obvious Mispricing
There is reason to think that obvious mispricing really ought to occur, even in
a world with huge quantities of smart money searching for mispriced assets.
That reason: there are often obstacles to short sales, to borrowing the assets
and selling them, thereby in effect holding negative quantities of the assets.
Edward Miller, an eccentric professor at the University of New Orleans who
has written provocative papers on a wide range of academic disciplines, first
pointed this out in a 1977 article in the Journal of Finance that seemed to take
efficient markets theorists by surprise.9
Miller’s argument was actually very simple. Suppose a particular stock,
or a particular tulip, or whatever, comes into great demand by a small
group of zealots, who bid eagerly against one another to buy as much of this
investment as they can. Efficient markets theory does not say that there are
no zealots, which would be an absurd claim; it says only that somehow the
smart money ultimately sets market prices. But if these zealots have really
lost their sense, and if they buy so aggressively that they end up being the
only people holding these assets, who is to say that these assets won’t become
wildly overpriced? The smart money, who are not crazy, would like to short
the overpriced assets, to profit from the eventual fall in price, but if they
cannot find any of the assets to borrow, the only way they can participate is
by buying. As a result, they must just sit on the sidelines. The market with
short-sales constraints can be wildly overpriced, and the smart money knows
it, but there is no way for the smart money to use that knowledge.10

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

201

Short-sales constraints are very real. Some countries’ governments do not
allow short sales at all. Even in countries where short sales are allowed, the
institutions supporting them may not work very well. Part of the reason is that
even in these countries, there is a widespread antipathy to short sellers. Short
sellers are blamed for all sorts of bad things. The New York Stock Exchange
used to have an orderly market for the borrowing and lending of shares, the
“loan crowd” on the floor of the exchange, but shut this market down some
years after the stock market crash of 1929—a move that was widely blamed
on short sellers.11 Short sellers are commonly targeted as “boogeymen” for
fluctuating or falling equity prices, a position echoed by regulators—short
sales of financial stocks were temporarily banned in the United States and
Europe after the market crash of 2008 in an attempt to stem market declines.
The difficulty of making short sales has played a real role in the mispricing of securities. A good example is the mispricing of the shares sold
during the 3Com sale of Palm near the peak of the stock market in March
2000. In this initial public offering, 3Com sold 5% of its subsidiary Palm, a
maker of personal digital assistants, to the general public, and announced
at the same time that the rest of Palm would be sold later. This initial 5% of
Palm went for such a high price in the market that, if one assumed that the
other 95% of the Palm shares were worth as much, these shares exceeded
the market value of their owner, 3Com. This is obvious mispricing if there
ever was such a thing. But the interest cost of borrowing Palm shares grew
to extraordinary levels, 35% per year by July 2000, high enough to make it
impractical for smart money to profit from knowledge of this mispricing by
shorting Palm and buying 3Com.12
The Palm example is extreme, but it illustrates the effects of restrictions
on short sales. There are many barriers to short selling, not just the explicit
interest cost; some of these barriers are bureaucratic, psychological, and social.

Statistical Evidence of Mispricings
It is difficult to make any solid judgments about market efficiency based
on a few anecdotes about alleged extreme mispricing of assets. But, in fact,
there is no shortage of systematic evidence that firms that are “overpriced”
by conventional measures have indeed tended to do poorly afterward. Many
articles in academic finance journals show this, not by colorful examples, but
by systematic evaluation of large amounts of data on many firms.
Stocks that are difficult to short tend to do relatively poorly as investments, as was shown by Stephen Figlewski in 1981.13 More generally, stocks
that are just overpriced by various measures tend to do poorly relative to
stocks that are underpriced. Sanjoy Basu found in 1977 that firms with high
price‑earnings ratios tend to underperform, and in 1992, Eugene Fama and

202

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

Kenneth French found the same for stocks with high price–to–book value.14
Werner De Bondt and Richard Thaler reported in 1985 that firms whose price
had risen a great deal over five years tend to go down in price in the next five
years, and that firms whose price had declined a great deal over five years
tend to go up in price in the succeeding five years.15 (In Chapter 8 we saw
that a similar tendency has held for national stock markets around the world.)
Jay Ritter found in 1991 that initial public offerings tend to occur at the peak
of industry‑specific investor fads and then to show gradual but substantial
price declines relative to the market over the subsequent three years.16 Thus,
there is a sort of regression to the mean (or to longer‑run past values) for stock
prices: what goes up a lot tends to come back down, and what goes down a
lot tends to come back up.
These findings, and similar findings by many other researchers, have
encouraged an approach to the market called value investing, that of picking
portfolios of stocks that are underpriced by conventional measures, on the
theory that they have been overlooked only temporarily by investors and
will appreciate eventually. The other side of this strategy is to sell overpriced
stocks short. One might think that the effect on the market of so many value
investors would be to reduce, and even possibly eliminate for a time, the relation across stocks between value and subsequent returns. Value investors are
after all buying the underpriced assets and bidding up their prices, and also
diverting demand away from overpriced assets.
Sometimes value investing strategies will probably cease to work as investors flock to exploit them, yet it certainly does not follow that value investing
as a whole will ever be out for good. Certainly avoiding investments that have
become so overpriced that only the zealots own them is a sensible strategy.
There are many different ways to define value, and the market as a whole is
not going to find it easy to eliminate all such profit opportunities.
Moreover, even if the effect of value on return across stocks disappears,
it does not follow that the effect of value on return over time for the market
as a whole must also disappear. The characteristic strategy of value investors is to pull out of overvalued individual stocks but not to pull out of the
market as a whole when it appears to be overvalued.

Earnings Changes and Price Changes
Another argument that markets are basically efficient, in the most global sense,
is merely that stock prices roughly track earnings over time—that despite
great fluctuations in earnings, price‑earnings ratios have stayed within a
comparatively narrow range.
Peter Lynch, an investment analyst who appeared frequently in the media
during the bull market of the 1990s, was quoted in banner red letters in a 1999

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

203

advertisement for Fidelity Investments featuring a full‑page photograph of him:
“Despite 9 recessions since WWII, the stock market’s up 63‑fold because earnings are up 54‑fold. Earnings drive the market.” The ad, first seen just before
the peak of the market, appeared to be designed to sell Fidelity’s stock mutual
funds by convincing readers that price growth is approximately justified by
earnings growth. But in fact the numbers were deceptive. When such a long
time interval is chosen for comparison, when no inflation correction is made, and
since earnings were very low right after World War II, it is not surprising that
Lynch could find such a correspondence. But if other examples are chosen, price
changes may seem far less justified by earnings growth.17 Lynch’s statement was
indicative of a common view that stock price changes are generally justified by
earnings changes, and that this proves that stock market price movements are
not due to any irrational behavior on the part of investors.
As we have noted, there have been only three great bull markets, periods
of sustained and dramatic stock price increase, in U.S. history: the bull market
of the 1920s, culminating in 1929; the bull market of the 1950s; and the long
bull market running from 1982 to 2000. (One might also add the bull market
leading to the peak in 1901, but it was not so dramatic. The Ownership-Society
Boom 2003–7 and the New-Normal Boom 2009–14 are even less dramatic in
comparison.)
The first great bull market, from 1920 to 1929, was a period of rapid earnings growth. Real S&P Composite earnings doubled over this period, and
real stock prices increased five-fold. The market change might be viewed as
a reaction to the earnings change, albeit an overreaction.
But in the second great bull market, the correspondence between price
growth and earnings growth is not so clear. Most of the price growth then
occurred in the 1950s, and from January 1950 to December 1959 the real
S&P Composite Index almost tripled. But real S&P earnings grew only 16%
in total over this entire decade, an earnings performance that was below
average by historical standards. In terms of overall economic growth, the
1950s were a little above average, though not as strong as either the 1940s
or the 1960s: average real gross domestic product growth was 3.3% a year
from 1950 to 1960.
In the third great bull market, real stock prices rose more or less continually from 1982 to 2000, but earnings did not grow at all uniformly. Real S&P
Composite earnings were actually lower at the bottom of the recession of
1991 than they were at the bottom of the recession of 1982, but the real S&P
Composite Index was almost two and a half times as high. So, for this bull
market, price increases cannot be viewed as a simple reaction to earnings
increases.
These examples show that earnings growth and price growth do not correspond well at all. One cannot criticize bubble theories by claiming that they do.

204

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

A Historical Relation between Price‑Earnings Ratios and
Subsequent Long‑Term Returns
In fact, price movements tend to be large relative to earnings, and price swings
relative to the long-trend of earnings have tended, historically, to be reversed
later. Figure 11.1 is a scatter diagram showing, on the horizontal axis, for
January of each year from 1881 to 2003, the CAPE price‑earnings ratio (as
discussed in Chapter 1 and plotted in Figure 1.3) for that month, and, on the
vertical axis, the annualized real (inflation‑corrected) stock market return
over the ten years following that month. This scatter diagram allows us to
see visually how well price‑earnings ratios forecast subsequent long‑term
(ten‑year) returns. Only January data are shown: if all twelve months of each
year were shown, there would be so many points that the scatter would be
unreadable. The downside of this plotting method, of course, is that by showing only January data, we miss most of the peaks and troughs of the market.
For example, we miss the peak of the market in 1929 and also miss the negative returns that followed it.
Figure 11.1 shows how CAPE values have forecast returns, since each
CAPE shown on the horizontal axis was known at the beginning of the
ten‑year period. This scatter diagram was developed by fellow economist
John Campbell and me. Plots like it, for various countries, were the centerpiece of our testimony before the board of governors of the Federal Reserve
on December 3, 1996, just before Alan Greenspan’s irrational exuberance
speech.18 Figure 11.1 differs from a chart we distributed at that meeting only
in that we now have data from 17 more years, 1987 through 2003 (endpoints
1997 through 2013), and so 17 new points have been added to the 106 that
were on the chart then.
The swarm of points in the scatter shows a definite tilt, sloping down
from the upper left to the lower right. The scatter shows that for some dates
near the left of the scatter (such as January 1920, January 1949, or January
1982) subsequent long‑term returns have been very high. In some years near
the right of the scatter (such as January 1929, January 1937, or January 1966)
subsequent returns have been very low. There are also some important
exceptions, such as January 1899, which still managed to have subsequent
ten‑year returns as high as 5.5% a year despite a high CAPE of 22.9, and
January 1922, which managed to have subsequent ten‑year returns of only
8.7% a year despite a low CAPE of 7.4. But the point of this scatter diagram
is that, as a rule and on average, years with low CAPEs have been followed
by high returns, and years with high CAPEs have been followed by low or
negative returns.
The relation between price‑earnings ratios and subsequent returns appears to
be moderately strong, though there are questions about its statistical significance,

205

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

Annualized subsequent ten-year return (%)

20

15

10

Up to 1986
After 1986

5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

–5

–10

Price-earnings ratio (CAPE)

Figure 11.1
Cyclically Adjusted Price‑Earnings Ratio (CAPE)
as Predictor of Ten‑Year Returns
Scatter diagram of annualized ten‑year returns against price‑earnings ratios.
Horizontal axis shows the CAPE (as plotted in Figure 1.3) for January of the year.
Vertical axis shows the geometric average real annual return per year on investing
in the S&P Composite Index in January of the year shown, reinvesting dividends,
and selling ten years later. Source: Author’s calculations using data from sources
given in Figure 1.3. See also Chapter 1, note 3.

since there are only a dozen non-overlapping ten‑year intervals in the 123 years’
worth of data. There has been substantial academic debate about the statistical significance of relationships like this one, and some difficult questions of
statistical methodology are still being addressed.19 We believe, however, that
the relation should be regarded as statistically significant. Figure 11.1 confirms
that long‑term investors—investors who could commit their money to an investment for ten full years—did do well when prices were low relative to earnings
at the beginning of the ten years and did do poorly when prices were high at
the beginning of the ten years. Long‑term investors would be well advised,
individually, to lower their exposure to the stock market when it is high, other
things equal, and get into the market when it is low.20 Of course, other things
are not always equal. At the time of this writing, in 2014, the CAPE is very high,

206

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

but so too are the prices of alternative investments and long-term bond prices,
and short-term interest rates are virtually zero.
The value of the CAPE at the peak of the stock market in 2000, over 40,
was far outside the normal historical range of price‑earnings ratios, and
bond prices and short-term interest rates were not at such extremes. That
same year, when the first edition of this book was published, I was careful
never to use this chart as a basis for forecasting the stock market. The forecast
would have been too extremely pessimistic to be believable. If one were to
fit a straight line or a curve to the scatter, and since the 2000 price‑earnings
ratio was outside the historical range, the shape of the curve would matter
a lot. Suffice it to say that the diagram suggested that, measuring from 2000,
the forecast would have been for substantially negative returns, on average,
to 2010. Measuring from 2014, with a price-earnings ratio in the mid-20s, the
figure suggests low positive real returns, a few percent a year, from holding
stocks for the ten years ending in 2024, though again that forecast should not
be taken as very reliable at all.
Part of the reason to suspect that the relation shown in Figure 11.1 is real,
if not highly reliable, is that, historically, when prices have been high relative
to earnings as computed here (using a ten‑year moving average of earnings),
the return in terms of dividends has been low, and when prices have been low
relative to earnings, the return in terms of dividends has been high.21 The year2000 record‑high price‑earnings ratios were matched by record‑low dividend
yields. In January 2000, S&P dividends were 1.2% of prices, far below the 4.7%
that was the historical average. By 2004, the market decline and some increases
in dividends brought dividends up to 1.7%, higher, but still low, and by 2014,
they were up a bit more to 1.9%. It is natural to suppose that when one is getting so much lower dividends from the shares one owns, one ought to expect
to earn lower investing returns overall. The dividend is, after all, part of the
total return one gets from holding stocks (the other part being the capital gain),
and dividends historically represent the dominant part of the average return
on stocks. The reliable return attributable to dividends, not the less predictable
portion arising from capital gains, is the main reason stocks have on average
been such good investments historically.
Returns from holding stocks must therefore be low when dividends are
low—unless low dividends themselves are somehow predictors of stock
market price increases, so that one can at times of low dividends actually
expect stock prices to rise more than usual to offset the effects of the low
dividends on returns. As a matter of historical fact, times when dividends
have been low relative to stock prices have not tended to be followed by
higher stock price increases in the subsequent five or ten years. Quite the
contrary: times of low dividends relative to stock prices in the stock market
as a whole tend to be followed by price decreases (or smaller-than-usual

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

207

increases) over long horizons, and so returns have tended to take a double
hit at such times, from both low dividend yields and price decreases. Thus,
the simple wisdom—that when one is not getting much in dividends relative
to the prices one pays for stocks, it is not a good time to buy stocks—turns
out to have been right historically.

Interest Rates as Forecasters of
Excess Returns of Stocks over Bonds
When interest rates are very low (as they are at the time of this writing), it
would seem that the attractiveness of the stock market is enhanced, even if
the stock market is looking highly priced by the CAPE, since the alternative
to stocks is not looking so good either. Indeed, if long-term interest rates are
very low (as when they hit an all-time record low in 2012, around the time
that the Fed announced its third round of quantitative easing—see Figure 1.3),
then investors in bonds need to have some doubts as to their worthiness as
alternatives to the stock market, even if the CAPE is high.
Since the CAPE negatively predicts long-term returns, one might suspect
that the excess real return between stocks and bonds (that is, the real return
on stocks minus the real return on bonds) would be influenced negatively both
by the CAPE and by an estimated real long-term interest rate. Indeed, this is
what we find, with the data shown in Figure 1.1.22 A strong signal to replace
stocks with bonds would be a time with high CAPE and high long-term real
interest rates. Such a time was September 1929, when the CAPE was 32.6,
when the long-term interest rate was 3.4%, and when, because of deflation in
the 1920s, an estimated real interest rate was even higher, 3.7%. The predicted
excess returns of stocks over bonds was –2.3% a year for 1929–39. (The actual
annualized excess return was –6.3% a year for 1929–39.) It was not so at the
time of this writing, in 2014, when the CAPE was around 25, long-term interest rates were around 2.5%, and estimated real long-term interest rates were
around a quarter of 1%. The predicted annualized excess return for U.S. stocks
over bonds from this simple analysis as of July 2014 for July 2014–July 2024
is 2.4% per year. Any such predictions have to be taken with a good deal of
caution, of course.

Dividend Changes and Price Changes
Some economists have claimed that there is a good relation between real stock
price movements and, if not real earnings movements, at least real dividend
movements.23 Dividend movements may be regarded as indicators of fundamental value, and so, these economists suggest, there is evidence that stock
prices are driven by real fundamentals, not investor attitudes.
