
When you fade the trend, you break a cardinal
rule of technical trading — to trade with the
trend, which is based on the Dow principle that
once a trend is established, the probability is
high that it will continue. Therefore, to fade the
trend is a purely opportunistic action based on
an understanding of crowd psychology. Fading
the trend also illustrates that the frame of reference of technical trading isn’t the security
and its fundamentals, but crowd behavior. Just
remember, swing trading against the trend
requires lightning speed, total concentration,
and nerves of steel.

To try to avoid making this mistake, you need to choose a core guiding principle, either trend-following or swing trading (see Chapter 16).
If you choose trend-following, you choose to suffer through the downward
bounce in an uptrend (or the upward bounce in a downtrend). And if you
have correctly identified the trend, your patience pays off and the trend
resumes. If you choose swing trading, you need courage, because sometimes
you’re trading against the trend. Remember that your choice of trending or
swing-trading indicators determines your holding period. Trending indicators
generally keep you in a trade for longer than swing-trading indicators.
The best guiding principles are the ones that relate directly to the supply and
demand dynamics that you can see on the chart. Simple, old-fashioned techniques,
such as bar reading and pattern identification, are powerful. Math-based indicators
are powerful, too, but if you find that you can’t describe market sentiment — what
the crowd is feeling — from a math-based indicator, don’t use it. Remember that
using just one indicator-based rule to guide your trading (whether judgment- or
math-based), such as buying when your security breaks a resistance line or selling
when it falls below a moving average, can make or save you a bundle.

Examining How Indicators Work
Indicators aren’t inherently tied to particular time frames, nor do they have a
single correct interpretation. For example, the standard momentum indicator

www.pdfdummies.com

63

64

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
I describe in Chapter 13 uses 12 days, and the standard interpretation is that
you buy when the indicator is over zero and you sell when the indicator is
under zero. But you could use five days or any other number of periods for the
indicator, and you could also sell when the indicator turns downward even if
the value is still above zero.
In the sections that follow, I describe the general way indicators work, but be
aware that technical traders are mavericks and use indicators in an infinite
variety of ways.

Finding relevant time frames
Most indicators measure price and volume changes relative to previous
prices and volume over a specific lookback period, such as 12 days or 21
days. If you compare the trend-following chart in Figure 4-1 with the swingtrading chart in Figure 4-2, you can easily deduce that trend-following uses
indicators with a relatively longer time frame than swing-trading indicators.
Most indicators have a range of time in which research shows they work best.
Most charting software incorporates this info and comes with preformatted indicators with default parameters, such as 12 periods for the momentum indicator.
A default parameter is only a starting point, and if 12 periods doesn’t work for
you as a momentum indicator, you’re welcome to use a different number of
periods. Twelve periods is the default because researchers found it the best
number over many thousands of price series. To adopt the default parameter
does not mean that you must trade every 12 days if you use the momentum
indicator to guide you. It means that looking back 12 periods from today
tends to give you useful information. See Chapter 13 for more on momentum.
Most indicators and patterns can stretch from a few minutes to several days
or even many months, with a few exceptions. You wouldn’t use momentum,
for example, on a monthly chart but you could use it on 12-minute bars.
Support and resistance lines can be drawn on a chart of any time frame, and
you can often see patterns like a head-and-shoulders on 60-minute bars as
well as a chart containing a year of data. Technology offers the ability to put
an indicator on the screen that traditionally used (say) 12 days — but today
it can be 12 periods, and the period could be 15-minute bars. (See Chapter 6
for a discussion of intraday time frames.)
The ability to apply an indicator over any time frame reflects the fractal quality of prices — the weird and wonderful fact that without a label, a price series
of 15-minute bars often can’t be distinguished from a month’s worth of daily
bars. Intraday bars are like microcosms of daily bars, and daily bars are like
microcosms of weekly or monthly bars. Traders respond to price changes in
regular, consistent, and repetitive ways no matter the time frame.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4: Using Indicators to Trade Systematically
To pick indicators to go with your time frame, get rid of the idea that you
already know your time frame. You may think you’re a long-term trader but
then discover a real affinity for an indicator that works stunningly on your
favorite securities at 20 days. You don’t want to miss out on an indicator that
“belongs” to a different time frame just because you’ve already boxed yourself in. The indicator may be more flexible than you first think. You can use
short-term indicators to make long-term trades and the other way around.
Thousands of technical traders all vover the world are inventing new twists
and tweaks on indicators all the time.

Heeding indicator signals
Indicators are designed to give buy and sell signals, although in many
instances, the signal is more like a warning and doesn’t have a black-andwhite embedded decision rule. Indicators generate signals in three ways as I
describe in the sections that follow — crossovers, meeting a range limit, and
convergence and divergence.

Crossovers
The term crossover refers to one line crossing another line. Crossovers in
technical analysis and trading include
✓ The price crossing a fixed historic benchmark. (See the “Establishing
Benchmark Levels” section, later in the chapter.)
✓ The indicator crossing the price or the price crossing the indicator.
(See Chapters 10 and 13 for support and resistance lines and moving
averages).
✓ One line of a two-line indicator crossing the other. (See information on
the moving average convergence/divergence indicator in Chapter 12.)
In most instances — but not all — the price crossing an indicator is named
a breakout, one of the most important concepts in technical analysis. When
a price rises above a long-standing resistance line, for example, technical
traders say it “broke out” of its previous trading range and now the sky’s the
limit — until the new range is established. Usually, you want to scrupulously
observe and measure a breakout. If the indicator line is at 10 and the price
goes to 12, it’s a breakout. If the price goes to 10.05, it’s also a breakout.
The word breakout itself tells you the crowd psychology behind the price
move. In an upside breakout, bullish sentiment triumphed. The bulls broke
out of the enclosure and are cavorting in the pasture. When bearish sentiment wins, the bears have broken down the fence and are eating your prize
roses. A breakout doesn’t necessarily imply a trend reversal, though; sometimes a breakout is a confirming factor that the existing trend is gathering
new momentum or passing new benchmarks.

www.pdfdummies.com

65

66

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
Range limits
Oscillators describe where today’s price stands relative to its recent trading
range, as I describe in Chapter 13. Oscillators are usually based on 100, so
they range from zero to 100, or minus 100 to plus 100, or some other variation using the number 100.
In practice, traders find that usually the scope of the price range falls well
under the outer limits and doesn’t vary by more than 20 percent to 80 percent of the total possible range, so they draw a line at 20 percent of the
maximum range and another at 80 percent (or 10 percent and 90 percent, or
some other variation). When the indicator approaches one of the lines, the
price is nearing an extreme of its recent range. This is a warning of an overbought or oversold condition and thus a potential retracement or reversal.
Depending on whether you’re a trend-follower or a swing trader, you may
alter the amount of your position or alter your stop (see Chapter 5). If you’re
a swing trader, you may use an actual crossover of the range lines as a buy/
sell signal.

Convergence and divergence
Convergence refers to two indicator lines coming closer to one another, such
as when a support line and a resistance line converge to form a triangle (see
Chapter 9) or two moving averages get closer together (see Chapter 13), indicating less difference between their numerical values. Convergence is most
often seen in indicators on the price chart, and generally means that the
price action is starting to go sideways or has a narrower high-low range, or
both. A sideways move, in turn, generally leads to a breakout. Convergence
does not have an embedded trading rule and is more often used as a warning
that a change in direction or the strength of a trend is changing.
Divergence refers to two indicator lines moving farther apart, such as when
the spread between two moving averages widens. Divergence also refers to
an indicator and the price going in different directions, and this is the most
common and useful application of the observation. Momentum indicators,
in particular, reshuffle the components of the price bar to come up with a
price’s rate of change, so that the slope of the indicator is a sophisticated
measure of the strength of a trend. When the price is still rising (making new
highs) as the momentum indicator starts to fall (making progressively lower
highs), the price and indicator are diverging.
Divergence is one of the few leading indicators in technical analysis and something you should note as a warning of a possible trend change, although it, like
convergence, doesn’t have an embedded trading rule.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4: Using Indicators to Trade Systematically

Establishing Benchmark Levels
Some price chart characteristics are inherent to the chart and not deliberately placed indicators. Every price series has absolute highs and lows in
its history. Technically, these characteristics aren’t indicators, and yet they
may serve to indicate future price action. You’ve probably heard the phrases
“52-week high” or “52-week low,” meaning the security is reaching a one-year
high or low. A new one-year high or low has no analytical value to the technical trader — unless it’s also a historic high or low. A historic high or low is an
absolute level that becomes a benchmark.
Examples of historical highs are the all-time high in the S&P 500 at 1553.11 in
March 2000 that was not bested until October 2007 at 1565.42. Another example is the all-time high in spot gold at $850 in January 1980, not surpassed
until 2010.
As in these cases, when a price makes a new historic high or low and then
retreats in the other direction, years can pass before the benchmark is
matched again. In the meantime, intermediate highs and lows emerge and
become benchmarks in their own right. At the time they occur, they seem
“historic.” After a bounce up off a new low, traders hesitate to break it, but
after they do, the price accelerates to the next low. The same thing happens
on the way up to new highs. Profit taking after a high causes the price to dip,
and traders hesitate to breach the new “historic” high. Historic levels are
magnetic — they attract some traders to try to break them — but they are
also barriers. Hesitation ahead of the breach of a benchmark price can be
prolonged, demonstrating that traders are fully aware of “historic levels.”
Historic levels are a cause and an effect of strange indicator behavior. If an
uptrending indicator like the moving average flattens out mysteriously, widen
the time frame on your chart to see whether the price is near a historic level.
The market is going to test the old high. If the test fails, expect a retracement
and maybe a reversal. If the price passes the test and makes a new high, you
expect the price to accelerate with high momentum and deliver a juicy profit.
See the discussion on momentum in Chapter 13.

Choosing Indicators
The good news is that everything works, at least some of the time. Moving
average indicators work (see Chapter 12). Channel breakouts work (take a
peek at Chapter 11). Trading in a three-to-five-day time frame with candlestick analysis works (see Chapter 8). But indicators only indicate. They don’t
dictate the next price move.

www.pdfdummies.com

67

68

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
All newcomers to technical analysis (and many old hands as well) tend to lose
sight of the limitations of indicators. Folklore says that technical traders are
always seeking the Holy Grail, or the perfect indicator or combination of indicators that is right 100 percent of the time. It doesn’t exist. One of the reasons
it doesn’t exist is that you are different from the next guy. Equally important,
you change over time. The ideal indicator that delivered great profits ten years
ago is one that you now avoid as carrying too much risk. In other words, an
indicator is only what you make of it — how you apply it.
The old joke has it, “Give 12 technical traders a new indicator, and a year
later you have 12 different track records.” How you use an indicator isn’t set
by the indicator itself, but by the trading rules you use. Indicators and trading rules have a chicken-and-egg relationship. The process of selecting and
using indicators involves not only the characteristics of the indicator, but
also a consideration of the trading rules you must employ to make the indicator work properly for you.
For example, you may like an indicator but find it generates too many trades
in a fixed period, so you don’t execute every single signal. Someone else may
use the identical indicator, but instead of overriding indicator signals with
personal judgment like you, he modifies the exact timing of trades by using a
second indicator. I talk about combining indicators in Chapter 16.
Modifying indicators with trading rules is always better than overriding them.
To override your indicator haphazardly is self-defeating. You’re letting emotion back in. Plus, you won’t get the expected result from the indicator — and
then you’ll blame the indicator. Fortunately, most indicators are fairly flexible.
They can be adapted to fit the trading style you prefer, such as the frequency
of your trades. Indicators are about price-move measurement. Trading rules
are about you and your tolerance for risk. Trading rules must be appropriate
to the indicators you choose. In short, don’t pick indicators that you can’t
follow, like a momentum indicator that gives ten trading signals per month
when you don’t have the time or inclination to trade that often.

Optimizing: Putting Indicators
to the Test
The first step in seeing whether a given indicator can work for you is to test
how it would have worked in the past. You expect price patterns to repeat,
because crowd psychology doesn’t change much. Optimization is the process
of testing a hypothesis on historical data (backtesting) to discover which
parameter would’ve worked the best. In practice, the terms backtesting and
optimization are used interchangeably.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4: Using Indicators to Trade Systematically
Optimization is a necessary evil because when you’re starting out to trade a
new security, you don’t know which indicators to use or which parameters
to put into the indicators. In keeping with the empirical approach, try various
indicators and different parameters in the indicators to see what works.
I say that optimization is evil because common sense tells you that conditions are never exactly the same and what worked on historical data may not
work in the future. Backtests to find good indicators and optimum parameters give you a sense of accuracy and reliability that is almost always misleading. Keep reading for more on optimization.

Constructing a backtest optimization
Backtesting is a valuable exercise that delivers a measure of how well an indicator parameter might work — in a situation where you have no other evidence that the indicator will work at all. Backtesting is better than eyeballing
multiple versions of the indicator on a chart.
A popular place to start backtesting indicators on your security is the simple
moving average crossover. The goal of the backtest is to find x, which is the
number of days in the moving average that would generate the best profit by
using a crossover rule (See Chapter 12). Here’s the formal hypothesis: “If you
buy XYZ stock every time the price crosses above the x-day moving average
and sell it every time the price crosses below the x-day moving average, it’ll
consistently and reliably be a profitable trading rule.”
Just about every software package allows you to search for the optimum
moving average and will deliver the results in minutes. In this case, I ordered
the software to test every moving average from 10 to 50 days over the past
1,000 days to see which moving average would have delivered the most profit
on XYZ stock (the name is withheld to protect the innocent). I also ordered a
buy-only strategy, although you can also test for additional gains from going
short (to sell today without owning the security and buy it back later after
the price has fallen). You can see the top-three best results in Table 4-1.

Table 4-1

Results of Simple Moving Average
Crossover Backtest on XYZ Stock

Number of Days in
Moving Average

Average Profit/Loss

Percent Gain

Number
of Trades

10

$1.56

68.60%

178

31

$3.02

59.34%

32

35

$3.32

61.69%

47

www.pdfdummies.com

69

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

70

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
The Table 4-1 test results shows that if you had been willing to trade 178 times
in 1,000 days, or roughly every 2 weeks, you would have made 68.6 percent by
using a 10-day moving average crossover of the price. Is that a good number?
One way to judge is to compare it to buy-and-hold; in other words, buying
on Day 1 and selling on Day 1,000. In this case, the software calculated the
buy-and-hold return as 43.4 percent, so for all that trading work, you made an
additional 25.2 percent. On a $10,000 starting capital stake, that’s $2,520. Or did
you? I didn’t include brokerage and other costs in this calculation.
Always look at an indicator backtest after slippage. Slippage is the reduction in
trading profits that arises from the cost of trading. It includes not getting the
exact price on your screen, having to trade on the opening price because your
indicator didn’t give you the signal until yesterday’s close was in, the bid-offer
spread, commissions, and fees. Checking the indicator’s performance after
slippage can make all the difference between a profitable trading rule and an
unprofitable one.
In Table 4-2, factoring in the cost of slippage now makes the 31-day version of
the simple moving average the better choice.

Table 4-2

Results of Simple Moving Average Crossover
Backtest on XYZ Stock Incorporating
$10 Per-Trade Slippage

Number of Days in
Moving Average

Average Profit/Loss

Percent
Gain

Number of
Trades

10

$0.36

28.60%

178

31

$2.70

49.34%

32

35

$2.10

31.69%

47

Refining a backtest
In the simple moving average crossover tests in Tables 4-1 and 4-2, I used
one criterion for selecting the optimum moving average — percent gain. But
percent gain is not the only goal. If percent gain were the only goal, you could
find yourself accepting a trading regime that delivers 100 losing trades for
every 10 winning trades. The ten winners must each be a home run to make
up for all those losses. But you are looking for systematic trading, not a few
home runs that may not repeat in the next 1,000 days. Therefore you also
care about the number of winning trades versus losing trades and about the
average win-loss ratio. You want as few losing trades as possible and you
want to get more profit from the average winning trade than you lose on the
average losing trade.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 4: Using Indicators to Trade Systematically
This time, I asked the program to show the top most profitable combinations
of the two moving average crossover trading rule. Here is the hypothesis
I seek to prove: “If you buy XYZ stock every time the shorter-term moving
average price crosses above the longer-term moving average and sell it every
time the shorter-term moving average crosses below the longer-term moving
average, it’ll consistently and reliably be a profitable trading rule.”
As in the first two tests (Table 4-1 and 4-2), I told the program to buy only and
tested over the past 1,000 days every short-term moving average from 1 to 20
days against every long-term moving average from 21 to 100 days. I also stipulated a $10 slippage cost of each trade. Table 4-3 shows two of the results.

Table 4-3

Results of Two Moving Average Crossover
Backtests on XYZ Stock

Short-term
Moving Average/
Long-term
Moving Average

Percent
Gain

Total
Trades

Total Winning
Trades/Total
Losing Trades

Average
Gain/Loss

Version 1: 10/73

58.60

8

6/2

1.75

Version 2: 5/10

63.48

147

47/100

0.56

The average gain-loss column indicates that Version 1 makes less profit than
Version 2, but takes only eight trades over the 1,000 days. Version 1 also has
a much higher number of winning trades than losing trades and a higher gainloss ratio. Most traders will zoom in on that win-loss ratio and pick the top
combination for the lower number of trades and the higher average gain-loss
ratio, even at the expense of some profit.
Backtesting never delivers a single, no-brainer parameter. Even after factoring in brokerage and slippage costs, you still have to choose between the
parameter that calls for more trades over one that calls for fewer trades, and
between one that delivers more winning trades than losing trades, and the one
that delivers a better win-loss ratio. You hardly ever find a parameter for your
indicator that meets all three criteria.
