Consider trading a simple moving average crossover system. Such a system is
usually good at capturing trends, but it lags the market and experiences frequent
whipsaws. If slower moving averages are used, the whipsaws can be avoided,
but the lag is made worse. Now add seasonality to the equation, The trend-following moving average system is applied, not to a series of prices, but to a

series that captures the seasonal ebb and flow of the market. Then compute the
seasonal series so it represents that ebb and flow, as it will be several days from
now-just far enough ahead to cancel out the annoying lag! The result: A system without lag (despite the use of slow, smooth, moving averages) that follows
seasonal trends. The ability to remove lag in this way stems from one of the
characteristics of seasonality: Seasonal patterns can be estimated far in
advance. In other words, seasonality-based models are predictive, as opposed
to merely responsive.
Since seasonality-based models are predictive, and allow turning points to be
identified before their occurrence, seasonal-based trading lends itself to countertrend trading styles. Moreover, because predictions can be made far in advance,
very high quality smoothing can be applied. Therefore, the kind of whipsaw trading encountered in responsive models is reduced or eliminated. Another nice characteristic of seasonality is the ability to know days, weeks, months, or even years
in advance when trades will occur--certainly a convenience.
Seasonality also has a downside. The degree to which any given market may
be predicted using a seasonal model may be poor. Although there may be few
whipsaws, the typical trade may not be very profitable or likely to win. If inversions do occur, but the trading model being used was not designed to take them
into account, sharp losses could be experienced because the trader could end up
going short at an exact bottom, or long at an exact top.
The extent to which seasonal models are predictive and useful and the possibility that inversion phenomena do exist and need to be considered are questions
for empirical study.

ORDERS USED TO EFFECT SEASONAL ENTRIES
Entries based on seasonality may be effected in at least three ways: with stops,
limits, or market orders. While a particular entry option may work especially well
with a particular model, any entry may be used with any model.
Entry orders themselves have their own advantages and disadvantages. The
advantage of a market or&r is that no signaled entry will be missed. Stop orders
ensure that no significant trends (in a trend-following model) will elude the trader,
and that entry will not occur without confirmation by movement in favor of the
trade (possibly beneficial in some countertrend models). The disadvantages are
greater slippage and less favorable entry prices, A limit order gets the trader the
best price and minimizes transaction costs. However, important trends may be
missed while waiting indefinitely for a retracement to the limit price. In countertrend models, a limit order may occasionally worsen the entry price. The entry
order may be tilled at the limit price, rather than at a price determined by the negative slippage that sometimes occurs when the market is moving against the trade
at the time of entry!

158

TEST

METHODOLOGY

The data sample used throughout the tests of seasonal entry methods extends from
August 1, 1985, to December 31, 1994 (the in-sample period), and from January
1, 1995, through February 1, 1999 (the out-of-sample period). For seasonality
studies, an in-sample period of only 10 years means there is a shortage of data on
which to develop the model. When generating seasonal entries was discussed,
mention was made about calculating seasonal momentum (or average price behavior) based on equivalent dates in previous years. Because of the data shortage,
when considering the in-sample data, calculations will be based not only on past
years, but also on future years. This is accomplished using fhe “jackknife.”
Target dates are run throughout the series, bar after bar. If only past years are
included, for the early data points, there are very few past years or none at all.
Since it takes at least 6 years of past data to get a reasonable seasonal average,
there would be no seasonality calculations for most of the in-sample period, which
itself is only 10 years. Consequently, there is very little data on which to optimize
essential parameters or determine how seasonal models perform on the in-sample
data. The jackknife, a well-known statistical technique (also known as the “leaveone-out method”), helps solve the data shortage problem
Suppose a seasonality estimate for June 1, 1987, is being calculated. If
only past data from the in-sample period is used, the estimate would be based on
data from 1986 and 1985. If, however, the jackknife is applied, not only would
data from the past be available, but so would data from the “future,” i.e., the
other years of the in-sample period (1988 through 1994). If the year (1987) that
serves as the target bar for the calculations is removed from the in-sample period,
the seasonality estimate for that bar would now be based on 9 years of data, a
reasonably adequate sample. The jackknife procedure is justified because the
data being examined to make the prediction is fairly independent of the data
actually being predicted by the seasonality estimate. Since the data used in generating the prediction is at least 1 year away from the target date, it is not contaminated with current market behavior. The process’provides an effectively
larger sample than could otherwise be obtained, and does so without seriously
compromising the available number of degrees of freedom.
For bars in the out-of-sample period, all past years are used to generate the seasonal&y estimates. For example, to calculate the seasonality for January 14, 1999,
the &past-years technique is used: Data from 1998 all the way back to 1985 are
included in the analysis. In this way, no calculation for the out-of-sample period is
ever based on any future or current data.
All the tests that follow are performed using seasonal entries to trade a diversified portfolio of commodities. The exits are the standard ones, used throughout this
book to study entry models. Trades are closed out either when an entry in the opposing direction occurs or when the standard exit closes the trade, whichever comes first.
The test platform is also standard. Here is the code for the seasonal trading tests:

CHAFlER 8 Scasonality

159

160

162

MovAvglma2,mal,matype,aVglen,nb)
if(modeltype

== 3

11

modeltype

/I cro88ove*

;
==

4)

//

stochastic

avg
osc

s-bar m*t %K
StochOac(stoch,hi,lo,cls,1,9,nb);
//
break;
default: nrerrorl"TRAPSMOD: invalid modeltype"1;
)
/I step through bare (days) to simulate actual trading
forlcb = 1; cb L- nb; cb++) (
// take no trades before the in-sample period
// ,.. same aa Tradestation's MaxBarsBack setting
if(dt[cbl < IS-DATE) ( eqcls[cb] = 0.0; continue; )
/f execute any pending orders and save closing equity
rc 3 ts.updaee,opnIcbl, bilcbl, loIcbl. clelcbl, cb);
if(rc I= 0) nrerror("Trade buffer overflow");
eqcls[cbl = te.curr.nte~ify(EQ_CLOSETOTAL);

// avoid placing orders on possibly limit-locked days
if(hi[cb+ll == lo[cb+ll) continue;
/! generate entry aignala, stop prices and limit prices
// for all seasonality-based entry models
signal - 0;
switchtmodeltype) (
case 1:
// basic thresholded momentum entry model
k = cb + disp;
tmp = thresh * mallkl;
ifleavglk] 5 tmp &(r savglk-11 c= tmp)
signal = 1;
else if(savg[kl < -tmp &h aavglk-II >= -tmp)
signal * -1;
break;
case 2: // basic crossover entry model
k - cb + disp;

}
I

//

process

next

bar

164

After declaring local variables and arrays, the first major block of code
copies various parameters to local variables for more convenient and understandable reference. The parameters are described in comments in this block of code.
The next block of code performs all computations that are carried out on
complete time series. The 50-bar average true range is calculated and saved in a
vector (exiratr); it will be used later for the placement of money management stops
and profit targets in the standard exit strategy. The average true range in this vector (or data series) is also used to normalize the price changes in the code that
immediately follows.
After calculating the average true range, normalized and clipped price
changes are calculated. Each bar in the seriespchg reflects the change in price from
the close of the previous bar to the close of the current bar. The price changes are
normalized by dividing them by the average true range. They are then clipped to
limit the influence of sharp spikes or statistical oudiers. Normalization is performed
because markets change in their volatility over time, sometimes very dramatically.
For example, the current S&P 500 has a price almost five or more times its price 15
years ago, with a corresponding increase in the size of the average daily move. If
the price changes were not normalized and represented in terms of recent volatility, any seasonal estimate conducted over a number of years would be biased. The
years with greater volatility would contribute more to the estimate than the years
with lesser volatility. In the case of the S&P 500, the most recent years would
almost totally dominate the picture. Using normalized price changes, each year
contributes about equally. Clipping to remove outhers is performed so the occasional, abnormal price change does not skew the estimates. Clipping is performed
at -2 and f2 average true range units.
The modekype selection then determines which calculations occur next. A
modeltype of 1 selects the basic momentum model. The seasonals are computed
from the clipped and normalized price changes, the jackknife is used on the insample period, and the all-past-years technique is used for the out-of-sample period.
These calculations are accomplished with a call to the function called
SeasonalAvg. The series of seasonal estimates is then smoothed using a moving
average of the type, specified by the parameter matype, and of a length set by
avglen, another parameter. A series of average absolute deviations of the seasonal
momentums is then computed. This series is nothing more than a lOO-bar simple
moving average of the absolute values of seasonal momentum, which is used in
later computations of threshold values. The modeltypes of 2,3, and 4 all represent
variations of the crossover model. The seasonals are computed, and then the seasonal estimates of price change for every bar are integrated (a running sum is calculated), creating a new series that behaves almost like a price series. The
synthesized, price-like series represents the movement in prices based on typical
behavior in previous and perhaps future years. Two moving averages are then
computed: ma1 (a moving average of the integrated seasonal time series of

CHAPTER 8 Seamnality

165

matype, having a length of avglen) and ma2 (used as a signal line for detecting

crossovers, calculated by taking a moving average of mal; the kind of average
taken is again specified by matype and the length by avglen). If the modeltype is
3 or 4, additional calculations are performed for models in which confirmation
and/or inversions are detected; in the current study, a 9-bar Fast %K is calculated
and saved in the vector sroch.
The next block of code consists of a loop that steps sequentially through all
bars in the data series. This loop is the same one that has been seen in every previous chapter on entry strategies. The first few lines of code deal with such issues
as updating the simulator, calculating the number of contracts to trade, and avoiding limit-locked days. The next few lines generate entry signals for all the seasonality-based entry models. Depending on the value of the modeltype parameter,
either of four different approaches is used to generate entry signals.
A modeltype of 1 represents the basic momentum threshold entry model. A
threshold is calculated by multiplying a threshold-determining parameter (thresh)
by the average absolute deviation of the seasonal momentum over the past 100 bars,
A long signal is issued if the seasonal momentum (savg), on the current bar plus a
displacement parameter (disp), crosses above the threshold. If the seasonal mornenturn, at the current bar plus the displacement, crosses below the negative of the
threshold, a sell signal is generated. In other words, if sufficiently strong seasonal
momentum is predicted for a given date, plus or minus some number of days or bars
(disp), then a trade is taken in the direction of the expected movement.
For modeltype 2, which represents the basic crossover entry model, the tnoving averages of the integrated seasonals, at the current bar plus a displacement factor, are calculated. If the first moving average crosses above the second, a buy is
generated. If it crosses below, a sell is generated. The displacement factor allows
the model to look for such crossings some number of days down the line (ahead
in time). In this manner, the displacement can neutralize the lag involved in the
moving averages. Because the seasonal averages are based on data that is usually
a year old, it is perfectly acceptable to look ahead several days.
A modelrype of 3 represents the same crossover model, but with the addition
of confirmation. Confirmation is achieved by checking the Stochastic oscillator of
the actual price series to determine whether it is consistent with what one would
be expected if the market were acting in a seasonal fashion.
If modeltype is 4, the crossover model, with the addition of confirmation and
inversion, is selected. When there is a modeltype of 4, a buy signal is issued if the
first moving average crosses above the second, and the seasonal pattern is confirmed by a Stochastic of less than 25. The model assumes that an inversion has
occurred and issues a sell signal if the Stochastic is over 75. If the first moving
average crosses below the second moving average, and the normal seasonal pattern is confirmed by a Stochastic that is over 75, a sell signal is issued. Inversion
is assumed and a buy signal issued if the Stochastic is less than 25.

Finally, the limit price (limprice) is set at the midpoint of the current bar. The
stop price (slppn’ce), for entry on a stop, is set at the close of the current bar plus
(if entering long) or minus (if entering short) one-half of the 50-bar average true
range. The remaining code blocks are identical to those in previous chapters: They
involve actually posting trades using the specified order (ordertype) and instructing the simulator to employ the standard exit strategy.
TEST

RESULTS

Tests are performed on two seasonality-based entry models: the crossover model
(both with and without confirmation and inversions) and the momentum model.
Each model is examined using the usual three entry orders: enter at open, on limit,
and on stop.
Tables 8-l and 8-2 provide information on the specific commodities that the
model traded profitably, and those that lost, for the in-sample (Table 8-l) and outof-sample (Table 8-2) runs. The SYM column represents the market being studied.
The rightmost column (COUNT) contains the number of profitable tests for a given
market. The numbers in the first row represent test identifiers. The last row
(COUNT) contains the number of markets on which a given model was profitable.
The data in these tables provide relatively detailed information about which markets
are and are not profitable when traded by each of the models: One dash (-) indicates
a moderate loss per trade, i.e., $2,000 to $4,ooO, two dashes (--) represent a large loss
per trade, i.e., $4,ooO or more; one plus sign (+) means a moderate profit per trade,
i.e., $1,000 to $2,000, two pluses (+ +) indicate a large gain per trade, i.e., $2,000
or more; and a blank cell means that the loss was between $0 and $1,999 or the profit was between $0 and $1,000 per trade. (For information about the various markets
and their symbols, see Table II-1 in the “Introduction” to Part II.)
Tests

of

the

Basic

Crossover

Model

A simple moving average (maI) of a specified length (av&n) was computed for the
integrated, price-like seasonality series. A second moving average (ma2) was taken of
the first moving average. A buy signal was generated when ma1 crossed above ma2.
A sell signal was generated when maI crossed below ma2. (This is the same movingaverage crossover model discussed in the chapter on moving averages, except here it
is computed on a predicted, seasonal series, rather than on prices.) The entries were
effected by either a market at open (Test l), a limit (Test 2), or a stop order (Test 3).
Optimization for these tests involved stepping the length of the moving averages (avglen) from 5 to 20 in increments of 5 and the displacement (disp) from 0
to 20 in increments of 1. For entry at the open, the best performance (in terms of
in-sample risk-to-reward ratio) was achieved with a moving average length of 20
and a displacement of 5. Entry on a limit was best with a length of 20 and a dis-

T A B L E

B - l

In-Sample Performance Broken Down by Test and Market

placement of 8. Entry on a stop required a length of 20 and a displacement of 6.
The model seemed to prefer longer moving averages (more smoothing), and somewhat earlier signals were required by the limit order when compared with the stop
or market-at-open orders.
In-sample, none of the results were profitable when both long and short positions were traded. However, the losses were much smaller on a per-trade basis than
those observed in many of the other tests presented in earlier chapters. The stop
order performed best. The market-at-open order performed worst. The limit order
came in not too far behind the stop. For both the stop and limit orders, trading was

Out-of-Sample Performance Broken Down by Test and Market

.
JY
^..
b"
~0
CL
HO
H"
or
.s il

i_

i_

1

I-

_

-

++
+

++
++
*+

!_

_

i_
.
-

++
**

+

_

i_
.
-I

_

/_
++
-

A-

+
++
++

+

_

.++
++

,
+

i++
++

.~~

i++
I..

++

,++
++

I-

++
++

I-

,++

i_
-

I_
I++

I
I_
-

,

I+

I-

+
-

i+

_

I-

-

,++
++

/-

++
++

i++
++
I_
/-

II-

I++
I
/I-

I

I-

I-

++

++
I-

++
++
_

,-

-

I_
+

,-

,-

1
I
/
,

,
I

.cII
0
.

:

'4

I

8
0

actually profitable for long positions. In all cases, ZO-bar moving averages provided
the best results, but the displacement varied depending on the order. A look-ahead
of 5 bars was optimal for entry at tbe open, 8 bars for entry on a limit, and 6 bars
for entry on a stop. This makes sense, in that one would want to post a limit order
earlier than a market-on-open order so as to give the limit some time to be filled.
Out-of-sample, the results showed the same ordering of overall performance as
measured by the average profit per trade ($TRD), with the stop order actually producing a positive return of $576 per trade, representing an 8.3% annual retam on
account; this system, although not great, was actually profitable on recent data. For

the stop entry, both in- and out-of-sample trading was profitable when only the long
trades were considered, but the short side lost in both samples. This is a pattern that
has been observed a number of times in the various tests. The percentage of wins
for all orders and samples was between 40 and 43%.
It is interesting that, even for the losing variations, the losses here were much
smaller than what seems typical for many of the models so far tested.
With entry at the open, equity declined until November 1988. It retraced
approximately 50% of the way until July 1989, making a small U-shaped formation, with the second of a double-top around November 1990. Equity then declined
rather steeply until November 1992 and, in a more choppy fashion, throughout tbe
remainder of the in-sample period and the first third of the out-of-sample period.
The decline ended in April 1996 when equity gradually climbed throughout the
remainder of the out-of-sample period.
With entry on a limit, equity was fairly flat until January 1987, rose very
rapidly to a peak in May 1987, and then declined until November 1992. From then
through July 1994, equity rose steeply. Afterward, choppy performance was
observed with no significant trend.
The stop order produced strong equity growth until June 1988. Equity then
declined in a choppy fashion through most of the in-sample period and about the
first quarter of the out-of-sample period. It reached bottom in December 1995 and
then rose sharply through the end of the out-of-sample period in February 1999.
Across all three entry orders, the best-performing market was Unleaded
Gasoline, in which strong, consistent profits were observed in both samples.
Palladium was also a strong market for this model: Both the entry at open and entry
on limit produced profits in- and out-of-sample, with the entry on limit having
strong profits in both samples, and the entry on stop producing strong profits outof-sample and neutral results in-sample. Live Hogs was another good market to
trade seasonally: Every order type yielded profits in-sample, while two of the three
order types yielded profits out-of-sample; both the limit and stop orders were profitable in both samples. Yet another good market to trade with this model is Coffee:
All three orders produced in-sample profits, while the market at open and stop
orders produced strong profits out-of-sample. Finally, Cotton did not do too badly:
The stop order yielded strong profits in both samples, and no order resulted in
strong losses in either sample. Finding good performance for Unleaded Gasoline is
totally in accord with expectations. What is moderately surprising is that Heating
Oil, for which there is a strong seasonal demand characteristic, was only profitable
in both samples when using the limit order. Coffee also traditionally has strong seasonal patterns caused by, e.g., recurrent frosts that damage crops, create shortages,
and drive up prices. Surprisingly, the wheats did not produce many profits in-sample.
The only exception was a small profit for Minnesota Wheat with a limit order. More
profits in the wheat group were seen out-of-sample, where the limit order led to
profitable trading in all three wheat markets and the stop order in Kansas Wheat.
