
Indicators in Action

129

FIGURE 6.19 The MACD provides a good signal to buy SUNW before the stock
began its move upward.

The most common figures are to have a 26-day exponential moving
average (EMA) as the slow one, a 12-day EMA as the fast one, and a 9day as the crossover. ProphetCharts calculates the difference between the
26-day and 12-day EMAs and plots this final value. This value moves above
and below a flat plot line, and there is no preestablished upper or lower
limit to this value, since the difference between these moving averages will
be different for every security examined.
Figure 6.19 shows the two-line MACD study: the black line is the difference between the 26-day and 12-day EMA; the dashed line is the 9-day
EMA. A signal takes place when the black line crosses above the dashed
line (bullish) or below the dashed line (bearish). The MACD’s purpose
is to plot the underlying momentum of a security and to offer crossover
points as a basis for trade decisions. In this example, the MACD provided a
buy signal just before Sun Microsystems (symbol SUNW) started a healthy
move upward.
There are actually two different ways of making use of the MACD:
crossovers and divergences. A crossover is the plainest, because you simply need to watch for the black line to cross above or below the dashed
line. A divergence takes place when the general direction of an indicator
is the opposite of the general direction of the security. For example, if a
particular stock seemed to be in a downtrend, yet its MACD was firm and
heading up at the same time, that is a divergent indicator as to where the

130

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.20 Three signals in a relatively short period—ﬁrst a buy, then a sell,
then another buy.

price is going to move next. A person using the MACD in this way would
acquire the stock, trusting the MACD to be providing a buy signal prior to
the stock following suit and moving higher.
As with any other crossover signal, the MACD is prone to providing
multiple signals. The more volatile a security, the more frequent (and less
reliable) these signals will be. If you are a very active trader, you can
use multiple signals as an opportunity to trade the stock more frequently
and in both directions (that is, both the long side and the short side). The
symbol OIH (Figure 6.20) provides an illustration of this, since there were
three signals given in a relatively short period: first a buy, then a sell, then
another buy.
The most powerful MACD signals are preceded by relatively quiet
price activity. If a stock is moving along in a relatively tight channel and
then gives a clear MACD signal, it is often an indicator of an important
price change. For example, A G Edwards (symbol AGE) was trading for
months in a tight range of just a few dollars (Figure 6.21). In mid-March,
even though the prices did not seem to be doing anything particularly
unusual, an MACD signal was generated to buy the stock. Although it
took a couple of weeks before any breakout occurred, the subsequent
movement was significant, and the MACD gave warning far in advance of
the actual price move.
Indicators can sometimes take on an almost clairvoyant quality
about them. The reason is that indicators provide a different insight and

Indicators in Action

131

FIGURE 6.21 The MACD shown here signaled a substantial move in A G Edwards
stock.

representation of the underlying price movement that is not visible by simply looking at the price chart. In Figure 6.22, the stock of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (symbol CME) had been steady in July and August, drifting downward late in August. In spite of this anemic behavior, the MACD
provided a crossover to the upside. This crossover preceded not just a very
large up movement, but it specifically preceded a single-day movement of
20 points.
There is another way you can view MACD information, and that is by
the use of a histogram. The MACD histogram is computed in the same way,
but instead of providing two lines, it illustrates the difference between the
two lines with positive bars (above the 0.00 line) or negative bars (below
the 0.00 line).
Figure 6.23 shows an example of an MACD histogram. Because the
bars are different and the transition from positive to negative (or vice
versa) is so obvious, this representation of MACD movement makes it
much easier to spot crossovers.
Figure 6.24 shows the analysis of a stock with an MACD histogram
and a two-line MACD stacked on top of one another. This makes it easier
to understand how these two studies correlate. In the two-line study, when
the black line is beneath the dashed trigger line, there are negative bars
in the histogram. When the black line is above the dashed trigger line,
there are positive bars in the histogram. As you can see, the trigger points

132

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.22 This MACD not only preceded a big move up by the stock CME but
also was a day in advance of the 20-point move made in a single day.

FIGURE 6.23 The MACD can also be viewed as a histogram.

Indicators in Action

133

FIGURE 6.24 The diﬀerences between the MACD histogram and the two-line
indicator.

are identical for both studies, and which study you elect to use is strictly
personal preference.

RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX (RSI)
The Relative Strength Index, often shortened to simply RSI, is a study
that compares the magnitude of a stock’s recent gains to recent losses.
The study itself is a single line that is in its own pane, moving up and
down between the ranges of 0 (at the bottom) to 100 (at the top). The
RSI (Figure 6.25) is very simple to interpret and use: if it drops below 70
(which is marked with a horizontal dashed line), there is a sell signal; if it
goes above 30 (also marked with a dashed horizontal line), there is a buy
signal.
The path the RSI takes depends completely on the direction and
momentum of the security’s price. It may bob up and down between the
30 and 70 levels, generating no signals for quite some time. The best RSI
indications happen when the study is plainly above or below one of the
horizontal lines (Figure 6.26) and makes a decisive move back into the
middle range.
Unlike slower-moving studies, the RSI is prone to generating many buy
and sell signals. In Chapter 7, you will learn how to use multiple studies together so they can essentially vote on the predicted direction of a stock.
Figure 6.27 shows the popular NASDAQ exchange-traded fund (ETF; symbol QQQQ) with four different RSI signals: three of them sells, and one of

134

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.25 Three RSI signals on symbol BHI—ﬁrst a sell, then a buy, then another sell.

FIGURE 6.26 A very clean RSI buy signal, since the RSI line went plainly
below—and then above—the 30 mark.

Indicators in Action

135

FIGURE 6.27 Some securities are so volatile that they provide multiple entry and
exit points in a relatively short time frame.

FIGURE 6.28 The RSI is easiest to use on broad, more gradual movements, such
as are shown here for United States Steel.

136

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

them a buy. In this example, each of these signals correctly anticipated the
future direction of the stock.
Stocks with RSI studies that are moving steadily without an abundance of signals are typically the most profitable. Figure 6.28 illustrates
such a case with United States Steel (symbol X). In late October, after
a steady decline in prices, the RSI pushes above the 30 level and anticipates a handsome 40 percent appreciation in the stock within a very short
time period. The RSI slips beneath the 70 level in early December, providing an easy opportunity to lock in profits before the stock eases in price
any more.
This chapter has given you an introduction to the basic concepts behind technical indicators. Although we have examined just a few basic
studies, you should at this point understand:

r The difference between overlaid and independent indicators.
r Principles behind interpreting buy and sell signals with studies.
r How to invoke an individual technical study.
r Moving averages, RSI, MACD, Bollinger Bands, the Ribbon Study, the
Linear Regression Channel, and PSAR studies.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to edit the parameters of studies
for more control and how to combine studies into Study Sets.

CHAPTER 7

Multiple Studies
and
Comparisons

n Chapter 6, we learned how the application of technical studies
(also known as indicators) can provide new insights into a chart’s
price action, including providing explicit buy and sell signals. However, you may find there is value in applying more than just one study at
a time.
In ProphetCharts, the price graph and any overlay studies are in a single charting pane. The volume, if displayed, is in a separate pane and any
other independent technical indicator each has its own pane (Figure 7.1).
The value of having separate panes is that you can rearrange the order and
size of each of those panes. Panes in ProphetCharts have a number of powerful properties:

I

r They can be arranged in any order you like.
r They can each be as tall or short as you like.
r The volume pane can be suppressed or revealed at any time.
r You can apply technical studies to virtually any pane.
That last point is particularly important. There is no reason, for instance, that a Simple Moving Average cannot be applied to the Volume
pane as easily as it could be applied to the Price pane. The flexibility in
ProphetCharts provides a virtually unlimited palette for crafting technical
studies to help you make better trading decisions.

137

138

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 7.1 Many studies can be applied at once to assist in the analysis of a
chart, and each study can be in its own individual pane.

THE TECHNICAL STUDIES EDITOR
One of ProphetCharts’ most powerful features is its technical studies editor, which allows you to apply, arrange, and adjust any of the nearly 200
different studies available in the program. This section will introduce you
to the editor and how to use it.
Applying a single study is something you learned about in Chapter 6.
The easiest way to apply one study is from the Technical Studies module
(Figure 7.2), which has an alphabetical listing of all the selections. Doubleclick on any study to apply it to the current chart, or drag-and-drop the
study onto the chart. Once the study is applied, it will remain there until
you choose Clear Studies from the Studies menu. So even if you enter many
other stock symbols, you will see the study applied to each one of them.
The Technical Studies module limits you to applying just one indicator
at a time. If you are using one study and double-click on another, the original study will be replaced by the new one. If you want to apply multiple
studies, or if you want to fine-tune the settings of one or more of the indicators, you will need to use the technical studies editor. To get to this editor,
choose the Apply Studies item from the Studies menu (Figure 7.3).

Multiple Studies and Comparisons

FIGURE 7.2 A list of all the studies is
shown in the Technical Studies module.
You can drag-and-drop or double click
any of these to apply them.

139

FIGURE 7.3 To access the technical
studies editor, click Apply Studies from
the Studies menu.

When you choose Apply Studies, a dialog box like the one in Figure 7.4
appears. This is the technical studies editor, and it has four main components:
1. Studies tab. Notice on the left side of the editor there are two

tabs—Studies and My Study Sets. The leftmost one, Studies, is selected
by default. This gives you access to the same list of technical studies
as is available in the Technical Studies module. You can add a study in
any of three ways—by double clicking it, by clicking it once and then
clicking Apply Study, or by dragging-and-dropping the study into the
pane of your choice.
2. My Study Sets tab. The content here is identical to the My Study Sets
module. You can choose this tab by clicking on the tab, and by clicking
on any of the study sets, you can examine or edit the components of
that study set. You will learn later in this chapter exactly how to make
and name a study set.
3. Panes. Most of the right side of this dialog box is devoted to the placement of the panes that make up the entire chart. Each small rectangle
represents a pane, and they are in the same order as they would be
displayed on the chart itself. You can grab the upper portion of any of

140

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 7.4 When you apply a technical study to the price, a shorthand abbreviation for that study will appear in the price pane.

these panes and drag it up or down in order to rearrange the order of
the panes. You can also drag a study from the Studies tab into any of
the panes in order to apply that study to that pane. For example, if you
dragged Simple Moving Average into the Volume pane, it would apply
that study to the volume.
4. Buttons. There are eight other elements to this editor, seven of which
are buttons and one of which is a checkbox. These are each described
next.

Multiple Studies and Comparisons

141

The buttons in the studies editor perform the following functions:

r Apply Study. Clicking this is the equivalent of double-clicking a study.
You have to click a particular study first before this button.

r Edit Study. Clicking this brings up a dialog box to let you edit any
study you have applied to the chart. You must click any of the studies
on the right side of the screen before clicking Edit Study. The dialog
box you see will depend on the study selected. A shortcut to get to the
same place is to double-click the study within the pane.
r Delete Study. This deletes a study you have applied to the chart. As
with Edit Study, you have to choose one of the studies in one of the
panes for this to do anything.
r Show Last Values. This is a checkbox, not a button, but it has one
simple function: to display the most recent values for each of the
studies you have applied to the chart. If this is checked, the most
recent values for each study will appear in the upper-left corner of
each pane.
r Add Pane. This adds a blank pane to your chart. The purpose of a pane
is to put studies within it. You probably will not need to use this button
very often, because when you add a study to a chart, it is given a new
pane for itself, anyway.
r Save Study Set. Clicking this button lets you preserve all the studies
and their settings into a study set which you can later access by just
double-clicking the name of the study set.
r OK. This accepts all the changes you have made and closes the editor.

EDITING A STUDY
Whether you are applying one study or a multitude of them to a chart, you
can edit any study to change its settings and appearance. Although you
probably will be satisfied with the default settings provided with any given
study, you might want to change the appearance settings to your liking.
Plus, if you are particularly sophisticated with a given technical indicator,
you may have your own settings you want to apply instead.
Generally speaking, what you are able to edit for any given study falls
into three general categories: (1) the source of the data; that is, the numbers
upon which the resulting technical indicator is based; (2) other numeric
parameters used to compute the study, such as the number of time periods
to use; (3) the presentation of the study, such as its color, opacity, line
style, and so forth.
It should also be noted that the concept of time periods strictly depends on the frequency of the bars being shown in your chart. If you are

142

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

looking at a daily graph, then a “period” is a day. So a 20-period moving
average is a 20-day moving average. If you are instead looking at the past
five days of trading activity on an hour-by-hour basis, each bar represents
one hour of time, so the same moving average study would be a 20-hour
moving average.
For the sake of simplicity, we will assume you are looking at a daily
chart, so we will use terms such as “50-day moving average” instead of the
more precise and accurate “50-period moving average.”
To edit a study, all you need to do is double-click the study that has
been applied and appears on the right side of the technical studies editor. You can also click the study once and then click the Edit Study button. When you do this, a Study Editor for that particular study will appear
(Figure 7.5) and will contain the various controls germane to that study as
well as the settings that are being used for it (which will typically be the
default settings, unless you have changed them).
Although every dialog box will be a little different, based on the study,
the one shown in Figure 7.5 (which is for Bollinger Bands) is representative
of the general components you will see for a Study Editor. These are:

r Data source. This dropdown lets you choose which element of the
price should be used as the basis for computing the study. Most people
want to use the closing price for their studies. But perhaps you’d rather
use the high price. Or the low price. You can click on this dropdown
and choose any of the available price fields. The fields available to you
depend on the study and how it is being used.
r Bar period and standard deviations. These two fields are specific to
the Bollinger Bands study, but they are a good example of the kind of
fine-tuning you can do with a technical study. You should have a deep
understanding of the study in question before adjusting the default parameters, however. One exception is the Moving Average, whose principal parameter (the number of periods to use) is simple enough for
anyone to understand.
r Fill, upper, and lower buttons. These three graphical buttons control the color, upper-line appearance, and lower-line appearance, respectively. Again, these are specific to Bollinger Bands but are good
general examples of the kinds of controls you will see on a Study
Editor.
Clicking on any of the appearance control buttons yields other dialog
boxes. For example, clicking the Fill button (which has a colored square
in it) opens a Color dialog box (Figure 7.6) that gives you control over the
color and opacity of the study. Choosing the color is simple enough—you

Multiple Studies and Comparisons

FIGURE 7.5 You have a lot of control
over each technical study, since virtually
any aspect of its computation or appearance can be adjusted.

143

FIGURE 7.6 The color of a particular
study makes it easy to read. You can adjust the color and opacity of any study to
your preference.

are provided a palette of colors from which to choose—but you might not
be acquainted with the term “opacity.”
The opacity of an object controls how much you can see through it,
if at all. You can change this setting from as little as 0.1 (as see-through
as possible) up to 1.0 (solid). This is valuable because you will quickly
find that studies can clutter your chart. You want them to enhance your
charting experience, not get in the way of it. One effective way to do this
is to tone down the appearance of a study (particularly overlaid studies)
so that they are more subtle. Your principal focus should always be on
the price action, with the studies providing you different insights into the
general trend of the price.
Clicking either the “upper” or “lower” button produces a special dialog
box to control the style of each line (Figure 7.7). As with the prior dialog
box, you have control over the color and opacity. You also have two new
controls: Weight (wherein the selection from the dropdown menu lets you
select how thick the line should be) and Pattern (wherein the selection
lets you choose if the line is solid, dashed, dotted, or some other style). It
bears repeating that all the studies will have different controls, but these
controls will be self-explanatory. You will also see the effects on the chart
immediately, so you can continue to make adjustments before committing
the changes with an OK.
As another illustration of how each Study Editor is different,
Figure 7.8 shows the dialog box for the MACD technical indicator. It has
the Data Source dropdown, as the other one did, but its numeric input is

144

FIGURE 7.7 Use the line style editor
to change the color, opacity, weight, and
pattern of each line in a study.

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 7.8 You can edit any study.
In this case, you can alter the data used
as the basis for the MACD as well as its
three moving average periods and the
appearance of both the MACD and signal lines.

different, since the MACD calls for different parameters (in this case, fast
period, slow period, and signal period). Whereas the Bollinger Bands had
an upper line and a lower line, the MACD has a MACD line and a Signal
line. As with the numeric parameters, these appearance settings are given
default values, which suit the majority of users.

WORKING WITH PANES
The ability to size and arrange the panes which comprise the entire chart
is one of ProphetCharts’ most powerful features. Manipulating the panes is
quite intuitive, since it merely involves dragging-and-dropping the panes in
the order you want. First, it helps to fully understand the nature of panes.
In ProphetCharts, a pane can either be (a) the Price pane, (b) the Volume pane, or (c) a study pane. Any of these panes can contain technical
indicators, and the item affected depends on where those indicators are
placed. If a Moving Average is in the Price pane, that study will show up
overlaid with the prices. If it is in the Volume pane, it will show up overlaid
with volume. If it is in its own pane, it will be the same shape as if it were
in the Price pane, but it will be by itself.

Multiple Studies and Comparisons

145

FIGURE 7.9 Independent indicators are provided with their own pane.

You can also edit any given study within its pane. The editing you do
in one pane does not affect the other panes. So if you had three moving
averages in the Price pane (a 30-, 50-, and 100-day moving average) and
a single moving average in the Volume pane, editing the moving average
in the Volume pane would not alter the other three moving averages. The
only “tie that binds” the panes together is the x-axis, which is time. All
the panes will line up with respect to time, because the chart would be
meaningless otherwise.
You typically needn’t worry about the creation and management of
panes, except insofar as you want to change their order. When you apply a
study, that study will go into the most common place, and if it calls for the
creation of a new pane, such a pane will be created. Figure 7.9 illustrates
how the Price pane has its own indicator (BBEMA, which is the abbreviation for Bollinger Band Exponential Moving Average) while the MACD
indicator is in its own pane.
You may have reason for the panes to be in a different vertical order
than is provided. It is completely up to you how you want these to appear.
Typically, the volume for a price chart appears beneath the price. Perhaps
you’d prefer the volume to be on top. All you need do is click on the Volume
pane, hold down the mouse button, and drag the pane to be above the Price
