
HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF
Another tenet of technical analysis is that human behavior doesn’t change,
and therefore price behavior doesn’t change. If a certain pattern is predictable now, it will be just as predictable 10 years from now.
An excellent illustration of this on a single chart is Figure 1.6. The stock
shown here is Red Hat (symbol RHAT) over a four-year period. For all of

Technical Analysis

9

FIGURE 1.5 After its triple top, CHK went on to a nearly 99 percent decline in
price.

FIGURE 1.6 Patterns can—and often do—repeat themselves in the same chart.

10

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

2002 and most of 2003, RHAT was forming a rather large cup with handle
pattern, indicated by the horizontal line. When it broke above this pattern,
the stock just about tripled in price.
After it peaked, RHAT sank for about a year before establishing another pattern. This time, the pattern was quite similar, only smaller. And
once again, after it broke above the pattern, the stock soared (this time
only double its breakout price, which is typical of a smaller pattern).
As you can see, once you train your eyes to find patterns and understand what the important price points are, you can take advantage of what
are relatively predictable price movements.
A variety of factors dictate the power of a breakout from a particular
pattern. One is the pattern itself, because some patterns are simply more
potent and reliable than others. Another is the volume accompanying the
price movement; a stock moving higher on stronger and stronger volume
is far more attractive than a stock moving the same direction on anemic
volume. Another factor still is the length of the pattern. A breakout from a
three-year-old saucer is going to have a lot more fireworks than a breakout
from a tiny two-week saucer.
Figure 1.7 provides an illustration of both (a) repetition and (b) pattern size equaling potency. The chart is the Russell 2000. The symbol
is $RUT. This chart is actually showing several patterns within a larger

FIGURE 1.7 An ascending wedge and, within that pattern, three nearly identical
patterns indicated by the horizontal lines.

Technical Analysis

11

pattern. The broad pattern, shown by the two almost parallel lines, is an
ascending wedge. This index is making a series of higher highs (bumping
up against the upper line) and higher lows (bouncing off the lower line). So
the index is in a general uptrend.
Within this pattern, though, are three smaller patterns, all of which are
progressively smaller versions of the first. If you look at the shape of the
prices beneath the horizontal line, you can see that this price movement
is virtually identical in all three instances, although the second pattern is
smaller that the first, and the third pattern is smaller still.
What’s interesting, of course, is what happens after the prices break
above each horizontal line—the stock moves higher. But not only can we
see the stock moving higher, we can also observe that the amount it goes up
is a little less each time. This is an example of how the oomph of the push
upward is closely related to how sizable the pattern is in the first place.

HEAD AND SHOULDERS
Throughout this book, we’ll be learning about a variety of patterns, a number of which are known as reversal patterns. They are called this because
they forecast a reversal in price direction.
One of the most basic and powerful reversal patterns is called the head
and shoulders. These formations are pretty easy to spot: on the left side is
a hump in prices (gradually moving up and then moving down again to
a certain supporting price). In the middle is a taller hump, again, slowly
moving up and then down again to support; this is the head. Finally, there
is another hump, the smallest of the three (ideally), which is the right
shoulder.
The support line is what’s key here. It even has a special name in the
context of this pattern; instead of being called the support line, it’s called
the neckline. If prices break beneath the neckline, there are three general
possibilities:
1. The prices will sink from there.
2. Prices will sink briefly, recover to touch the underside of what used to

be support (now resistance), and then start to fall.
3. Prices will stabilize, push back toward the former support line, and

then overcome it, thus negating the pattern.
The ideal circumstance is (2), since it allows a person to carefully enter
the position at a very desirable price and set a stop just above the former
support line. This is the ideal low risk–high reward scenario. Figure 1.8

12

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 1.8 After a break beneath the neckline in November, Ariba lost virtually
all of its value.

is an example of just this circumstance, with Ariba (symbol ARBA) forming a very nice head and shoulders pattern from July through November.
Once prices broke beneath the neckline, the stock went from about $600
to $300. But for the first couple of weeks of December, buyers pushed the
stock back to about $550, still below the neckline. (Note: these prices are
adjusted for reverse stock splits.)
This is a test of the pattern. The pattern has already established itself, and the chart is bearish, but buyers are still trying to push the stock
higher. You can almost picture the bulls and bears in a tug-of-war, with
the neckline in the middle of the battle. In this case, shorting the stock
at $550 would have been brilliant, because after testing the pattern, the
price started to sink virtually without pause until almost all the equity was
wiped out.
Take a look at Figure 1.9, which is a very similar chart. Broadcom (symbol BRCM) managed to survive the initial burst of the NASDAQ bubble in
the first half of 2000. By October of that year, it broke beneath the neckline
in a very well-formed head and shoulders pattern, and it didn’t stop once
to test that level again. The stock plummeted from $130 to under $10 per
share in a couple of years.

Technical Analysis

13

FIGURE 1.9 Broadcom, one of the hottest stocks of the Internet bubble, collapsed
after a head and shoulders pattern in late 2000.

A BREAKOUT AND A FAILURE
Stock patterns are every bit as powerful on the upside as on the downside.
When looking for bullish patterns, you need to be on the lookout for breaks
above resistance, as opposed to breakdowns beneath support (as is the
case with bearish patterns).
One such bullish breakout is shown in Figure 1.10, where a cup with
handle pattern had been forming over the course of a year. At the midpoint of the chart, notice two important things happen simultaneously:
(1) the price suddenly bursts well above the resistance line (drawn here
for clarity), and (2) the volume in the stock increases substantially (as you
can see from the volume graph located in the lower pane). Together, there
is no more powerful positive statement about a stock’s bullish direction,
and this stock kept climbing by hundreds of percent afterward. As you will
learn throughout this book, volume is almost as important as price movement, particularly with respect to bullish formations, which require a lot of
volume to fuel the rise.
As you gain experience in recognizing chart patterns and anticipating
the moves that stocks can make after a certain pattern is fulfilled, you may

14

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 1.10 A price breakout with accompanying high volume is an excellent
predictor of future upward movement.

be tempted to mentally draw in a complete pattern where one hasn’t fully
formed yet. For example, if you see a shoulder, a head, and part of a shoulder, you might conclude that this is going to complete as a head and shoulders pattern, and you might as well get in now and enjoy the extra profits
that exist between the current price and the neckline. Or you might see
a saucer formation that is getting very close to breaking out, and you figure you might as well get a better price on the stock by not waiting for
the breakout, since sometimes breakouts can rapidly push the stock up to
much riskier levels.
It’s important not to fall into this trap. Not all patterns that complete
themselves perform as they are supposed to perform, and the chances for
success are even lower if the pattern doesn’t really finish forming. It’s critically important that you wait for a pattern to complete instead of trading
off emerging patterns.
A good example of this is shown in Figure 1.11. This stock was forming a very nice inverted head and shoulders pattern for nearly a year. The
horizontal line indicates the neckline, which, had prices pushed above it,
would have been an important measuring tool for the pattern.
However, about three-quarters of the way across the chart, you can see
that the price stalled at about $25 and could not gather the energy to make a
run for the neckline. Instead, the price started sinking, made a flimsy effort

Technical Analysis

15

FIGURE 1.11 Anticipating a breakout is almost always a mistake. The anticipated
breakout, shown by the horizontal line, never happened, and afterwards the stock
withered away.

to recover, and then started sinking hard. Had you bought at $25, contemplating a big breakout to much higher prices, you might have held on to the
stock as it sank into the single digits. There are countless examples of this
kind of event, and you must always remember to have the patience to wait
for the pattern to complete.

A CHANGE IN DIRECTION
Most people have heard the maxim “The trend is your friend.” One might
supplement that by saying, “The trend is your friend, but every trend someday ends.” Technical analysis is a means by which you can judge that trend
change.
Many embellishments you can put on a chart, such as trend lines and
channels, can be used to assess when an upward-moving stock is starting
to head down, or vice versa. Look at Figure 1.12, for example, which is a
20-year-long chart of Harris Corporation. For well over a decade, the stock
was trending down, making a series of lower highs and lower lows. You
can see this downtrend more clearly because of the channel lines that have
been drawn.

16

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 1.12 Breaking above the descending channel presaged a sea change in
this stock’s direction.

In late 1992, the stock price finally got the strength to push above this
channel. It might have seemed risky to buy the stock at such a “high” price,
but what the prices were indicating was that the downward channel was
old news, and the stock had a new direction. Over the coming years, it went
up many hundreds of percent in an uptrend that was just as well defined as
its downtrend.
As with most technical studies, this cuts both ways—just as a downtrend can transform into an uptrend, an uptrend can be broken and change
into a downtrend. Imagine driving down a straight highway, and all you are
able to see is the median line in the road. As long as the median line is on
the left side of the car, you know you’re generally heading in the correct
direction. But if that median line moves beneath the car and to your right,
you know something has seriously changed!
In a similar fashion, look at Diebold’s stock chart for the late 1970s and
early 1980s in Figure 1.13. Year after year, the stock continued to climb,
and it obeyed its ascending trend line, never letting the price go below it.
That changed very early in 1984, when prices dipped under this very wellestablished trend line.
What’s particularly fascinating is that this trend line switched coats, as
trend lines often do when prices violate them, and changed from support
to resistance. Diebold’s price didn’t fall far at all before it resumed moving

Technical Analysis

17

FIGURE 1.13 Here is one of countless examples of support changing into resistance, as the trend line did not permit the prices to go above it once it was violated.

upward. The average observer would breathe a sigh of relief that the stock
was going up again. But the skilled chartist would know that the price was
pushed up against resistance and, instead of being a solid stock to own,
actually provided a fairly low-risk shorting opportunity. After nearly half
a year of trying to poke through the trend line again, the price finally succumbed and lost nearly half its value.
Just because a channel or trend line is violated by price action doesn’t
guarantee that a trend change is in place, however. It simply suggests the
possibility. Prices crossing a line almost certainly indicate the end of the
prior trend or pattern. But what is beginning will take some time to know
for sure.
As an illustration of this, examine the chart in Figure 1.14 of the large
insurance carrier AIG. The stock was plainly in a downtrend from the end
of 2000 to the end of 2003, as shown by the descending trend line. But at the
very end of 2003, prices pushed through this line with force. This did not
signal a new era of higher prices, however. The stock rallied, sank, rallied
again, and sank again, and then rallied once more (in a series of lower highs
and lower lows). Thus, instead of a new uptrend, the stock’s downtrend
was continuing at a much lower pace in the shape of an expanding wedge.
Importantly, notice how the prices obey the support of the trend line, which
had formerly represented resistance and now had changed coats into

18

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 1.14 The descending trend line here changed from resistance to support
after prices pushed past it, and a new pattern—an expanding wedge—was formed.

support. Even though the line had been violated, it was useful in future
years as a guideline for price behavior.

WHEN PATTERNS WORK TOGETHER
A pattern on its own can be a good indicator of future price direction, but
two patterns working in concert, pointing to the same direction, can add
even more credence to the prediction.
The patterns need not be similar, although they can be. For example,
the right shoulder of a head and shoulders pattern might itself be a smaller
head and shoulders pattern. Or you might find two bullish patterns (or bearish patterns) appearing on the same chart in approximately the same time
frame.
Figure 1.15 is an example of this. The stock is the Utility HOLDRS Trust
(symbol UTH). There are two bearish situations shown here: the first is
that UTH broke beneath an extremely long ascending trend line, which
indicates a possible change in direction from bullish to bearish. As the
price meandered along during the last few months of 2005 and the first few
months of 2006, it formed a very well-defined head and shoulders pattern
whose neckline it pierced. Since these two patterns were both bearish and

Technical Analysis

19

FIGURE 1.15 This chart shows two patterns in action—an ascending trend line,
which was violated, and a head and shoulders pattern.

happened roughly in the same period, it made a doubly bearish argument
for UTH’s direction.

MORE BREAKOUTS
Let us take some more time looking at examples of various breakouts to
strengthen our understanding of what to look for and how potent these can
be. Your “chart sense”—that is, your ability to recognize patterns in charts
without their being pointed out to you—will mainly come from experience.
The examples in this book are a first step toward that goal.
The first chart is for EMC Corporation (symbol EMC) from 1988
through 2000 (see Figure 1.16). For about four years, EMC formed a cup
with handle pattern, whose resistance is illustrated by the horizontal line
on the chart. There are a variety of things to notice about this chart:

r The volume was slowly picking up during the formation of the breakout pattern; it’s always encouraging to see interest in a stock grow,
even before the breakout.
r When the stock did break out (indicated by the circle), it paused for a
little while, but it did not sink beneath the former resistance line; thus,
the pattern was tested successfully.
r Subsequent to the breakout, volume increased steadily.

20

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 1.16 EMC’s stock blasted thousands of percent higher after a breakout
from a base. The volume picked up handsomely over the years.

From the point of the breakout, the stock went on to an almost unthinkable 40,000 percent gain. A mere $1,000 invested in this stock and
sold at the top would have been worth $400,000.
The next breakout (Figure 1.17) illustrates how you never can tell
when a boring stock is going to get exciting. The stock is Hansen Natural
Corporation (symbol HANS), which, for a six-year period, must have been
one of the most uninteresting stocks around. It bounced between a splitadjusted $1.50 and $2.50 month after month, year after year. And little
wonder—this was a very small company selling fruit juice beverages in
a world dominated by Coca-Cola and Pepsi.
That all changed in late 2003, about the time the company entered the
market for energy drinks. It was clear that this was an important breakout point, because the basing pattern was so old and well-established. It
should also be noted here that it’s at times like these when a stock seems
expensive. After all, think back to how the stock would have looked back
then: it would be at an all-time high, and you would be paying more than
anyone else had paid for more than six years. So you can imagine why
people would be reluctant to pay $3.00 for a stock that so many others had
bought for between $1.50 and $2.50. It would be tempting to wait for the
price to ease back down again to the lower depths of its six-year-old range.
But this opportunity never came. The stock just started climbing, abandoning its old levels. Interestingly, volume continued to be thin, even while

Technical Analysis

21

FIGURE 1.17 One of the hottest stocks of 2004 and 2005, Hansen Natural
Corporation, made its move after breaking above a very well-formed saucer pattern
in late 2003.

the stock doubled from $3.50 to $7.00 in the first few months of 2004. In
May 2004, however, volume increased from 10 or 20 thousand shares a day
to one or two million shares a day. You can see the tremendous increase
in volume, which never abated. The stock stayed above its ascending trend
line the entire time, increasing a handsome 4,100 percent from its breakout
point as of the time of this writing.
It isn’t just unknown little companies that can create amazing returns,
however. Take a look at 3M Corporation, one of the solidest blue chip companies around, and certainly one that was widely known in the 1980s. Look
at Figure 1.18 and see how the company’s stock built an amazing cup with
handle formation over more than a decade. From 1973 to 1986, the company’s stock went essentially nowhere, but it was carving what turned out
to be an incredibly potent base pattern.
In 1986 and 1987, the company’s stock rose, but during the crash of October 1987, pretty much all the value that had been added to the stock was
wiped out in a matter of a few days. What’s especially interesting, though,
is that 1987’s crash is almost an inconsequential blip in the grand scheme
of the chart, as 3M went on to an impressive 8,600 percent gain over the
next 17 years. Once the basing and breakout were finished, the stock basically never went down and became one of the best-performing stocks of
any kind, blue chip or otherwise.

22

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 1.18 This very long-term graph of 3M Corporation illustrates that even
over a long time period, technical analysis has tremendous weight. The breakout in
the mid-1980s was the ﬁrst step to a staggering rise in the value of 3M.

One last example of a breakout shows once again how vital volume is.
A bullish move almost always requires volume to power it up, whereas a
bearish pattern can make a stock collapse on its own weight. PetroChina
(symbol PTR) had an explosion in volume perfectly correlated to its breakout from a cup with handle pattern in the spring of 2003. Notice the highlighted portion of the volume bars indicating this change in Figure 1.19. The
volume is the gasoline that feeds the fire of higher stock prices. As buyers
clamor to get into a stock, the excitement feeds off itself. It took a threefold rise in the stock’s price before PTR paused at all and its prices eased
for a while.

MORE BREAKDOWNS
The same principles that relate to ascending stock prices hold true for descending prices, except that volume isn’t quite so important. But what you
need to watch are the same simple guidelines of support, resistance, and
pattern recognition.
CMS Energy (symbol CMS) is shown in Figure 1.20. The stock had been
a top performer from 1985 through 1999, rising well over 10-fold. In 1998

Technical Analysis

23

FIGURE 1.19 The gigantic rise in volume was an important factor in this stock’s
push higher.

FIGURE 1.20 Patterns can range in time from days to years—this head and shoulders pattern formed over a period of two years until it broke beneath its headline in
the second half of 1999.

24

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 1.21 Juniper lost about 97 percent of its peak value once it broke beneath the neckline of its head and shoulders pattern.

and 1999, however, a head and shoulders pattern formed, and the price
broke beneath the neckline. The price shored up and retested the neckline
(which was the ideal time to short the stock, since the risk was the lowest)
before beginning to fall in earnest. Notice that the fall took some time to
fully unfold; the stock actually recovered most of its losses by the spring of
2001, only to begin its slide once more. By the time it was over, CMS had
lost 90 percent of its value from its peak.
An even more amazing fall from grace is illustrated with Figure 1.21,
which is Juniper Networks (symbol JNPR). This stock fell from $245 to
$5 in just two years. A skilled technical analyst would have seen a bad
fall coming based on the stock’s behavior in 2000. Although the head and
shoulders formation is somewhat more complex than normal, the neckline
is well defined, and the prices did retest the neckline beautifully.
What made the fall of this stock so dramatic was its incredible rise beforehand. The stock had increased in value from about $18 in the spring of
1999 to $245 in the summer of 2000, so the ascent was very rapid. Because
of this, there were very few areas of support on the way down when the
stock started falling. Think back to the Red Rover game described earlier
in this chapter; there simply weren’t any lines of people chained together
to slow the stock down. Once the price started falling, it rarely paused, until the buyers and sellers reached a state of equilibrium. But even by 2006,
