factors compelling concentration in Category 1, our actual acquisition activity in that category has been sporadic and inadequate.
Our preaching was better than our performance. (We neglected
the Noah principle: predicting rain doesn't count, building arks
does.)
We have tried occasionally to buy toads at bargain prices with
results that have been chronicled in past reports. Clearly our kisses

140

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

fell fiat. We have done well with a couple of princes-but they
were princes when purchased. At least our kisses didn't turn them
into toads. And, finally, we have occasionally been quite successful
in purchasing fractional interests in easily-identifiable princes at
toad-like prices.
Berkshire and Blue Chip are considering merger in 1983. If it
takes place, it will involve an exchange of stock based upon an
identical valuation method applied to both companies. The one
other significant issuance of shares by Berkshire or its affiliated
companies that occurred during present management's tenure was
in the 1978 merger of Berkshire with Diversified Retailing
Company.
Our share issuances follow a simple basic rule: we will not issue shares unless we receive as much intrinsic business value as we
give. Such a policy might seem axiomatic. Why, you might ask,
would anyone issue dollar bills in exchange for fifty-cent pieces?
Unfortunately, many corporate managers have been willing to do
just that.
The first choice of these managers in making acquisitions may
be to use cash or debt. But frequently the CEO's cravings outpace
cash and credit resources (certainly mine always have). Frequently, also, these cravings occur when his own stock is selling far
below intrinsic business value. This state of affairs produces a moment of truth. At that point, as Yogi Berra has said, "You can
observe a lot just by watching." For shareholders then will find
which objective the management truly prefers-expansion of domain or maintenance of owners' wealth.
The need to choose between these objectives occurs for some
simple reasons. Companies often sell in the stock market below
their intrinsic business value. But when a company wishes to sell
out completely, in a negotiated transaction, it inevitably wants toand usually can-receive full business value in whatever kind of
currency the value is to be delivered. If cash is to be used in payment, the seller's calculation of value received couldn't be easier.
If stock of the buyer is to be the currency, the seller's calculation is
still relatively easy: just figure the market value in cash of what is
to be received in stock.
Meanwhile, the buyer wishing to use his own stock as currency
for the purchase has no problems if the stock is selling in the market at full intrinsic value.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

141

But suppose it is selling at only half intrinsic value. In that
case, the buyer is faced with the unhappy prospect of using a substantially undervalued currency to make its purchase.
Ironically, were the buyer to instead be a seller of its entire
business, it too could negotiate for, and probably get, full intrinsic
business value. But when the buyer makes a partial sale of itselfand that is what the issuance of shares to make an acquisition
amounts to-it can customarily get no higher value set on its shares
than the market chooses to grant it.
The acquirer who nevertheless barges ahead ends up using an
undervalued (market value) currency to pay for a fully valued (negotiated value) property. In effect, the acquirer must give up $2 of
value to receive $1 of value. Under such circumstances, a marvelous business purchased at a fair sales price becomes a terrible buy.
For gold valued as gold cannot be purchased intelligently through
the utilization of gold-or even silver-valued as lead.
If, however, the thirst for size and action is strong enough, the
acquirer's manager will find ample rationalizations for such a
value-destroying issuance of stock. Friendly investment bankers
will reassure him as to the soundness of his actions. (Don't ask the
barber whether you need a haircut.)
A few favorite rationalizations employed by stock-issuing
managements follow:
(a) "The company we're buying is going to be worth a lot
more in the future." (Presumably so is the interest in the
old business that is being traded away; future prospects
are implicit in the business valuation process. If 2X is issued for X, the imbalance still exists when both parts
double in business value.)
(b) "We have to grow." (Who, it might be asked, is the "we"?
For present shareholders, the reality is that all existing
businesses shrink when shares are issued. Were Berkshire
to issue shares tomorrow for an acquisition, Berkshire
would own everything that it now owns plus the new business, but your interest in such hard-to-match businesses as
See's Candy Shops, National Indemnity, etc. would automatically be reduced. If (1) your family owns a 120-acre
farm and (2) you invite a neighbor with 60 acres of comparable land to merge his farm into an equal partnershipwith you to be managing partner, then (3) your managerial domain will have grown to 180 acres but you will have
permanently shrunk by 25% your family's ownership in-

142

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

terest in both acreage and crops. Managers who want to
expand their domain at the expense of owners might better consider a career in government.)
(c) "Our stock is undervalued and we've minimized its use in
this deal-but we need to give the selling shareholder 51 %
in stock and 49% in cash so that certain of those shareholders can get the tax-free exchange they want." (This
argument acknowledges that it is beneficial to the acquirer
to hold down the issuance of shares, and we like that. But
if it hurts old owners to utilize shares on a 100% basis, it
very likely hurts on a 51 % basis. After all, a man is not
charmed if a spaniel defaces his lawn, just because it's a
spaniel and not a St. Bernard. And the wishes of sellers
can't be the determinant of the best interests of the
buyer-what would happen if, heaven forbid, the seller insisted that as a condition of merger the CEO of the acquirer be replaced?)
There are three ways to avoid destruction of value for old
owners when shares are issued for acquisitions. One is to have a
true business-value-for-business-value merger, such as the Berkshire-Blue Chip combination is intended to be. Such a merger attempts to be fair to shareholders of both parties, with each
receiving just as much as it gives in terms of intrinsic business
value. The Dart Industries-Kraft and Nabisco-Standard Brands
mergers appeared to be of this type, but they are the exceptions.
It's not that acquirers wish to avoid such deals; it's just that they
are very hard to do.
The second route presents itself when the acquirer's stock sells
at or above its intrinsic business value. In that situation, the use of
stock as currency actually may enhance the wealth of the acquiring
company's owners. Many mergers were accomplished on this basis
in the 1965-69 period. The results were the converse of most of the
activity since 1970: the shareholders of the acquired company received very inflated currency (frequently pumped up by dubious
accounting and promotional techniques) and were the losers of
wealth through such transactions.
During recent years the second solution has been available to
very few large companies. The exceptions have primarily been
those companies in glamorous or promotional businesses to which
the market temporarily attaches valuations at or above intrinsic
business valuation.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

143

The third solution is for the acquirer to go ahead with the acquisition, but then subsequently repurchase a quantity of shares
equal to the number issued in the merger. In this manner, what
originally was a stock-for-stock merger can be converted, effectively, into a cash-for-stock acquisition. Repurchases of this kind
are damage-repair moves. Regular readers will correctly guess that
we much prefer repurchases that directly enhance the wealth of
owners instead of repurchases that merely repair previous damage.
Scoring touchdowns is more exhilarating than recovering one's
fumbles. But, when a fumble has occurred, recovery is important
and we heartily recommend damage-repair repurchases that turn a
bad stock deal into a fair cash deal.
The language utilized in mergers tends to confuse the issues
and encourage irrational actions by managers. For example, "dilution" is usually carefully calculated on a pro forma basis for both
book value and current earnings per share. Particular emphasis is
given to the latter item. When that calculation is negative (dilutive) from the acquiring company's standpoint, a justifying explanation will be made (internally, if not elsewhere) that the lines will
cross favorably at some point in the future. (While deals often fail
in practice, they never fail in projections-if the CEO is visibly
panting over a prospective acquisition, subordinates and consultants will supply the requisite projections to rationalize any price.)
Should the calculation produce numbers that are immediately positive-that is, anti-dilutive-for the acquirer, no comment is
thought to be necessary.
The attention given this form of dilution is overdone: current
earnings per share (or even earnings per share of the next few
years) are an important variable in most business valuations, but
far from all-powerful.
There have been plenty of mergers, non-dilutive in this limited
sense, that were instantly value-destroying for the acquirer. And
some mergers that have diluted current and near-term earnings per
share have in fact been value-enhancing. What really counts is
whether a merger is dilutive or anti-dilutive in terms of intrinsic
business value (a judgment involving consideration of many variables). We believe calculation of dilution from this viewpoint to be
all-important (and too seldom made).
A second language problem relates to the equation of exchange. If Company A announces that it will issue shares to merge
with Company B, the process is customarily described as "Company A to Acquire Company B", or "B Sells to A". Clearer think-

144

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

ing about the matter would result if a more awkward but more
accurate description were used: "Part of A sold to acquire B", or
"Owners of B to receive part of A in exchange for their properties". In a trade, what you are giving is just as important as what
you are getting. This remains true even when the final tally on
what is being given is delayed. Subsequent sales of common stock
or convertible issues, either to complete the financing for a deal or
to restore balance sheet strength, must be fully counted in evaluating the fundamental mathematics of the original acquisition. (If
corporate pregnancy is going to be the consequence of corporate
mating, the time to face that fact is before the moment of ecstasy.)
Managers and directors might sharpen their thinking by asking
themselves if they would sell 100% of their business on the same
basis they are being asked to sell part of it. And if it isn't smart to
sell all on such a basis, they should ask themselves why it is smart
to sell a portion. A cumulation of small managerial stupidities will
produce a major stupidity-not a major triumph. (Las Vegas has
been built upon the wealth transfers that occur when people engage in seemingly-small disadvantageous capital transactions.)
The "giving versus getting" factor can most easily be calculated in the case of registered investment companies. Assume Investment Company X, selling at 50% of asset value, wishes to
merge with Investment Company Y. Assume, also, that Company
X therefore decides to issue shares equal in market value to 100%
of Y's asset value.
Such a share exchange would leave X trading $2 of its previous
intrinsic value for $1 of Y's intrinsic value. Protests would
promptly come forth from both X's shareholders and the SEC,
which rules on the fairness of registered investment company
mergers. Such a transaction simply would not be allowed.
In the case of manufacturing, service, financial companies,
etc., values are not normally as precisely calculable as in the case of
investment companies. But we have seen mergers in these industries that just as dramatically destroyed value for the owners of the
acquiring company as was the case in the hypothetical illustration
above. This destruction could not happen if management and directors would assess the fairness of any transaction by using the
same yardstick in the measurement of both businesses.
Finally, a word should be said about the "double whammy"
effect upon owners of the acquiring company when value-diluting
stock issuances occur. Under such circumstances, the first blow is
the loss of intrinsic business value that occurs through the merger

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

145

itself. The second is the downward revision in market valuation
that, quite rationally, is given to that now-diluted business value.
For current and prospective owners understandably will not pay as
much for assets lodged in the hands of a management that has a
record of wealth-destruction through unintelligent share issuances
as they will pay for assets entrusted to a management with precisely equal operating talents, but a known distaste for anti-owner
actions. Once management shows itself insensitive to the interests
of owners, shareholders will suffer a long time from the price/value
ratio afforded their stock (relative to other stocks), no matter what
assurances management gives that the value-diluting action taken
was a one-of-a-kind event.
Those assurances are treated by the market much as one-bugin-the-salad explanations are treated at restaurants. Such explanations, even when accompanied by a new waiter, do not eliminate a
drop in the demand (and hence market value) for salads, both on
the part of the offended customer and his neighbors pondering
what to order. Other things being equal, the highest stock market
prices relative to intrinsic business value are given to companies
whose managers have demonstrated their unwillingness to issue
shares at any time on terms unfavorable to the owners of the
business.
[I]n contemplating business mergers and acquisitions, many
managers tend to focus on whether the transaction is immediately
dilutive or anti-dilutive to earnings per share (or, at financial institutions, to per-share book value). An emphasis of this sort carries
great dangers. . .. [I]magine that a 25-year-old first-year MBA student is considering merging his future economic interests with
those of a 25-year-old day laborer. The MBA student, a nonearner, would find that a "share-for-share" merger of his equity
interest in himself with that of the day laborer would enhance his
near-term earnings (in a big way!). But what could be sillier for
the student than a deal of this kind?
In corporate transactions, it's equally silly for the would-be
purchaser to focus on current earnings when the prospective acquiree has either different prospects, a different mix of operating
and non-operating assets, or a different capital structure. At Berkshire, we have rejected many merger and purchase opportunities
that would have boosted current and near-term earnings but that
would have reduced per-share intrinsic value. Our approach,
rather, has been to follow Wayne Gretzky's advice: "Go to where

146

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

the puck is going to be, not to where it is." As a result, our shareholders are now many billions of dollars richer than they would
have been if we had used the standard catechism.
The sad fact is that most major acquisitions display an egregious imbalance: They are a bonanza for the shareholders of the
acquiree; they increase the income and status of the acquirer's
management; and they are a honey pot for the investment bankers
and other professionals on both sides. But, alas, they usually reduce the wealth of the acquirer's shareholders, often to a substantial extent. That happens because the acquirer typically gives up
more intrinsic value than it receives. Do that enough, says John
Medlin, the retired head of Wachovia Corp., and "you are running
a chain letter in reverse."
Over time, the skill with which a company's managers allocate
capital has an enormous impact on the enterprise's value. Almost
by definition, a really good business generates far more money (at
least after its early years) than it can use internally. The company
could, of course, distribute the money to shareholders by way of
dividends or share repurchases. But often the CEO asks a strategic
planning staff, consultants or investment bankers whether an acquisition or two might make sense. That's like asking your interior
decorator whether you need a $50,000 rug.
The acquisition problem is often compounded by a biological
bias: Many CEO's attain their positions in part because they possess an abundance of animal spirits and ego. If an executive is
heavily endowed with these qualities-which, it should be acknowledged, sometimes have their advantages-they won't disappear when he reaches the top. When such a CEO is encouraged by
his advisors to make deals, he responds much as would a teenage
boy who is encouraged by his father to have a normal sex life. It's
not a push he needs.
Some years back, a CEO friend of mine-in jest, it must be
said-unintentionally described the pathology of many big deals.
This friend, who ran a property-casualty insurer, was explaining to
his directors why he wanted to acquire a certain life insurance company. After droning rather unpersuasively through the economics
and strategic rationale for the acquisition, he abruptly abandoned
the script. With an impish look, he simply said: "Aw, fellas, all the
other kids have one."
At Berkshire, our managers will continue to earn extraordinary returns from what appear to be ordinary businesses. As a first
step, these managers will look for ways to deploy their earnings

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

1997]

147

advantageously in their businesses. What's left, they will send to
Charlie and me. We then will try to use those funds in ways that
build per-share intrinsic value. Our goal will be to acquire either
part or all of businesses that we believe we understand, that have
good, sustainable underlying economics, and that are run by managers whom we like, admire and trust.
B.

Sensible Stock Repurchases Versus Greenmaip9

The companies in which we have our largest investments have
all engaged in significant stock repurchases at times when wide discrepancies existed between price and value. As shareholders, we
find this encouraging and rewarding for two important reasonsone that is obvious, and one that is subtle and not always understood. The obvious point involves basic arithmetic: major repurchases at prices well below per-share intrinsic business value
immediately increase, in a highly significant way, that value. When
companies purchase their own stock, they often find it easy to get
$2 of present value for $1. Corporate acquisition programs almost
never do as well and, in a discouragingly large number of cases, fail
to get anything close to $1 of value for each $1 expended.
The other benefit of repurchases is less subject to precise measurement but can be fully as important over time. By making repurchases when a company's market value is well below its
business value, management clearly demonstrates that it is given to
actions that enhance the wealth of shareholders, rather than to actions that expand management's domain but that do nothing for
(or even harm) shareholders. Seeing this, shareholders and potential shareholders increase their estimates of future returns from the
business. This upward revision, in turn, produces market prices
more in line with intrinsic business value. These prices are entirely
rational. Investors should pay more for a business that is lodged in
the hands of a manager with demonstrated pro-shareholder leanings than for one in the hands of a self-interested manager marching to a different drummer. (To make the point extreme, how
much would you pay to be a minority shareholder of a company
controlled by Robert Vesco?)
The key word is "demonstrated". A manager who consistently
turns his back on repurchases, when these clearly are in the interests of owners, reveals more than he knows of his motivations. No
matter how often or how eloquently he mouths some public rela39 [Divided by hash lines: 1984; 1984.]

148

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

tions-inspired phrase such as "maximizing shareholder wealth"
(this season's favorite), the market correctly discounts assets
lodged with him. His heart is not listening to his mouth-and, after
a while, neither will the market.
(Our endorsement of repurchases is limited to those dictated
by price/value relationships and does not extend to the "greenmail" repurchase-a practice we find odious and repugnant. In
these transactions, two parties achieve their personal ends by exploitation of an innocent and unconsulted third party. The players
are: (1) the "shareholder" extortionist who, even before the ink on
his stock certificate dries, delivers his "your-money-or-your-life"
message to managers; (2) the corporate insiders who quickly seek
peace at any price-as long as the price is paid by someone else;
and (3) the shareholders whose money is used by (2) to make (1)
go away. As the dust settles, the mugging, transient shareholder
gives his speech on "free enterprise", the muggee management
gives its speech on "the best interests of the company", and the
innocent shareholder standing by mutely funds the payoff.)
C.

Leveraged Buyouts40

If successful corporate business acquisition is so hard, how
does one explain the widespread recent success of most of the
leveraged-buy-out ("LBO") operators who have purchased corporations? A huge part of the answer comes from income-tax effects
and other simple effects. When, in a typical LBO, the typical
mostly equity corporate capitalization was replaced by 90% debt
plus a new lO%-of-capitalization common stock position:
(1) the combined market value of all the new common stock
plus all the new debt became much higher than the previous market value of all the older common stock, because
the existing stream of pre-tax earnings was no longer
shared with corporate income tax collectors who, in many
cases, had previously received more cash each year than
shareholders; and
(2) even after the value-enhancing effect of the corporate tax
reduction was shared with former shareholders by paying
them extra-high prices to leave, a retained residue of
value-enhancing tax effect made the new common stock
40 [1989 Wesco Financial Corporation Letter to Shareholders, by Charles T. Munger.
