
the border without being able to see it, and
spend twenty minutes trying to work out if
we are in East or West Germany. Charlotte
was born and raised in the East German city
of Leipzig, but she is no less uncertain than I
am about which former country we are in.
“You just would not know anymore unless
you are told,” she says. “They have to put up

310/396

a sign to mark it.” A landscape once scarred
by trenches and barbed wire and minefields
exhibits not so much as a ripple. On the outside, at least, it’s perfectly clean. Somewhere
near this former border we pull off the road
into a gas station. It has three pumps in a
narrow channel without space to maneuver
or to pass. The three drivers filling their gas
tanks need to do it together, and move along
together, for if any one driver dawdles,
everyone else must wait. No driver dawdles.
The German drivers service their cars with
the efficiency of a pit crew. Precisely because
the arrangement is so archaic, Charlotte
guesses we must still be in West Germany.
“You would never find this kind of gas station in East Germany,” she says. “Everything
in East Germany is new.” She also claims she
can guess at sight whether a person, and especially a man, is from the east or the west.
“West Germans are much prouder. They
stand straight. East Germans are more likely

311/396

to slouch. West Germans think East Germans are lazy.”
“East Germans are the Greeks of Germany,” I say.
“Be careful,” she says.
From Düsseldorf we drive to Leipzig, and
from Leipzig we hop a train to Hamburg to
find the mud wrestling. Along the way she
humors me by parsing her native tongue for
signs of anality. “Kackwurst is the term for
feces,” she says grudgingly. “It literally
means shit sausage. And it’s horrible. When I
see sausages I can’t think of anything else.”
She thinks a moment. “Bescheissen:
someone shit on you. Klugscheisser: an intelligence shitter.
“If you have a lot of money,” she continues,
“you are said to shit money: Geldscheisser.”
She rips a handful of other examples off the
top of her head, a little shocked by how fertile is this line of thinking, before she says,
“And if you find yourself in a bad situation,

312/396

you say, ‘Die Kacke ist am dampfen the shit
is steaming.’” She stops and appears to realize she is encouraging a theory of German
national character.
“It’s just in the words,” she says.
“Sure it is.”
“It doesn’t mean it applies.”
Outside of Hamburg we stopped for lunch
at a farm owned by a man named Wilhelm
Nölling, a German economist now in his seventies but with the kick and bite of a much
younger man. He has the chiseled features
and silver hair of a patrician but the vocal
cords of a bleacher bum. “The Greeks want
us to pay their lunch!” he bellows, as he gives
me a tour of his private goat pen. “That is
why they are rioting in the streets! Baaa!”
Back when the idea of the euro was being
bandied about, Nölling had been a governor
of the Bundesbank. From the moment the
discussion turned serious he has railed
against the euro. He’d written one mournful

313/396

pamphlet called “Good-bye to the Deutsche
Mark?” and another, more declarative
pamphlet called “The Euro: A Journey to
Hell.” Together with three other prominent
German economists and financial leaders
he’d filed a lawsuit, still wending its way
through the German courts, challenging the
euro on constitutional grounds. Just before
the deutsche mark got scrapped, Nölling had
argued to the Bundesbank that they should
just keep all the notes. “I said, ‘Don’t shred
it!” he now says with great gusto, leaping out
of an armchair in the living room of his
farmhouse. “I said, ‘Pile it all up, put it in a
room, in case we need it later!’”
He finds himself stuck: he knows that he is
engaged in an exercise futile and pointless.
“Can you turn this back?” he says. “We know
we can’t turn this back. If they say, ‘Okay, we
were wrong, you were right,’ what do you do?
That is the hundred-thousand-million-dollar
question.” He thinks he knows what should

314/396

be done but doesn’t think Germans are capable of doing it. The idea he and his fellow
dissident German economists have cooked
up is to split the European Union in two for
financial purposes. One euro, a kind of
second-string currency, would be issued for,
and used by, the deadbeat countries—Greece, Portugal, Spain, Italy, and so
on. The first-string euro would be used by
“the homogenous countries, the ones you can
rely on.” He lists these reliable countries:
Germany, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Finland, and (he hesitates for a second over
this) France.
“Are you sure the French belong?”
“We discussed this,” he says seriously.
They decided that for social reasons you
couldn’t really exclude the French. It was just
too awkward.
As he presided over the Maastricht treaty,
which created the euro, the French prime
minister François Mitterrand is rumored to

315/396

have said privately that yoking Germany to
the rest of Europe in this way was sure to
lead to imbalances, and the imbalances were
certain to lead to some crisis, but by the time
the crisis struck he’d be dead and gone—and
others would sort it out. Even if Mitterrand
didn’t say exactly that, it’s the sort of thing
he should have said, as he surely thought it.
At the time it was obvious to a lot of people,
and not only Bundesbank governors, that
these countries did not belong together.
But then how did people who seem as intelligent and successful and honest and well organized as the Germans allow themselves to
be drawn into such a mess? In their financial
affairs they’d ticked all the little boxes to ensure that the contents of the bigger box were
not rotten, and yet ignored the overpowering
stench wafting from the big box. Nölling felt
the problem had its roots in German national character. “We entered Maastricht because
they had these rules,” he says, as we move off

316/396

to his kitchen and plates heaped with the
white asparagus Germans take such pride in
growing. “We were talked into this under
false pretenses. Germans are, by and large,
gullible people. They trust and believe. They
like to trust. They like to believe.”
If the deputy finance minister has a sign on
his wall reminding him to see the point of
view of others, here is perhaps why. Others
do not behave as Germans do: others lie. In
this financial world of deceit Germans are
natives on a protected island who have not
been inoculated against the virus carried by
visitors. The same instincts that allowed
them to trust Wall Street bond salesmen also
allowed them to trust the French, when they
promised there would be no bailouts, and the
Greeks, when they swore that their budget
was balanced. That is one theory. Another is
that they trusted so easily because they
didn’t care enough about the cost of being
wrong, as it came with certain benefits. For

317/396

the Germans the euro isn’t just a currency.
It’s a device for flushing away the past. It’s
another Holocaust Memorial. The Greeks
may have German public opinion polls running against them, but deeper forces run in
their favor.
In any case, if you are obsessed with cleanliness and order yet harbor a secret fascination with filth and chaos, you are bound to
get into some kind of trouble. There is no
such thing as clean without dirt. There is no
such thing as purity without impurity. The
interest in one implies an interest in the other. The young German woman who had driven me back and forth across Germany exhibits interest in neither, and it’s hard to say
whether she is an exception or a new rule.
Still, she marches dutifully into the world’s
largest red-light district, seeking out a lot of
seedy-looking German men to ask them
where she might find a female mud wrestling
show. Even now she continues to find new

318/396

and surprising ways in which Germans find
meaning in filth. “Scheisse glänzt nicht,
wenn man sie poliert: Shit won’t shine, even
if you polish it,” she says, as we pass the
Funky Pussy Club. “Scheissegal: it just
means ‘I don’t give a shit.’” She laughs.
“That’s an oxymoron in Germany, right?”
The night is young and the Reeperbahn is
hopping: it’s the closest thing I’ve seen in
Germany to a mob scene. Hawkers lean
against sex clubs and sift likely customers
from the passing crowds. Women who are almost pretty beckon men who are clearly
tempted. We pass several times the same
corporate logo, of a pair of stick figures engaged in anal sex. Charlotte spots it and remembers that a German band, Rammstein,
was arrested in the United States for simulating anal sex on stage while performing a
song called “Bück Dich” (Bend Over). But on
she charges, asking old German men where
to find the dirt. At length she finds a

319/396

definitive answer, from a German who has
worked here for decades. “The last one shut
down years ago,” he says. “It was too
expensive.”

V
TOO FAT TO FLY

On August 5, 2011, moments after the U.S.
government watched a rating agency lower
its credit rating for the first time in American
history, the market for U.S. Treasury bonds
soared. Four days later, the interest rates
paid by the U.S. government on its new tenyear bonds had fallen to the lowest level on
record, 2.04 percent. The price of gold rose
right alongside the price of U.S. Treasury
bonds, but the prices of virtually all other
stocks and bonds in rich Western countries
went into a free fall. The net effect of a major

321/396

U.S. rating agency’s saying that the U.S. government was less likely than before to repay
its debts was to lower the cost of borrowing
for the U.S. government and to raise it for
everyone else. This told you a lot of what you
needed to know about the ability of the U.S.
government to live beyond its means: it had,
for the moment, a blank check. The shakier
the United States government appeared, up
to some faraway point, the more cheaply it
would be able to borrow. It wasn’t exposed
yet to the same vicious cycle that threatened
the financial life of European countries: a
moment of doubt leads to higher borrowing
costs, which leads to greater doubt, and even
higher borrowing costs, and so on until you
become Greece. The fear that the United
States might actually not pay back the money
it had borrowed was still unreal.
On December 19, 2010, the television news
program 60 Minutes aired a thirteen-minute
piece about U.S. state and local finances. The

322/396

correspondent Steve Kroft interviewed a
private Wall Street analyst named Meredith
Whitney, who, back in 2007, had gone from
being obscure to famous when she correctly
suggested that Citigroup’s losses in U.S.
subprime bonds were far bigger than anyone
imagined, and predicted the bank would be
forced to cut its dividend. The 60 Minutes
segment noted that U.S. state and local governments faced a collective annual deficit of
roughly half a trillion dollars, and noted
another
trillion-and-a-half-dollar
gap
between what the governments owed retired
workers and the money they had on hand to
pay them. Whitney pointed out that even
these numbers were unreliable, and probably
optimistic, as the states did a poor job of
providing information about their finances
to the public. New Jersey governor Chris
Christie concurred with her and added, “At
this point, if it’s worse, what’s the difference?” The bill owed by American states to

323/396

retired American workers was so large that it
couldn’t be paid, whatever the amount. At
the end of the piece Kroft asked Whitney
what she thought about the ability and willingness of the American states to repay their
debts. She didn’t see a real risk that the
states would default, because the states had
the ability to push their problems down to
counties and cities. But at these lower levels
of government, where American life was
lived, she thought there would be serious
problems. “You could see fifty to a hundred
sizable defaults, maybe more,” she said. A
minute later Kroft returned to her to ask her
when people should start worrying about a
crisis in local finances. “It’ll be something to
worry about within the next twelve months,”
she said.
That prophecy turned out to be self-fulfilling: people started worrying about U.S.
municipal finance the minute the words were
out of her mouth. The next day the

324/396

municipal bond market tanked. It kept falling right through the next month. It fell so
far, and her prediction received so much attention, that money managers who had put
clients into municipal bonds felt compelled
to hire more people to analyze states and cities, to prove her wrong. (One of them called
it “The Meredith Whitney Municipal Bond
Analyst Full Employment Act.”) Inside the
financial world a new literature was born,
devoted to persuading readers that Meredith
Whitney didn’t know what she was talking
about. She was vulnerable to the charge: up
until the moment she appeared on 60
Minutes she had, so far as anyone knew, no
experience at all of U.S. municipal finance.
Many of the articles attacking her accused
her of making a very specific forecast—as
many as a hundred defaults within a
year!—that had failed to materialize. (Sample
Bloomberg News headline: MEREDITH
WHITNEY LOSES CREDIBILITY AS MUNI DEFAULTS

325/396

FALL 60%.) The whirlwind thrown up by the

brief market panic sucked in everyone who
was anywhere near municipal finance. The
nonpartisan, dispassionate, sober-minded
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, in
Washington, D.C., even released a statement
saying that there was a “mistaken impression
that drastic and immediate measures are
needed to avoid an imminent fiscal meltdown.” This was treated in news accounts as
a response to Meredith Whitney, as she was
the only one in sight who could be accused of
having made such a prediction.
But that’s not at all what she had said: her
words were being misrepresented so that her
message might be more easily attacked. “She
was referring to the complacency of the ratings agencies and investment advisers who
say there is nothing to worry about,” said a
person at 60 Minutes who reviewed the transcripts of the interview for me, to make sure
I had heard what I thought I had heard. “She

326/396

says there is something to worry about, and
it will be apparent to everyone in the next
twelve months.”
Whatever else she had done, Meredith
Whitney had found the pressure point in
American finance: the fear that American cities would not pay back the money they had
borrowed. The market for municipal bonds,
unlike the market for U.S. government
bonds, spooked easily. American cities and
states were susceptible to the same cycle of
doom that had forced Greece to seek help
from the International Monetary Fund. All it
took to create doubt, and raise borrowing
costs for states and cities, was for a woman
with no standing in the municipal bond market to utter a few sentences on television.
That was the amazing thing: she had offered
nothing to back up her statement. She’d
written a massive, detailed report on state
and local finances, but no one except a handful of her clients had any idea what was in it.

327/396

“If I was a real nasty hedge fund guy,” one
hedge fund manager put it to me, “I’d sit
back and say, ‘This is a herd of cattle that can
be stampeded.’”
What Meredith Whitney was trying to say
was more interesting than what she was accused of saying. She didn’t actually care all
that much about the municipal bond market,
or how many cities were likely to go bankrupt. The municipal bond market was a
dreary backwater. As she put it, “Who cares
about the stinking muni bond market?” The
only reason she had stumbled into that market was that she had come to view the U.S.
national economy as a collection of regional
economies. To understand the regional economies, she had to understand how state and
local governments were likely to behave; and
to understand this she needed to understand
their finances. Thus she had spent two unlikely years researching state and local finance. “I didn’t have a plan to do this,” she

328/396

said. “Not one of my clients asked for it. I
only looked at this because I needed to understand it myself. How it started was with a
question: how can GDP [gross domestic
product] estimates be so high when the
states that outperformed the U.S. economy
during the boom were now underperforming
the U.S. economy—and they were twentytwo percent of that economy?” It was a good
question.
From 2002 to 2008, the states had piled
up debts right alongside their citizens’: their
level of indebtedness, as a group, had almost
doubled, and state spending had grown by
two-thirds. In that time they had also systematically underfunded their pension plans
and other future liabilities by a total of nearly
$1.5 trillion. In response, perhaps, the pension money that they had set aside was invested in ever-riskier assets. In 1980 only 23
percent of state pension money had been invested in the stock market; by 2008 the

329/396

number had risen to 60 percent. To top it all
off, these pension funds were pretty much all
assuming they could earn 8 percent on the
money they had to invest, at a time when the
Federal Reserve was promising to keep interest rates at zero. Toss in underfunded
health care plans, a reduction in federal dollars available to the states, and the depression in tax revenues caused by a soft economy, and you were looking at multi-trilliondollar holes that could only be dealt with in
one of two ways—massive cutbacks on public
services or a default—or both. She thought
default unlikely, at least at the state level, because the state could bleed the cities of
money to pay off its bonds. The cities were
where the pain would be felt most intensely.
“The scary thing about state treasurers,” she
said “is that they don’t know the financial
situation in their own municipalities.”
“How do you know that?”
“Because I asked them!”

330/396

All states may have been created equal, but
they were equal no longer. The states that
had enjoyed the biggest boom were now facing the biggest busts. “How does the United
States emerge from the credit crisis?” Whitney asked herself. “I was convinced—because
the credit crisis had been so different from
region to region—that it would emerge with
new regional strengths and weaknesses.
Companies are more likely to flourish in the
stronger states; the individuals will go to
where the jobs are. Ultimately, the people
will follow the companies.” The country, she
thought, might organize itself increasingly
into zones of financial security and zones of
financial crisis. And the more clearly people
understood which zones were which, the
more friction there would be between the
two. (“Indiana is going to be like, ‘NFW I’m
bailing out New Jersey.’”) As more and more
people grasped which places had serious financial problems and which did not, the

331/396

problems would only increase. “Those who
have money and can move do so,” Whitney
wrote in her report to her Wall Street clients,
“those without money and who cannot move
do not, and ultimately rely more on state and
local assistance. It becomes effectively a
‘tragedy of the commons.’”
The point of Meredith Whitney’s investigation, in her mind, was not to predict defaults
in the municipal bond market. It was to compare the states to each other so that they
might be ranked. She wanted to get a sense
of who in America was likely to play the role
of the Greeks, and who the Germans. Of who
was strong, and who weak. In the process
she had, in effect, unearthed America’s scariest financial places.
“So what’s the scariest state?” I asked her.
She only had to think for about two
seconds.
“California.”

332/396

one summer morning I
pedaled a five-thousand-dollar titaniumframe mountain bike rented in anxiety the
previous evening down the Santa Monica
beach road to the corner where Arnold Schwarzenegger had asked me to meet him. He
turned up right on time, driving a black Cadillac SUV with a handful of crappy old jalopy bikes racked to the back. I wore the
closest I could find to actual bicycle gear; he
wore a green fleece, shorts, and soft beige
slipperlike shoes that suggested both a surprising indifference to his own appearance
and a security in his own manhood. His hair
was still vaguely in a shape left by a pillow,
and his eyelids drooped, though he swore
he’d been up for an hour and a half reading
newspapers. After reading the newspapers,
this is what the former governor of California
often does: ride his bike for cardio, then hit
the weight room.
AT SEVEN O’CLOCK

333/396

He hauls a bike off the back of the car, hops
on, and takes off down an already busy
Ocean Avenue. He wears no bike helmet,
runs red lights, and rips past DO NOT ENTER
signs without seeming to notice them, and
up one-way streets. When he wants to cross
three lanes of fast traffic he doesn’t so much
as glance over his shoulder but just sticks out
his hand and follows it, assuming that
whatever is behind him will stop. His bike
has at least ten speeds but he has just two:
zero, and pedaling as fast as he can. Inside
half a mile he’s moving fast enough that
wind-induced tears course down his cheeks.
He’s got to be one of the world’s most recognizable people, but he doesn’t appear to
worry that anyone will recognize him, and no
one does. It may be that people who get out
of bed at dawn to jog and Rollerblade and
race-walk are too interested in what they are
doing to break their trance. Or it may be that
he’s taking them by surprise. He has no

334/396

entourage, not even a bodyguard. His economic adviser, David Crane, and his media
adviser, Adam Mendelsohn, who came along
for the ride just because it sounded fun, are
now somewhere far behind him. Anyone
paying attention would think, That guy
might look like Arnold but it can’t possibly
be Arnold because Arnold would never be
out alone on a bike at seven in the morning,
trying to commit suicide. It isn’t until he is
forced to stop at a red light that he makes
meaningful contact with the public. A woman pushing a baby stroller and talking on a
cell phone crosses the street right in front of
him, and does a double take. “Oh . . . my . . .
God,” she gasps into her phone. “It’s Bill
Clinton!” She’s not ten feet away but she
keeps talking to the phone, as if the man is
unreal. “I’m here with Bill Clinton.”
“It’s one of those guys who has had a sex
scandal,” says Arnold, smiling.

335/396

“Wait . . . wait,” says the woman to her
phone. “Maybe it’s not Bill Clinton.”
Before she can make a positive identification the light is green, and we’re off.
His life has been a series of carefully staged
experiences. He himself has no staged
presentation of it, however. He is fresh, alive,
and improvisational: I’m not sure even he
knows what he will do next. He’s not exactly
humble, but then if I had lived the life he’s
lived I’m not sure I would be, either, though
I might try to fake humility more often than
he does, which is roughly never. What saves
him from self-absorption, aside from a natural curiosity, is a genuine lack of interest in
personal reflection. He lives the same way he
rides his bike, paying far more attention to
what’s ahead than what’s behind. In office,
he kept no journal of any sort. I find it amazing, but he now says he didn’t so much as
scribble little notes that might later be used
to reconstruct his experience and his feelings
