
Weren't you at all reluctant about quitting college a year before
you were going to get your degree?
No, because I just couldn't wait to get started. Also, I was a finance
major, and my teachers knew a lot less than I did about the stock market and investing.
What did they teach you in college about the stock market?
They teach you theories, and theories don't work most of the
time.
For example?
The efficient market hypothesis [the concept that the market immediately discounts all known information], which in my opinion is
ridiculous.
Why is it ridiculous?
Because different market participants will do research of varying quality. The market price will reflect the average assessment of all
investors. If you can do research that most other people do not, you
might be able to discover something that most of the rest of the market doesn't know and benefit from that knowledge. There are a lot of
things that I know about my companies that most other investors
don't. Therefore, my evaluation of these companies is not going to be
the same as theirs. Why then should a stock always trade at the right
price level?
When you buy a stock, do you know where you want to get out
before you get in?
Certainly. I always have a target price at which I will get out, assuming the fundamentals haven't changed. If the fundamentals get
stronger, however, I might raise my target.
What is this target based on? Is it some specified percent gain?
Yes, a percent gain.
What percent?
It depends how cheaply I buy the stock, but on average 20 to 25
percent.
What you are doing sounds like the exact opposite of Peter
Lynch, who says you should go for a "ten-bagger" [buy stocks that
you think can increase tenfold]; you're not even going for a double, or even close to it.

F R O M I S T A N B U L TO

1 never go for home runs. That's why I. should do well in a bear
market.
I assume that when you sell a stock, you look to buy it back when

it dips.
Certainly, as long as the fundamentals don't change.
But don't you often find yourself taking a moderate profit on a
stock, and then the stock never dips enough to give you a chance

to repurchase it?
That happens a lot of time, but I don't worry about it. My main goal is
not to lose money. If you can make money consistently, you will do
just fine.
Most of your trading history has been with a small amount of
money. Now that you have started a fund and are doing well, that
amount will increase dramatically. How will trading much larger

sums of money affect your approach?
It won't change anything. The stocks I buy are all well-known names
with lots of liquidity. This is deliberate. When I first started, my attitude was that I had to think big. Therefore I made sure to adopt a
style that could be used with much larger sums of money.
The period during which you have traded has coincided with one

of the greatest bull markets in history. What happens to your
approach if we go into a major bear market?
I hope we get a bear market. All the momentum players will get killed;
all the Internet players will get killed; all the growth players will get
killed; the value players, however, will do okay. The companies that I
buy are already in bear markets. They are trading at five to six times
earnings. They don't have room to go much lower. Remember, the
stocks that I buy are already down 60 to 70 percent from their highs.
Okay, I could see why you would lose a lot less in a bear market
than investors using other approaches. But if the S&P index
comes off 20 or 30 percent, I would assume that your stocks
would go down as well.
That's fine, I'll just hold. I know the value of my companies. I don't
second-guess myself when 1 make an investment. A lot of other
money managers have rules about getting out of their stocks if they go
down by some specified amount, say 7 percent or 10 percent. They

S T R E E T BULL

have to do that because they are not sure about what they are buying.
I do tremendous research on any stock that I buy, and I know how
much it is worth. In fact, if a stock I buy goes down 10 percent and
the fundamentals haven't changed, 1 might well buy more.
But if you never use any stop-loss points, what happens if a company you buy goes bankrupt? How much of an impact would an
event like that have on your portfolio?
It will never happen. I don't buy any companies that have even a
remote chance of going bankrupt. I buy companies that have a good
balance sheet, a high book value, consistent business track records,
good management, and large insider buying ownership. These are not
the type of companies that go bankrupt.
How do you know when you are wrong in a position?
If tbe fundamentals change and the stock no longer meets my criteria
for holding it at the current price.
What if the price is going against you, but the fundamentals
haven't changed?
Then I will just buy more.
How many different stock positions do you typically hold at one
time?
About ten. Simple logic: My top ten ideas will always perform better
than my top hundred.

What is the maximum amount of your portfolio that you would

allocate to a single stock?
At this point, the maximum I would hold on any single stock is about
30 percent of the portfolio. It used to be as high as 70 percent.
That sounds like an extremely large maximum position on one
stock. What happens if you are wrong on that trade?
I make sure that I know the fundamentals and that I am not wrong.

But there may be some reason for a stock going down that you
don't know about.

No.
How can you say no for sure?
Because I know the companies I buy. For example, if I buy Viasoft at
$7, a company that has $5 per share in cash and no debt, what is my
downside—$2?

AHMETOKUMUS

What is your approach on the short side?
I look for stocks that are trading at a huge multiple to earnings. However, after my experience with Internet stocks last year, I've added a
rule that there has to be a catalyst. Now, regardless of how extremely
overvalued a stock may be, I won't sell it until there has been a catalyst for change.
So another mistake you made in shorting Amazon and Schwab
last year, besides selling into a mania, was selling without a catalyst.
Exactly. Even though those stocks may be overvalued, the direction of
the fundamentals is still strong. Although Amazon is not making any
money, they continue to grow their revenues and meet their sales targets. As long as this is the case, the market is not going to sell the
stock off sharply.
It seems it would be very difficult for you to apply your methodology to the short side. On the long side, you are buying stocks
that have already declined sharply and are trading at prices
that represent strong value. In other words, you are buying at a
point where your risk exposure is relatively low. In contrast,
when you are shorting a stock, no matter how high you sell it at,
there is always an open-ended risk, which is the exact opposite
of your buying approach. How can you even approach the short
side?
I make sure that the fundamentals are broken before I go short. Even
if Schwab today were trading at a hundred times earning, I wouldn't
short it as long as the trend in the fundamentals was still improving. 1
would wait for the fundamentals to start deteriorating.
But you might get another mania that drives the stock higher,
even though the fundamentals are deteriorating.
Once the fundamentals get broken, market manias get broken as
well. For example, there was a mania in Iomega a few years ago. Once
the fundamentals started to break down, the mania ended.

But how do you deal with the problem of unlimited risk?
All my longs are long-term investments, but my shorts are usually
short-term precisely because of the danger of unlimited risk.

F R O M I S T A N B U L TOJJU S T R E E T B U L L

How would you rate the quality of Wall Street research?
Not very good.
For what reason?
Most analysts don't have a logical reason why a stock should be at a
given price. As long as the company does well, they don't care what
the price is. Typically, if a stock reaches their target, they will just
raise the target, even though the fundamentals haven't changed.

We have seen an incredible bull market during the 1990s. Is the
magnitude of this advance justified by the fundamentals?
For two reasons I think we are witnessing the biggest financial mania
ever in the stock market. First, the stock market price/earnings ratio
is at a record high level. Second, the average profit margin of companies is at its highest level ever.
What do you mean by profit margin?
The amount of profit per sales. For example, if the profit margin is 20,
it means the company is making $20 in profits for every $ 100 in sales.
Why then is a high profit margin a negative?
Because there is virtually no room for further improvement.
What do you read?
Everything, including financial newspapers and magazines, tons of
company reports, and all sorts of trade journals. The trade periodicals
I read depend on my existing and prospective positions. For example,
last year I owned a company that was making products for urinary disorders, so 1 read Urinary Times.
What is the specific checklist you use before buying a stock?
The stock must meet the following criteria:
1. The company has a good track record in terms of growing their earnings per share, revenues per share, and cash flow per share.
2. The company has an attractive book value [the theoretical value of a
share if all the company's assets were liquidated and its liabilities paid
off] and a high return on equity.
3. The stock is down sharply, often trading near its recent low. But this
weakness has to be due to a short-term reason while the long-term
fundamentals still remain sound.
4. There is significant insider buying or ownership.

F R O M I S T A N B U L TO W A L L S T R E E T B U L L

5. Sometimes a company having a new management team with a good
track record of turning companies around may provide an additional
reason to buy the stock.

What are the trading rules you live by?
> Do your research and he sure you know the companies that you are
buying.
&»

Buy low.

> Re disciplined, and don't get emotionally involved.
What are your goals?
My goal is to be the best money manager in the industry. After the
f u n d reaches its ten-year anniversary, I hope to have the best track
record for the prior ten years, nine years, all the way down to five
years. Anything shorter than five years could indicate someone who
is just lucky or using a style that is temporarily in favor with the
market.

Okumus has developed a trading style that assures he will miss 80
to 90 percent of the winning stocks he identifies and typically realize
only a small portion of the advance in the stocks he does buy. He also
brags that he has never owned a stock that has made a new high.
These hardly sound like characteristics of a great trading approach.
Yet these seeming flaws are actually essential elements of his success. Okumus has only one overriding goal: to select individual
trades that will have a very high probability of gain and a very low
level of risk. To achieve this goal he has to be willing to forgo many
winners and leave lots of money on the table. This is fine with Okumus. His approach has resulted in over 90 percent profitable trades
and a triple-digit average annual return.
Okumus's bread-and-butter trade is buying a stock with sound
fundamentals at a bargain price. He looks for stocks with good
growth in earnings, revenues, and cash flow, and significant insider
buying or ownership. Strong fundamentals, however, are only half
the picture. A stock must also be very attractively priced. Typically,
the stocks Okumus buys have declined 60 percent or more off their

highs and are trading at price/earnings ratios under 12. He also
prefers to buy stocks with prices as close as possible to book value.
Very few stocks meet Okumus's combination of fundamental and
price criteria. The majority of the stocks that fulfil] his fundamental
requirements never decline to his buying price. Out of the universe
of ten thousand stocks Okumus surveys, he holds only about ten in
his portfolio at any given time.
One element of market success frequently cited by Market Wizards, both in this volume and its two predecessors, is the age-old
trading adage: Cut your losses short. Yet Okumus's methodology
seems to fly in the face of this conventional wisdom. Okumus does
not believe in liquidating a stock position because it shows a loss. In
fact, if a stock he buys moves lower, he may even buy more. How can
Okumus be successful by doing the exact opposite of what so many
other great traders advise?
There is no paradox. There are many roads to trading success,
although none are particularly easy to find or to stay on. Cutting
losses is important only because it is a means of risk control. While
all successful traders incorporate risk control into their methodology,
not all use cutting losses to achieve risk control. Okumus attains risk
control by using an extremely restrictive stock selection process: He
buys only financially sound companies that have already declined by
well over 50 percent from their highs. He has extreme confidence
that the stocks he buys have very low risk at the time he buys them.
To achieve this degree of certainty, Okumus passes up many profitable trading opportunities. But because he is so rigorous in his
stock selection, he is able to achieve risk control without employing
the principle of cutting losses short.
One technique Okumus uses to enhance his performance is the
sale of out-of-the-money puts on stocks he wishes to own. He sells
puts at a strike price at which he would buy the stock anyway. In this
way, he at least makes some profit if the stock fails to decline to his
buying point and reduces his cost for the stock by the option premium received if it does reach his purchase price.
Okumus is very disciplined and patient. If there are very few

stocks that meet his highly selective conditions, he will wait until
such opportunities arise. For example, at the end of the second
quarter in 1999, Okumus was only 13 percent invested because,
as he stated at the time, "There are no bargains around. I'm not
risking the money I'm investing until I find stocks that are very
cheap."

MARK MINERVINI

Stock Around the Clock

Minervini comes Off as a bit cocky, not because he thinks he's better than the
markets—in fact, his respect for the markets and an appreciation of his
own fallibility underlie his whole trading philosophy—but rather in the
sense that he feels he is better than most of his peers. And, frankly, if he
can even remotely continue to match his spectacular performance of the
past five years in corning years, then this conceit may not be misplaced. I
sensed that he took particular pleasure in the knowledge that as a selftaught dropout (from junior high school no less!) he has run circles
around most Ph.D.s trying to design systems to beat the market.
After dropping out of school, Minervini supported himself as a drummer. Trying to get Minervini to talk about his early experiences as a musician was a futile and frustrating effort. Despite my repeated entreaties
that a discussion of a trader's background was essential in giving an interview some color and life, he seemed intent on not providing any details
about his career as a drummer. I had the distinct impression that his
responses were being guided by the hand of an unseen publicist. He
either gave the most general of answers or somehow managed to divert the
discussion back to the stock market. Sample question (asked with growing
weariness): "Is there anything at all with any specificity that you can tell me
about your experiences as a musician? Answer: "I was attracted to music
because I liked the freedom, which is what attracted me to the stock market. . . ." Finally, after much prodding, he summarily acknowledged that
he played for several bands, cut a record, appeared on an MTV video,
worked as a studio musician, and owned his own studio. End of story.
Minervini became interested in the stock market in the early 1980s

169

MARK

while still in his teens. His early dabbling soon grew into a full-time
obsession. He sold his studio and used the proceeds to stake his trading.
Initially, he lost everything—an experience he describes in the interview.
He realized that his worst mistake had been depending on others for
advice, so he embarked on an intensive program of self-education and
research.
After nearly a decade of research and market experience, Minervini
developed a well-defined trading methodology. In mid-1994, confident
that his trading approach was sufficiently refined, and encouraged by his
steadily improving performance, Minervini consolidated his various
accounts into a single account that was to become his track record. (Previously, he maintained several accounts, partially to facilitate comparing
different strategies.) In the five and a half years since initiating this
account, Minervini's performance has been nothing short of astounding.
His average annual compounded return during the period has been a
towering 220 percent, including his 155 percent first place finish in the
1997 U.S. Investing Championship. Most traders and money managers
would be delighted to have Minervini's worst year during this span—a
128 percent gain—as their best year. But return is only half the story.
Amazingly, Minervini achieved his lofty gains while keeping his risk very
low: He had only one down quarter— barely—a loss of a fraction of 1

percent.
Minervini launched his own hedge fund, the Quantech Fund, LP, in
2000. He is also president of the Quantech Research Group, an institutional research firm that provides stock selections based on Minervini's
proprietary selection methodology. Minervini spends his days managing
money and his nights running computer screens and scouring company
fundamentals.
I interviewed Minervini in his Midtown Manhattan office. The
interview was conducted over the course of two afternoons. Minervini
was clearly under the weather, acknowledging that he was running a
temperature of 103 degrees. He chose not to cancel our meetings,
however, because by his own admission, being interviewed in a Market
Wizard book was one of his lifetime goals. He was not about to let a
virus deter him from checking another item off his list of career objectives.

S T O C K A R O U N D TiHi

When I arrived, Minervini was in his office, looking at a stock chart
on his computer screen and timing the entry of a trade. After hanging
up the phone he commented to me:
"I hope I don't get a good fill."

Come again?
A good fill is a death blow. The average investor who puts in a buy
order when the market is at 27 is thrilled if he gets a fill at 263/4. I
would probably just turn around and get out of the position. Stocks
that are ready to blast off are usually very difficult to buy without
pushing the market higher. If I put in an order for ten thousand at 27
and the floor comes back to me and says, "We can only do three thousand at 27. The market is at 271/4. What do you want to do now?" it
reinforces my belief that the timing of the trade is right.
What was the motivation for the stock you just bought?
The motivation is always the same. Although I may hold the position
much longer, I am buying the stock because I think it will go up
within hours or at most days.
Yes, but what gives you that conviction?
You mean besides seventeen years of experience? The starting point is
a quantitative screen based on the characteristics of the stocks that
witnessed the largest and most rapid price advances during the past
century. A good book on this concept, which may be out of print, is
Superperformance Stocks by Richard Love.
What are some of the common denominators of stocks that share
this rapid price gain characteristic?
They tend to be less familiar names. More than 80 percent of the
stocks are less than ten years old. Although many of these stocks are
newer companies, I avoid low-priced stocks. Stocks that are low are
usually low for a reason. Typically, the stocks I buy are $20 or higher,
and I never buy stocks under $12. My basic philosophy is: Expose
your portfolio to the best stocks the market has to offer and cut your
losses very quickly when you're wrong. That one sentence essentially
describes my strategy.

MARK

What are some of the other characteristics of the largest winning
stocks?
One thing that would surprise most people is that these stocks typically trade at above-average price/earnings (P/E) ratios, even before
they become big winners. Many investors limit their selections to
stocks with low P/E ratios. Unfortunately, avoiding stocks just because
the P/E seems "too high" will result in missing out on some of the
best market moves.
A protracted discussion followed wherein I asked specifics about Minervini's trade selection process. His answers could be described most
kindly as general, and perhaps more accurately as evasive. Assuming that
the target market audience for this book is not insomniacs, I see little
purpose in repeating any of this conversation here. Finally, sensing that I
was finding his responses frustratingly ambiguous, he continued in a
measured tone.
Look, none of this is a black box. You have all these people trying
to come up with formulas to beat the market. The market is not a science. The science may help increase the probabilities, but to excel
you need to master the art of trading.
People always want to know what's in my computer model. I think
that is the least relevant issue to successful trading. Of course you
need an edge, but there are a thousand ways to get an edge. Some
people use strategies that are completely opposite mine, yet we can
both be very profitable.
Developing your own strategy is what is important, not knowing
my strategy, which 1 have designed to fit my personality. Understanding my trading philosophy, my principles, and my money management
techniques, that may be valuable. Besides, I think most people

overemphasize stock selection.
What do you mean?
I think people spend too much time trying to discover great entry
strategies and not enough time on money management. Assume you
took the top two hundred relative strength stocks [the two hundred
stocks that outperformed the market average by the greatest amount

S T O C K A R O U N D THIS

during a specified number of past months] and placed the names on a
dart board. Then each day, you threw three darts and bought the
resulting stocks, and whenever any stock went down, say, 10 percent
from your entry level, you sold it instantaneously. I would be willing to
bet that you would make money because you are exposing yourself to
a group of stocks that is likely to contain some big potential winners
while at the same time you are cutting your losses.
You're not saying that if you took the entire list of stocks and
threw darts, you would make money as long as you cut your
losses at 10 percent. You're specifying that the list has to be preselected in some way—in your example, the stocks with the highest relative strength.
I was only using an extreme example to illustrate a point: Containing
your losses is 90 percent of the battle, regardless of the strategy. In
addition, if you put yourself in a position to buy stocks that have the
potential to go up a lot, your odds will be better.
In other words, the odds will be better if you buy stronger stocks.
The odds will be better that you will buy stocks that go up a lot. Of
course, the odds may also be better that you will buy stocks that go
down a lot. But you don't have to worry about that—do you?—since
you are cutting your losses.
Then I assume that, as a general principle, you believe in the
idea of relative strength—buying stocks that have been going up
more than the market averages.
Or down less. One way to use relative strength is to look for stocks
that hold up well during a market correction and are the first to
rebound after the market comes off a relative low; these stocks are
the market leaders.
When you first started trading stocks, what method did you use
to select your buys?
[He laughs heartily at the recollection.] I didn't have any method. I
was buying low-priced stocks that were making new lows. I was also
taking tips from brokers.
Tell me about that.
The worst experience was in the early 1980s when my broker talked me
into buying a stock that was trading just under $20. The stock came
