
174 • Way of the Turtle

the threshold at which that reduction occurs. Looking at our simulation’s equity curve, I decide that reducing positions by 90 percent
when I reach a drawdown of 38 percent will limit the drawdowns.
The addition of this rule improves the returns, which go from 41.4
percent without the rule to 45.7 percent with it, and the drawdown
drops from 56.0 percent to 39.2 percent, with the MAR ratio going
from 0.74 to 1.17. One might think, “This is a great rule; the system
is now much better.” However, this is completely incorrect!
The problem is that there is only one time during the entire test
when this rule comes into play. It happens at the very end of the
test, and I’ve taken advantage of my knowledge of the equity curve
to construct the rules, and so the system has been ﬁtted intentionally to the data. “What’s the harm?” you ask. Consider the shape of
the graph in Figure 11-6, where we vary the threshold for the drawdown where a reduction kicks in.
You may notice the rather abrupt drop in performance if we use
a drawdown threshold of less than 37 percent. In fact, a 1 percent
change in the drawdown threshold makes the difference between
earning 45.7 percent and losing 0.4 percent per year. The reason
for the drop in performance is that there is an instance in August
1996 where this rule kicks in and we cut back the position size so
much that the system does not earn enough money to dig out of
the hole created by the drawdown. Perhaps this is not such a good
rule. It worked in the ﬁrst instance only because the drawdown was
so close to the end of the test.
Traders call this phenomenon a cliff. The presence of cliffs—
large changes in results for a very small change in parameter values—is a good indication that you have overﬁt the data and can
expect results in actual trading that are wildly different from those

MAR Ratio as Drawdown Threshold Varies
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6

• 175 •

0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2

Drawdown Threshold

Figure 11-6

Change in MAR Ratio as the Number of Days in the Moving Average Varies

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

%

%
49
%
50
%

48

%

47

%

46

45

%

%
40
%
41
%
42
%
43
%
44
%

39

%

38

37

20

%
21
%
22
%
23
%
24
%
25
%
26
%
27
%
28
%
29
%
30
%
31
%
32
%
33
%
34
%
35
%
36
%

–0.4

176 • Way of the Turtle

which you achieved in testing. It is also another reason why optimizing parameters is good: You can see cliffs and ﬁx the source of
the problem before you start trading.

The Importance of Sample Size
As was noted brieﬂy in Chapter 2, people tend to place too much
importance on a small number of instances of a particular phenomenon despite the fact that from a statistical perspective very little information can be drawn from a few instances of any event.
This is the primary cause of overﬁtting. Rules that do not come into
play very often can cause inadvertent overﬁtting, which leads to a
divergence in performance between backtests and real trading.
This can happen inadvertently over the course of many instances
because most people are not used to thinking in these terms. A
good example is seasonality. If one tests for seasonal changes in 10
years of data, there will be at most 10 instances of a particular seasonal phenomenon since there are only 10 years of data. There is
very little statistical value in a sample size of 10, and so any tests
using those data will not be good predictors of future performance.
Let’s consider a rule that ignores this concept and uses the computer to help us ﬁnd the perfect way to overﬁt to our data. You
might notice that September was a bad month for a few years; then
you might test a rule that lightens positions in September by a certain percentage. Since you have a computer, you might decide to
have it search for any sort of seasonally bad periods in which you
should lighten up.
I did this for the system in this chapter. Then I ran 4,000 tests
that tested reducing positions at the beginning of each month and
then lightening up by a certain percentage for a certain number of

Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests • 177

days and then resuming the previous position size when that number of days had passed. I found two such periods in the 10 years of
data I used for testing. If one lightens up 96 percent for the ﬁrst 2
days of September and the ﬁrst 25 days of July, one can get better
results. How much better?
The addition of this rule improves our returns, which move from
45.7 percent without the rule to 58.2 percent with it, and our drawdown goes up a tiny bit from 39.2 percent to 39.4 percent, whereas
the MAR ratio goes from 1.17 to 1.48. Again we think: “This is a
great rule; my system is now much better.”
Unfortunately, this rule works only because there were signiﬁcant
drawdowns during those periods in the past, not because there is
something magical about those periods. It is not very likely that the
drawdowns will occur on the same dates in the future. This is an
example of the worst kind of overﬁtting, but you would be surprised
how many otherwise intelligent people fall prey to this sort of trap.
If you do not know this, you might think that the system is good
enough to start trading with it. You might even start to raise money
from friends and family by telling them about this wonderful system and its results. The problem is that you really have a system
that returned 41.4 percent, not 58.2 percent; a drawdown of 56.0
percent, not 39.4 percent; and a MAR ratio of 0.74, not 1.48. You
are bound to be disappointed with the real performance because
you have been seduced by the easy improvements of curve ﬁtting.
Next I’ll examine ways to avoid the problems discussed in this
chapter. I’ll show ways to determine what you actually may be able
to achieve from a system in order to minimize the impact of trader
effects, detect random effects, properly optimize, and avoid overﬁtting to the historical data.

This page intentionally left blank

twelve
ON SOLID GROUND
Trading with poor methods is like learning to juggle while
standing in a rowboat during a storm. Sure, it can be done, but it is
much easier to juggle when one is standing on solid ground.

ow that you are aware of some of the major ways in which you
can get inaccurate results from backtests, you may be wondering: “How can I determine what I might actually be able to
achieve?” or “How do I avoid the problems described in Chapter
11?” or “How do I test the right way?” This chapter will discuss the
general principles of doing proper backtesting. A thorough understanding of the underlying causes of the backtesting predictive
errors discussed in Chapter 11 is an important prerequisite for this
chapter, and so it is a good idea to reread that chapter carefully if
you only skimmed it the ﬁrst time.
At best, you can get a rough sense of what the future holds by
looking at the results of historical simulation. However, fortunately,
even a rough idea can provide enough edge to enable a good trader
to make a lot of money. To understand the factors that affect the
margin of error, or degree of roughness, for your ideas, you need to
look at a few basic statistical concepts that provide the basis for his-

N

• 179 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

180 • Way of the Turtle

torical testing. Since I am not a big fan of books ﬁlled with formulas and lengthy explanations, I will try to keep the math light and
the explanations clear.

Statistical Basis for Testing
Proper testing takes into account the statistical concepts that affect
the descriptive ability of the tests as well as the limitations inherent in those descriptions. Improper testing can make you overconﬁdent when in reality there is little or no assurance the test results
have any predictive value. In fact, bad tests may provide the wrong
answer entirely.
Chapter 11 covered most of the reasons why historical simulations are at best rough estimates of the future. This chapter shows
how to increase the predictive ability of testing and get the best
rough estimate possible.
The area of statistics relating to inference by sampling from a
population is also the basis for the predictive potential of testing
through the use of historical data. The basic idea is that if you have
a sufﬁciently large sample, you can use measurements made on
that sample to infer likely ranges of measurements for the entire
group. So, if you look at a sufﬁciently large sample of past trades
for a particular strategy, you can draw conclusions about the likely
future performance of that strategy. This is the same area of statistics that pollsters use to make inferences about the behavior of a
larger population. For example, after polling 500 people drawn randomly from every state, pollsters draw conclusions about all the voters in the United States. Similarly, scientists assess the effectiveness
of a particular drug for the treatment of a particular disease on the

On Solid Ground • 181

basis of a relatively small study group because there is a statistical
basis for that inference.
The two major factors that affect the statistical validity of the
inferences derived from a sample of a population are the size of the
sample and the degree to which the sample is representative of the
overall population. Many traders and new system testers understand
sample size at a conceptual level but believe that it refers only to
the number of trades in a test. They do not understand that the statistical validity of tests can be lessened even when they cover thousands of trades if particular rules or concepts apply to only a few
instances of those trades.
They also often ignore the necessity that a sample be representative of the larger population as this is messy and hard to measure
without some subjective analysis. A system tester’s underlying
assumption is that the past is representative of what the future is
likely to bring. If this is the case and there is a sufﬁciently large sample, we can draw inferences from the past and apply them to the
future. If the sample is not representative of the future, the testing
is not useful and will not tell us anything about the likely future
performance of the system that is being tested. Thus, this assumption is critical. If a representative sample of 500 people is sufﬁcient
to determine who the new president is likely to be with a 2 percent
margin of error using a representative sample, would polling 500
attendees at the Democratic National Convention tell us anything
about the voting of the overall population? Of course it wouldn’t
because the sample would not be representative of the population
—it only includes Democrats whereas the actual U.S. voting population includes many Republicans who were not included in the
sample; Republicans probably will vote for candidates different

182 • Way of the Turtle

from the ones your poll indicated. When you make a sampling mistake like this, you get an answer, perhaps even the one you want,
but it is not necessarily the right answer.
Pollsters understand that the degree to which a sample truly
reﬂects the population it is intended to represent is the key issue. Polls
conducted with samples that are not representative are inaccurate,
and pollsters get ﬁred for conducting inaccurate polls. In trading,
this is also the key issue. Unfortunately, unlike pollsters, who generally understand the statistics of sampling, most traders do not.
This is perhaps most commonly seen when traders paper trade or
backtest over only the very most recent history. This is like polling
at the Democratic convention.
The problem with tests conducted over a short period is that during that period the market may have been in only one or two of the
market states described in Chapter 2, perhaps only in a stable and
volatile state, in which reversion to the mean and countertrend
strategies work well. If the market changes its state, the methods
being tested may not work as well. They may even cause a trader
to lose money. So, testing must be done in a way that maximizes
the likelihood that the trades taken in the test are representative of
what the future may hold.

Existing Measures Are Not Robust
In testing, you are trying to determine relative performance, assess
potential future performance, and determine whether a particular
idea has merit. One of the problems with this process is that the
generally accepted performance measures are not very stable—they
are not robust. This makes it difﬁcult to assess the relative merits

On Solid Ground • 183

of an idea because small changes in a few trades can have a large
effect on the values of these nonrobust measures. The effect of the
instability in the measures is that it can cause one to believe that
an idea has more merit than it actually has or discard an idea
because it does not appear to have as much promise as it might
when examined using more stable measures.
A statistic is robust if changing a small part of the data set does
not change that statistic signiﬁcantly. The existing measures are too
sensitive to changes in the data, too jumpy. This is one of the reasons that in doing historical simulation for trading system research,
slight differences in parameter values cause relatively large differences in some of the measures; the measures themselves are not
robust (i.e., they are too sensitive to small portions of the data). Anything that affects those small portions can affect the results too
greatly. This makes it easy to overﬁt and to fool yourself with results
that you will not be able to match in real life. The ﬁrst step in testing the Turtle Way is to address this issue by ﬁnding performance
measures that are robust and not sensitive to small changes in the
underlying data.
One of the questions that Bill Eckhardt asked me during my
initial interview for the Turtle position was: “Do you know what
a robust statistical estimator is?” I stared blankly for a few seconds
and admitted: “I have no idea.” (I now can answer that question.
There is a branch of mathematics that tries to address the issue
of imperfect information and poor assumptions; it is called robust
statistics.)
It is clear from the question that Bill had respect for the imperfect nature of testing and research based on historical data as well
as knowledge of the unknown that was rare at that time and is still

184 • Way of the Turtle

rare. I think this is one of the reasons Bill’s trading performance has
held up so well over the years.
This is yet another example of how far ahead of the industry Rich
and Bill’s research and thinking were. The more I learn, the deeper
my respect for their contribution to the ﬁeld becomes. I am also
surprised at how little the industry has advanced beyond what Rich
and Bill knew in 1983.

Robust Performance Measures
Earlier chapters in this book used the MAR ratio, CAGR%, and
the Sharpe ratio as comparative performance measures. These
measures are not robust, since they are very sensitive to the start
and end dates for a test. This is especially true for tests of less
than 10 years. Consider what happens when we adjust the start
and end dates for a test by a few months. To illustrate this effect,
let’s run a test that starts on February 1, 1996, instead of January
1 and that ends on April 30 instead of June 30, 2006, removing
just one month from the beginning of the test and two months
from the end.
A test of the Triple Moving Average system with the original test
dates returns 43.2 percent with a MAR ratio of 1.39 and a Sharpe
ratio of 1.25. With the revised start and stop dates, the return jumps
to 46.2 percent, with the MAR ratio increasing to 1.61 and the
Sharpe ratio increasing to 1.37. A test of the ATR Channel Breakout system with the original dates shows returns of 51.7 percent, a
MAR ratio of 1.31, and a Sharpe ratio of 1.39. With the revised
dates, the return climbs to 54.9 percent, the MAR ratio increases
to 1.49, and the Sharpe ratio increases to 1.47.

On Solid Ground • 185

The reason we see this sensitivity across all three measures is that
the MAR ratio and the Sharpe ratio have return as a component of
their numerators and return, whether expressed by CAGR% used
for MAR or monthly average return used for the Sharpe ratio, is
sensitive to start and stop dates. The maximum drawdown can also
be sensitive to start and stop dates when that drawdown occurs near
the beginning or end of a test. This has the effect of making the
MAR ratio especially sensitive since it is composed of two components, both of which are sensitive to start and end dates; therefore,
the effect of a change gets multiplied during the computation of
this ratio.
The reason CAGR% is sensitive to changes in start and stop
dates is that it represents the slope of the smooth line that goes from
the start of the test to the end of the test on a logarithmic graph;
changing the start and stop dates can change the slope of that line
signiﬁcantly. Figure 12-1 shows this effect.
Note how the slope of the line labeled “Revised Test Dates” is
higher than that of the line labeled “Original Test Dates.” In the
example above there was a drawdown at the beginning of the test

The Effect of Start and End Date Changes on CAGR%

Revised Test Dates

Original Test Dates

Figure 12-1

The Effect of Changes in the Start and End Dates on CAGR%

186 • Way of the Turtle

during January 1996; there was also a drawdown in the last two
months of the test: May and June 2006. So, by moving the test dates
a few months, we were able to eliminate both of those drawdowns.
This is the same effect seen in Figure 12-1: Removing a drawdown
on either end of a test will increase the slope of the line that deﬁnes
CAGR%.

Regressed Annual Return (RAR%)
A better measure of the slope is a simple linear regression of all the
points in each line. For readers who do not like math, a linear
regression is a fancy name for what sometimes is called a best ﬁt
line. The best way to think about this is to realize that it represents
the straight line that goes through the middle of all the points,
much like what would happen if you stretched the graph and
removed all the bumps by pulling on the ends without changing
the overall direction of the graph.
This linear regression line and the return it represents create a
new measure that I call the regressed annual return, or RAR% for
short. This measure is much less sensitive to changes in the data at
the end of the test. Figure 12-2 shows how the slope of the line
changes much less when the endpoints for RAR% change.
We can see how the RAR% measure is less sensitive to changes
in the test dates by running the same comparison we ran earlier
because the two lines are much closer to having the same slope.
The RAR% for the original test is 54.67 percent, whereas the RAR%
for the altered dates is 54.78 percent, only 0.11 percent higher.
Contrast this with the CAGR% measure, which changed by 3.0
percent points from 43.2 percent to 46.2 percent. For this test, the

On Solid Ground • 187

The Effect of Start and End Date Changes on RAR%

Revised Test Dates

Original Test Dates

Figure 12-2

The Effect of Changes in the Start and End Dates on RAR%

CAGR% was almost 30 times more sensitive to the change in the
end dates.
The monthly average return used in the Sharpe ratio is also sensitive to these changes because we are removing three bad months
from the end of the tests, and that affects the average return,
although the average return is affected less than the CAGR%. A
better measure to use in the numerator would be the RAR%.
As was noted earlier, the maximum drawdown component of the
MAR ratio is also sensitive to changes in start and end dates. If the
largest drawdown is on either end of the test, the performance
measure MAR will be affected considerably. The maximum drawdown is a single point on an equity curve, and so you are missing
out on some valuable additional data. A better measure is one that
includes more drawdowns. A system that had ﬁve large drawdowns
of 32 percent, 34 percent, 35 percent, 35 percent, and 36 percent
would be harder to trade than would a system that had drawdowns
of 20 percent, 25 percent, 26 percent, 29 percent, and 36 percent.
Further, the extent of the drawdown is only one dimension: All
30 percent drawdowns are not the same. I would not mind a draw-

188 • Way of the Turtle

down that lasted only two months before recovering to new highs
nearly as much as I would mind one that took two years to reach
new highs. The recovery time or the length of the drawdown itself
is also very important.

R-Cubed: A New Risk/Reward Measure
To take all these factors into account, I have created a new
risk/reward measure that I call the robust risk/reward ratio (RRRR).
I also like to call it R-cubed since I still have a bit of the nerdy engineer in me and tend to do these sorts of things. R-cubed uses RAR%
in the numerator and a new measure I call the length-adjusted average maximum drawdown in the denominator. There are two components to this measure: the average maximum drawdown and the
length adjustment.
The average maximum drawdown is computed by taking the ﬁve
largest drawdowns and dividing by 5. The length adjustment is
made by taking the average maximum drawdown length in days
and dividing it by 365 and then multiplying that number by the
average maximum drawdown. The average maximum drawdown
length is computed by using the same algorithm, that is, taking the
ﬁve longest drawdowns and dividing by 5. So, if the RAR% was 50
percent and the average maximum drawdown was 25 percent and
the average maximum drawdown length was one year, or 365 days,
you would have an R-cubed value of 2.0, which comes from 50 percent/(25 percent  365/365). R-cubed is a risk/reward measure that
accounts for risk from both a severity perspective and a duration
perspective. It does this by using measures that are less sensitive to
changes in the start and end dates. The measure is more robust

On Solid Ground • 189

than the MAR ratio; that is, it is less likely to change when minor
changes are made in the test.

Robust Sharpe Ratio
The robust Sharpe ratio is RAR% divided by the annualized standard deviation of the monthly return. This measure is less sensitive
to changes in the data set for the same reason that RAR% is less
sensitive than CAGR%, as was outlined above. Table 12-1 shows
how the robust measures are less sensitive to changes in the end
dates of the test.
Table 12-1
