
14 506455-ch09.indd 142

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

143

The basic idea of the agency dilemma is the fact that the people who own the
company aren’t the ones necessarily running it. When you buy 100 shares of
a company, for instance, you’re not given the right to tell the company what
kinds of products it should sell. You’re surrendering those key business decisions to the hired hands that run the business. And that includes the CEO
and the rest of the management team, such as the chief financial officer and
chief operating officer.
Not surprisingly, when there are hired hands running an enterprise on behalf
of the owners, there’s a potential for problems. And that’s the case with companies, too. That’s where corporate governance comes in. Companies are
required to have a team of business experts, called a board of directors, that
are supposed to watch over the management team. If the board feels management is making poor decisions with the company’s resources, it’s up to them
to either reprimand or replace them.
The agency dilemma has become even more of an issue with the rise of massive mutual funds. Large money management firms, which own a vast majority
of companies’ stock, usually own a stock for less than a year, according to the
Bogle Financial Markets Research Center. That’s down from six years in the
1980s. What that means is that the big owners of stock are short-timers, and
aren’t all that vested in making sure the company is being properly watched
over the long haul. Many of these large owners are in to make a quick profit,
and don’t have any reason to care whether the company is being run efficiently and for the long run. That’s why it’s up to you, the fundamental analyst,
to realize when companies have poor corporate governance, and to steer clear
when they do.

Getting to know the board
The board of directors is really your only advocate in the boardroom. Unless
you own enough shares to get a direct hand on how a company is run, you’re
leaving it up to the board to make sure your money is properly handled. You,
the shareholder, get to vote on the board members, and the company pays
them sometimes large sums to conduct the job as watchdog.
So-called activist shareholders, like Carl Icahn, try to break through the agency
dilemma by buying large blocks of shares and using the influence of a large
position to force management teams to make changes.
Boards of directors also have a number of committees, which take on specialized oversight roles. These roles are of upmost importance to fundamental

14 506455-ch09.indd 143

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

144 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
analysts because they get to the core of how professionals are chosen to run
the company and how much they’re paid. Those committees include the:
✓ Audit committee: If there’s one board to pay most attention to, it’s this
one. The audit committee is responsible for directly connecting with
the accounting firm that checks over the company’s books and records.
The members of the audit committee must be independent, meaning that
they have no outside business dealings with the company.
✓ Compensation committee: The board members on this committee
have the job of determining how much to pay the people running the
company.
✓ Nominating committee: These board members evaluate candidates for
key jobs at the company.
Paying attention to corporate governance can be a critical part of understanding what companies are worth investing in and which ones are best avoided.
At 17 of the firms that suffered the biggest business problems and stock losses
during the first part of the financial crisis in 2007 and 2008, most had poor corporate governance, according to research firm The Corporate Library. These
firms had board members who received excessive compensation or who
over-boarded by sitting on four or more corporate boards. Over-boarding is
considered a corporate governance risk, since the directors are distracted and
potentially unable to adequately watch over any one company. As a group,
these 17 firms lost an average 80% of their stock value between mid-2007 and
the end of 2008, twice the loss by the broader stock market.

Stepping Through the Proxy
When you invest in a company, you’re entitled to vote on some of the company’s corporate matters, most importantly, on the slate of people who sit on
the board. Think of the proxy statement as your guide to all the matters that
will come up for a vote at the company. Generally, most proxy statements will
include several key elements, as described below.
One of the primary purposes of the proxy is to break out how much the executives are getting paid. This is such a critical part of your analysis, it will be
explored in more detail in the next section of this chapter.

14 506455-ch09.indd 144

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

145

Bringing good governance to light
General Electric, in its 2008 proxy for its 2009
meeting, went to great lengths to assure investors that its board of directors were largely
independent. At the time of the proxy, GE disclosed that 13 of its 16 directors were considered independent.
But the company took things a step further by
detailing the tests it applied to the board members to determine whether or not they were
independent. For instance, GE disclosed that a
number of the board members were connected

with companies that did business with GE. But
the relationships were tested to ensure that
none of the companies received more than 2%
of their total revenue from GE.
GE, as required by regulations, further disclosed
that none of the members of the audit committee received any sort of compensation from the
company other than director fees. Director fees,
or payments made to directors, will be explored
in more detail later in this chapter.

Getting to know the board of directors
Typically, the first section of a proxy provides fairly complete biographies of
the members of the board of directors. You’ll usually see what kind of experience the members have, what kind of education they have, and what other
corporate boards they sit on.
Pay close attention to how many corporate boards the directors sit on. As
described above, if you notice several members of the board are sitting on
three, four or more boards, you might wonder how much time they’re able to
dedicate to the company you’ve invested in.

Analyzing the independence
of board members
Most companies will reserve a spot in the proxy, usually below the list of the
directors, to outline steps that have been taken to make sure the board of
directors are proper watchdogs. One of the most critical ways to do this is by
ensuring that most of the board members are independent, or have no direct
business relationship with the company.

14 506455-ch09.indd 145

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

146 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Delving into the board’s committees
The key aspect of this part of the proxy is to highlight which board members
sit on which committees. You’ll want to pay very close attention to who is
sitting on the audit committee, since this is the group of people that’s supposedly there to protect you from accounting fraud.
When looking over all the directors on the board, you want to pay particular
attention to the members of the audit committee. Make sure they are financially literate. A look at their biographies will give you a decent idea if they’re
qualified for this extremely important job.
In addition to the competence of board members, you want to look for
involvement and participation. In this section of the proxy, companies will
often disclose how many times the members of the board met during the
year. You want to see the board meeting at least four times a year, or once a
quarter. In 2008, GE disclosed the board met 22 times.
You also want to make sure that the board members are actually showing
up for the meetings. If you see multiple members missing 25% or more of
the meetings, you might be concerned that they’re not paying close enough
attention to the matters at hand.

Finding potential conflicts between
the board and the company
Most proxy statements will contain a section, often called related-person
transactions or related-party transactions, which outlines any business relationships board members have with the company they’re overseeing.
If you don’t read anything else in a proxy, always check out the related-party
transaction section. This is where a company must lay out any potentially
sweet deals it has going with its officers and directors. Fundamental analysts
who read this section of Enron’s proxy statements got an early warning of
some of the strange dealings between the company and its chief financial
officer, Andrew Fastow. While many of the key details were left out, according to the Securities and Exchange Commission, there was enough of a vague
description of the relationship between Fastow and the company to at least
raise suspicions.

14 506455-ch09.indd 146

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

147

Understanding how the board is paid
The board of directors isn’t overseeing the company you’ve invested in out
of the kindness of its heart. The board members get paid, sometimes handsomely, for the service. Luckily, the payments received by directors are disclosed for all to see.
Pay for board members is a delicate balance. On one hand, you don’t want
to see board members receiving excessive compensation. If payment is over
the top, the board members have an incentive to keep their mouths shut and
not risk their gravy train by raising objections. However, qualified and savvy
businesspeople aren’t going to take the risk of sitting on a board for nothing.
Sometimes you get what you pay for.
Just as you compare a company’s net income and profit to its peers, you
can do the same with board members’ pay. For instance, the median board
member at companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500 in 2008 earned nearly
$200,000, says The Corporate Library. That was an increase of roughly 12%.
Keep your eyes open for sudden increases of pay to board members. A big
spike in pay might indicate the company is trying to ensure a very amicable
board of directors.
While it’s helpful to compare how much directors get paid with the average of
companies in the S&P 500, it’s really best to compare against similar companies of comparable size. Sometimes disparities can be telling. For instance, the
lead director at Freddie Mac, the lending entity that was essentially taken over
by the government in 2008, was paid $100,000. That was well above the going
rate of roughly $30,000 for directors at comparable companies, The Corporate
Library says.
Sometimes board members are paid in cash. Sometimes they receive stock.
Most of the time, though, they receive both cash and stock. And in some
cases, companies may provide additional perks to board members. At GE in
2008, for instance, board members were permitted to receive GE appliances
and other products, take part in programs to give gifts to charity, and enjoy
events for the directors and their spouses.
While it might seem like a potential conflict of interest for the board members
to take freebies from a company, just pay attention to the total amount of compensation. Be sure that the company clearly discloses all the benefits directors receive, including the perks, and make sure they’re not excessive.

14 506455-ch09.indd 147

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

148 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Auditing the auditor
While the board of directors is supposed to be your closest ally in the boardroom, luckily, even the board has someone watching it: the auditor. The
auditing firm has the job of checking over the books and records of a company to make sure it’s representing everything accurately.
But it’s kind of up to you, again, to make sure the auditor is on your side. One
of the biggest inherent potential conflicts with an auditing firm is the fact it is
paid by the company to provide the audited results. That’s a conflict that you
kind of have to live with, since that’s how the system works.
If you see that the auditing firm is getting paid for all sorts of other services
for the company besides conducting the audit, you should get concerned. You
could imagine a situation where an auditing firm would get so reliant on these
extra fees, it might not be as diligent as it should be. After all, Arthur Andersen
had a very extensive relationship with Enron, which some say might have contributed to the auditor not raising flags at the company.
Luckily, the proxy makes digging up these kinds of details relatively easy. At
the bottom of the proxy, the company must disclose all the fees it paid to its
auditing firm. The fees are organized into:
✓ Audit fees: These are the direct costs the company pays to the audit
firm for reviewing its books, including the 10-K.
✓ Audit-related fees: These are fees generally connected to the audit process, typically a review of the company’s financial controls.
✓ Tax fees: Companies will often tap their auditing firm for tips on ways to
manage their tax bills.
✓ All other fees: Here’s the line item you want to pay close attention to.
These “other” fees include consulting fees for information technology
services and other advisory services that have nothing to do with the
company’s audit.
It’s usually best when a company has a minimal amount, if not $0, in the line
for all other fees paid to the auditing firm. You want to make sure the auditor
is looking out for you, not itself and its partners’ profits. In 2008, GE paid no
fees outside of audit, audit-related and tax to its auditing firm, KPMG. GE also
disclosed that the KPMG partners in charge of auditing it must be rotated at
least every five years. That reduces the chances of the partners getting too
cozy with GE management.

14 506455-ch09.indd 148

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

149

Finding out about the other
investors in a stock
When you look to buy a house, you may pay close attention to who your
neighbors are. It’s helpful to find out what other people are investing in the
same neighborhood and street. The same goes for stocks. The proxy will
tell you which executives and directors are large investors in the firm. If
you want to get a list of the biggest owners of a stock who aren’t officers or
directors, that information is available elsewhere as I’ll describe in Chapter
14. Furthermore, you can get an idea of what’s on the other investors’ minds
by reading the shareholder proposals. You’ll find out how to check in on the
other investors in the final section of this chapter.

How Much Are We Paying You?
Understanding Executive
Compensation
Some fundamental analysts might think examining executive compensation
is a distraction. After all, the salaries of all a company’s employees, including
the CEO and management team, are subtracted from revenue to arrive at net
income. Certainly, if a CEO’s pay was completely outlandish, the profitability
of the firm would fall and tip off fundamental analysts that way.
Even so, a key part of fundamental analysis is understanding the motives and
ethics of the management team. After all, you’re entrusting this team of men
and women to take your money and invest it productively in ways to generate a return for you. If your money is being siphoned off for the big cheese to
enrich himself, that’s a problem for a fundamental analyst.
Studying executive compensation is a detailed science that could fill many
books. And every year, major publications such as USA TODAY release comprehensive executive compensation reports that give you an idea of what’s
reasonable or excessive.
If you’re interested in learning more about how much CEOs get paid and what
is generally acceptable, check out USA TODAY’s interactive graphic at www.
usatoday.com/money/graphics/ceo-comp/flash.htm. To give you a general
idea of how the other half lives, Table 9-1 shows the top-paid CEOs in 2007 and
Table 9-2 shows the lowest-paid ones.

14 506455-ch09.indd 149

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

150 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Table 9-1

Top-Paid CEOs in 2007

Company

Executive

Salary

Bonus

Total compensation

Merrill
Lynch

John
Thain

$57,692

$15,000,000

$83,092,713

CBS

Leslie
Moonves

$5,323,367

$18,500,000

$67,615,827

FreeportMcMoRan

Richard
Adkerson

$2,083,333

$5,432,000

$65,193,723

Oracle

Lawrence
Ellison

$1,000,000

$8,369,000

$61,180,524

XTO
Energy

Bob
Simpson

$1,312,508

$35,500,000

$56,614,936

Source: USA TODAY citing data from Salary.com

Table 9-2

Lowest-Paid CEOs in 2007

Company

Executive

Salary

Bonus

Total compensation

Yahoo

Jerry
Yang

$1

$0

$1

Apple

Steve
Jobs

$1

$0

$1

Google

Eric
Schmidt

$1

$1,898

$480,561

Duke Energy

James
Rogers

$0

$0

$496,271

Symantec

John
Thompson

$800,000

$350,000

$1,258,611

Source: USA TODAY citing data from Salary.com

Figuring out how much executives earn
If you’ve ever tried to find out how much a friend or coworker makes, you
might get the answer, “It’s none of your business.” And that’s probably the
case. But guess what. Since you’re technically paying the CEO’s salary, as an
investor, it is your business to know what he or she is paid.

14 506455-ch09.indd 150

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

151

CEOs don’t typically just get a paycheck every couple of weeks. Generally,
they receive a base salary plus a number of bonuses and other incentives that
become valuable if they meet certain performance milestones. That’s why
most CEOs’ pay is broken into these parts:
✓ Salary: This is the base pay received by the executive.
✓ Bonus: These discretionary payments are generally awarded at the end
of the year for meeting certain performance targets.
✓ Equity awards: Top executives will often be given compensation that’s
tied to the company’s stock price. These grants may become very valuable if the company’s stock price rises in the future. Equity awards are
generally stock options or restricted stock, which are both described in
more detail below.
For instance, in 2008, GE CEO Jeffrey Immelt received a salary of $3.3 million
and equity awards of $2.0 million for total compensation of $5.3 million. GE is
one of the few companies to meticulously outline the goals the CEO needed
to meet in order to earn bonuses and other incentive pay.
You can tell something about executives’ motives by the way they handle their
bonuses. Immelt, for instance, asked GE’s board of directors not to pay him a
bonus in 2008 due to the dramatic fall of the company’s stock price. The board
accepted the suggestion, even though GE meet the operational targets that
were conditions for the bonus. The denial of the bonus cost Immelt millions,
since his bonus was $5.8 million in 2007. Immelt also declined a $11.7 million
long-term performance award.
On the other hand, former Merrill Lynch CEO Thain was subpoenaed to disclose details of more than $3.6 billion in bonuses that were handed to executives of that firm at the end of 2008. Those bonuses were paid just before the
distressed investment bank was about to report a massive $27 billion loss for
the year and was rescued by both taxpayers and Bank of America in a rushed
merger. Interestingly, Thain was also the highest-paid CEO in 2007 according
to Table 9-1 above.

Checking out the other perks
executives receive
Oh, to live the life of a CEO. In addition to the pay, CEOs receive other noncash
bonuses. The more forthcoming companies will break out all these perks, too.
These perks generally include personal use of the corporate jet, leased cars,
tax-preparation counseling, and discounts or free products from the company.

14 506455-ch09.indd 151

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

152 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Going beyond the proxy to find executive perks
Just as you might negotiate for access to childcare or extra vacation time accepting a new job,
the same goes for executives. Executives of large
companies will very often seek non-monetary
extras as part of their pay. These extras can
range from a home-office setup to paid consulting gigs after retirement, paid insurance premiums or tickets to sporting events.
It’s important for a fundamental analysts to
pay attention to these perks, because they are
a factor in determining an executive’s total
compensation.
When these extras are large enough the
company should, in theory, disclose them in
the proxy statement. But as you’ve probably
noticed so far, companies go out of their way
to keep details on executive pay as general as
possible and not list or itemize specific perks.
Most of these items are rolled up into a broad
category in the proxy, usually called “other” or
something vague. You can often find “other”
pay listed in a table in the company’s proxy.
Some companies go a bit further and break out
the value of certain expected perks executives
receive such as use of aircraft, cars or financial
or tax planning.
And that’s why keen fundamental analysts
interested in executive pay often find they must
look beyond the proxy. Don’t get me wrong, the
proxy is extremely valuable and should be your
starting point when researching executive pay.
But remember companies will only go so far in
listing details on perks executives are getting.

And that’s why you need to know how to take
your research one step further to get the full
story on executive pay.
The first place to check after the proxy are court
documents. Lurid details about executive pay
are often fleshed out in divorce papers, legal
skirmishes with business partners or in other
legal battles.
One of the best examples of how you can get
more details about all the benefits an executive
is getting from the company occurred with GE
and its former CEO Jack Welch. Court papers
from Welch’s 2002 divorce from his wife of 13
years revealed many never-before-seen details
of perks Welch received from GE in retirement.
Some of the perks included use of a multi-million dollar New York City apartment, a limo and
security for his homes.
The case even got the attention of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and has
set a precedent for what needs to be disclosed
regarding perks. The SEC in late 2004 settled
charges against GE. The SEC alleged GE didn’t
adequately disclose the extent and details of
perks given to Welch.
The SEC said GE’s 1996 annual report didn’t go
far enough in describing the perks Welch would
receive in retirement, instead, vaguely calling
them “facilities and services.” GE consented to
the SEC’s order. You can read more about this
case here: http://www.sec.gov/news/
press/2004-135.htm.
