
Many things have happened to change these colorful markets of the
past. High income and inheritance tax rates are one. A more important
influence is the tendency toward a levelling of incomes that continues
year after year in every section of the United States. The very rich and
the very poor each year grow smaller in number. Each year the middle
groups grow larger. This has produced a steady shrinkage of big stock
buyers, and an even greater growth of small stock buyers. Along with
them has come a tremendous growth in another class of stock buyer, the
institutional buyer. The investment trust, the pension and profit-sharing
trusts, even to some degree the trust departments of the great banks do
not represent a few big buyers. Rather they are a few professional man-
agers entrusted with handling the collective savings of innumerable
small buyers.

Partly as a result of all this, and partly as a cause helping to bring
it about, basic changes have come in our laws and institutions as they
affect the stock market. The Securities and Exchange Commission
has been created to prevent the type of manipulation and pool oper-
ation that spurred on the rampant stock market gambling of the past.
Rules are in force limiting margin buying to a fraction of what was
formerly considered customary. But most important of all, as already dis-
cussed in an earlier chapter, the corporation of today is a very different


The Third Dimension 201

if it is exceedingly well run. The bigger a company is, the harder it is to
manage efficiently. Quite often the inherent advantages of scale are fully
balanced or even more than balanced by the inefficiencies produced by
too many bureaucratic layers of middle management, consequent delays
in making decisions, and, at times, the seeming inability of top executives
in the largest companies to know quickly just what needs corrective
attention in various subdivisions of their far-flung complexes.

On the other hand, when a company clearly becomes the leader in
its field, not just in dollar volume but in profitability, it seldom gets dis-
placed from this position as long as its management remains highly
competent. As discussed in examining the second dimension of a con-
servative investment, such a management must retain the ability to
change corporate ways to match the ever-changing external environ-
ment. There is a school of investment thinking that advocates acquiring
shares in the number-two or -three company in a field because “these
can go up to number one, whereas the leader is already there and might
slip.’ There are some industries where the largest company does not
have a clear leadership position; but, where it does, we emphatically do
not agree with this viewpoint. It has been our observation that, in
many years of trying, Westinghouse has not surpassed General Electric,
Montgomery Ward has not overtaken Sears, and—once IBM estab-
lished early dominance in its areas of the computer market—even the
extreme efforts of some of the largest companies in the country,
including General Electric, did not succeed in displacing IBM from its
overwhelming share of that market. Neither have scores of smaller
price-cutting suppliers of peripheral equipment been able to displace
IBM as the main and most profitable operator in that phase of the
computer industry.

What enables a company to obtain this advantage of scale in the first
place? Usually getting there first with a new product or service that
meets worthwhile demand and backing this up with good enough mar-
keting, servicing, product improvement, and, at times, advertising to
keep existing customers happy and coming back for more. This fre-
quently establishes an atmosphere in which new customers will turn to
the leader largely because that leader has established such a reputation,
for performance (or sound value) that no one is likely to criticize the
buyer adversely for making this particular selection. In the heyday of the
attempts of others to cut into IBM’s computer business, no one will ever
know how many employees of corporations planning to use a computer


202 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

for the first time recommended IBM rather than a smaller competitor
whose equipment they privately thought was better or cheaper. In such
instances the primary motive was probably a feeling that if, later on, the
equipment should fail ta perform, those making the recommendation
would not be blamed if they had chosen the industry leader but could
very well find their necks out a mile if a failure occurred and they had
chosen a smaller company without an established reputation.

There is a saying in the pharmaceutical industry that, when a truly
worthwhile new drug is created, the company that gets in first takes and
holds 60 percent of the market, thereby making by far the bulk of the
profits. The next company to introduce a competitive version of the
same product gets perhaps 25 percent of the market and makes moder-
ate profits. The next three companies to arrive divide perhaps 10 per-
cent to 15 percent of the market and earn meager profits. Any further
entrants usually find themselves in a quite unhappy position. A trend
toward the substitution of generic for trade names may or may not upset
these ratios, and in any case there cannot be said to be an exact formu-
la applicable to other industries; nevertheless, the concept behind them
should be kept in mind when an investor attempts to appraise which
companies have a natural advantage in regard to profitability and which
do not.

Lower production costs and greater ability to attract new customers
because of a well-recognized trade name are not the only ways that scale
can consistently give a company competitive strength. Examining some
of the factors behind the investment strength of the soup division of the
Campbell Soup Company is illuminating. In the first place, as by far the
largest soup canners in the nation, this company can reduce total costs
through backward integration as smaller companies cannot. Making
many of their own. cans exactly to meet their own needs is a case in
point. More important, Campbell has enough business so that it can
scatter canning plants at strategic spots across the nation, which makes
for a sizable double advantage: It is both a shorter haul for the grower
delivering his produce to the cannery and a shorter average haul from
cannery to supermarket. Since canned soup is heavy in relation to its
value, freight costs are significant. This puts the smaller canner with only
one or two plants at a big disadvantage in trying to compete in a
nationwide market, Next, and probably most important of all, because
Campbell’s is a recognized product that the customer knows and wants
when he enters the supermarket, the retailer automatically awards to it


The Third Dimension 203

a prominent and fairly sizable area of his always sought-after shelf space.
In contrast, he is usually quite reluctant to do as much for a less-known
or unknown competitor. This prominent shelf space helps to sell the
soup and is still another factor tending to keep the number-one com
pany on top, a factor extremely discouraging for potential competitors.
Also discouraging for them is Campbell’s normal advertising budget,
which adds very much less to the cost per can sold than such a budget
would for a competitor with a very much smaller output. For reasons
such as these, this particular company has strong inherent forces tending
to protect profit margins. However, to present a complete picture, we
must note some influences working in the opposite direction. When
Campbell’s own costs rise, as they can do sharply in an inflationary peri-
od, prices to the consumer cannot be raised more than the average of
other foods or there could be a shift in demand away from soups to
other staples. Far more important, Campbell has a major competitor that
most companies do not have to contend with and that, as rising pro-
duction costs cause higher prices to the consumer, can cut significantly
into Campbell’s market. This is the American housewife fighting her
battle of the budget by making soup in her own kitchen. This point is
mentioned merely to show that even when scale affords huge compet-
itive advantages and a company is well run, these characteristics, impor-
tant as they are, do not, of themselves, assure extreme profitability.
Scale is by no means the only investment factor tending to perpet-
uate the much greater profitability and investment appeal of some com-
panies over others. Another which we believe is of particular interest is
the difficulty of competing with a highly successful, established produc-
er in a technological area where the technology depends on not one sci-
entific discipline but the interplay of two or preferably several quite dif
ferent disciplines. To explain what I mean, let us suppose that someone
develops an electronic product that promises to open up sizable new
markets in either the computer or instrument field. There are enough
highly capable companies in both areas that have in-house experts able
to duplicate both the electronic hardware and the software program -
ming that such products require so that if the new market appears large
enough, sufficient competition may soon develop to make the profits of
the smaller innovator rather tenuous. In areas such as these, the success-
ful large company has a further built-in advantage. Many such lines can-
not be sold unless a network of service people is available to make rapid
repair at the customers’ locations. The large established company usually


204 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

has such an organization in being. It is extremely difficult and expensive
for a small new company introducing a worthwhile new product to
establish such a network. It may be even harder for the new company
to convince a potential buyer that it has the financial staying power not
only to have the service network in place when the sale is made but to
keep it there in the future. Furthermore, while all these influences have
made it difficult in the past for the newcomer with an exciting product
to establish real leadership in most subdivisions of the electronics indus-
try, although a few companies have done s0, it is likely to be still more
difficult in the future. This is because the semiconductor is becoming a
larger and larger percentage of both the total content and the total tech-
nical know-how of more and more products. The lcading companics
making these devices also now have at least as much in-house knowl-
edge as the top old-line computer and instrament companies if they
elect to compete in many new product areas that are largely electronic.
A case in point is the dramatic success of Texas Instruments in the sen-
sationally growing area of hand-held calculators and the difficulties of
some of the early pioneers in this field.

However, notice how the balance changes if, instead of just a tech-
nology based on electronic hardware and software, producing the prod-
uct calls for these skills to be combined with some quite different ones
such as nucleonics or some highly specialized area of chemistry. The
large electronic companies simply do not have the in-house skills to
enter these interdisciplinary technologies. This affords the best-run
innovators a far better opportunity to build themselves into the type of
leadership position in their particular product line that carries with it
the broad profit margin that tends to continue as long as managerial
competence does not weaken. I believe that some of these multidisci-
plinary technological companies, in not all of which is electronics a sig-
nificant factor, have recently proven some of the finest opportunities for
truly farsighted investing. I am inclined to think that more such oppor-
tunities will occur in the future. Thus, for example, I suspect that some-
time in the future new leading companies will arise through products
or processes that utilize some of these other disciplines combined with
biology, although so far I have not seen any company in this area that so
qualifies. This is not to say that none exists.

Technological development and scale are not the only aspects of a
company’s activities in which unusual circumstances may raise opportu-
nities for sustained high profit margins. In certain circumstances these


The Third Dimension 205

can also occur in the area of marketing or sales. An example is a company
that has created in its customers the habit of almost automatically spec-
ifying its products for reorder in a way that makes it rather uneconom-
ical for a competitor to attempt to displace them. Two sets of conditions
are necessary for this to happen. First) the company must build up a rep-
utation for quality and reliability in a product (a) that the customer rec-
ognizes is very important for the proper conduct of his activities,
(b) where an inferior or malfunctioning product would cause serious
problems, (c) where no competitor is serving more than a minor seg
ment of the market so that the dominant company is nearly synony-
mous in the public mind with the source of supply, and yet (d) the cost
of the product is only a quite small part of the customer's total cost of
operations. Consequently, moderate price reductions yield only very
small savings in relation to the risk of taking a chance on an unknown
supplier. However, even this is not enough to ensure that a company
fortunate enough to get itself in this position will be able to enjoy
above-average profit margins year after year. Second, it must have a
product sold to many small customers rather than a few large ones.
These customers must be sufficiently specialized in their nature that it
would be unlikely for a potential competitor to feel they could be
reached through advertising media such as magazines or television. They
constitute a market in which, as long as the dominant company main-
tains the quality of its product and the adequacy of its service, it can be
displaced only by informed salesmen making individual calls. Yet the size
of cach customer’s orders make such a selling effort totally uneconom-
ical! A company possessing all these advantages can, through marketing,
maintain an above-average profit margin almost indefinitely unless a
major shift in technology (or, as already mentioned, a slippage in its own
efficiency) should displace it. Companies of this type can most often be
found in the moderately high technology supply area. One of their
characteristics is to maintain their image of leadership by holding fre-
quent technical seminars on the use of their product, a marketing tool
that proves highly effective once a company attains this type of position.

It should be noted that the “above-average” profit margin or
“greater than normal” return on investment need not be—in fact,
should not be—many times that earned by industry in general to give
a company’s shares great investment appeal. Actually, if the profit or
return on investment is too spectacular, it can be a source of danger, as
the inducement then becomes almost irresistible for all sorts of compa-


206 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

nies to try to compete so as to get a share of the unusual honey pot. In
contrast, a profit margin consistently just 2 or 3 percent of sales greater
than that of the next best competitor is sufficient to ensure a quite out-
standing investment.

To summarize the matter of the third dimension of a truly conser-
vative investment: It is necessary not just to have the quality of person-
nel discussed in the second dimension but to have had that personnel
(or their predecessors) steer the company into areas of activity where
there are inherent reasons within the economics of the particular busi-
ness so that above-average profitability is not a short-term matter. Put
simply, the question to ask in regard to this third dimension is: “What
can the particular company do that others would not be able to do
about as well?” If the answer is almost nothing, so that, as the business
gets more prosperous, others can rush in to share in the company’s pros-
perity on about equal terms, the evidence is conclusive that while the
company’s stock may be cheap, the investment fails to qualify as to this
third dimension.


4

The Fourth Dimension

Price of a Conservative Investment

earnings ratio—that is, the current price divided by the earnings

per share. In the attempt to appraise whether the price-earnings
ratio is in line with a proper valuation for that specific stock, trouble
begins to arise. Most investors, including many professionals who
should know better, become confused on this point because they don’t
have a clear undcrstanding of what makes the price of the Particular
stock go up or down by a significant amount. This misunderstanding
has resulted in losses in billions of dollars by investors who find out
later that they own stocks bought at prices that they never should have
paid. Even more billions have been lost as investors have sold out, at the
wrong time and for the wrong reasons, shares they had every reason to
hold and which, if held, would have become extremely profitable as
long-range investments. Still another result is one that, if it happens
repeatedly, will seriously impaur the ability of deserving corporations to
obtain adequate financing, with all that this could mean in a lower
standard of living for everyone: Every time individual stocks take sick-
ening plunges, another group of badly burned investors places the
blame on the system rather than on their own mistakes or those of their
advisors. They conclude that common stocks of any type are not suit-
able for their savings.

T: fourth dimension of any stock investment involves the price-


208 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

The other side of the coin is that many other investors can be found
who over the years have prospered mightily from holding the right
stocks for considerable periods of time. Their success may be due to
understanding basic investment rules. Or it may be due to just plain
good luck. However, the common denominator in this success has been
the refusal to sell certain unusual high-quality stocks simply because
each has had such a sharp fast rise that its price-earnings ratio suddenly
looks high in relation to that to which the investment community had
become accustomed.

In view of the importance of all this, it is truly remarkable that so
few have looked beneath the surface to understand exactly what causes
these sharp price changes. Yet the law that governs them can be stated
reasonably simply: Every significant price move of any individual common
stock in relation to stocks as a whole occurs because of a changed appraisal of that
stock by the financial community.

Let us see how this works in practice. Two years ago company G was
considered quite ordinary. It had earned $1 per share and was selling at
ten times earnings, or $10. During these last two years most companies
in its industry have been showing a downward profit trend. In contrast,
a series of brilliant new products, combined with better profit margins
on old products, enabled G company to report $1.40 per share last year
and $1.82 this year and to give promise of further gains over the next
several years. Obviously the actions within the company that produced
the sharp contrast between G’s recent results and those of others in the
industry could not have started just two years ago but must have been
going on for some time; otherwise the operating economies and the
brilliant new products would not have occurred. However, belated
recognition (i.e., appraisal) of how well G is qualifying in regard to mat-
ters covered in our discussions of the first three dimensions has now
caused the pricc-carnings ratio to rise to 22, When compared with
other stocks showing similar above-average business characteristics and
comparable growth prospects, this ratio of 22 does not appear at all high.
Since 22 times $1.82 is $40, here is a stock that has legitimately gone up
400 percent in two years. Equally important, a record such as G’s is fre-
quently an indication that there is now functioning a management team
capable of continued growth for many years ahead. Such a growth, even
at a more modest rate averaging, say, 15 percent in the next decade or
two, could easily result in profits by that time running into the thou-
sands rather than the hundreds of percent.


The Fourth Dimension 209

The matter of “appraisal” is the heart of understanding the seeming
vagaries of price-earnings ratios. It should never be forgotten that an
appraisal is a subjective matter. It has nothing necessarily to do with
what is going on in the real world about us. Rather, it results from what
the person doing the appraising believes is going on, no matter how far
from the actual facts such a judgment may be. In other words, any indi-
vidual stock does not rise or fall at any particular moment in time
because of what is actually happening or will happen to that company.
It rises or falls according to the current consensus of the financial com-
munity as to what is happening and will happen regardless of how far
off this consensus may be from what is really occurring or will occur.

At this point many pragmatic individuals simply throw up their
hands in disbelief. If the huge price changes that occur in individual
stocks are made solely because of changed appraisals by the financial
community, with these appraisals sometimes completely at variance
with what is going on in the real world of a company’s affairs, what sig-
nificance have the other three dimensions? Why bother with the
expertise of business management, scientific technology, or accounting,
at all? Why not just depend on psychologists?

The answer involves timing. Because of a financial-community
appraisal that is at variance with the facts, a stock may sell for a consid-
erable period for much more or much less than it is intrinsically worth.
Furthermore, many segments of the financial community have the habit
of playing “follow the leader,” particularly when that leader is one of the
larger New York City banks. This sometimes means that when an unre-
alistic appraisal of a stock is already causing it to sell well above what a
proper recognition of the facts would justify, the stock may stay at this
too high level for a long period of time. Actually, from this already too
high a price it may go even higher.

These wide variations between the financial community’s appraisal
of a stock and the true set of conditions affecting it may last for several
years. Always, however—sometimes within months, sometimes only
after a much longer period of time—the bubble bursts. When a stock
has been selling too high because of unrealistic expectations, sooner or
later a growing number of stockholders grow tired of waiting. Their sell-
ing soon more than exhausts the buying power of the small number of
additional buyers who still have faith in the old appraisal. The stock then
comes tumbling down. Sometimes the new appraisal that follows is
quite realistic. Frequently, however, as this re-examination evolves under

