Those ever-changing trends
Although technical traders look to follow trends, they also look for situations
where the trend changes so that they can find new profit opportunities. In
general, day traders are going to follow trends, and swing traders — those
who hold securities for a few days or even weeks — are going to be more
interested in identifying changes that may play out over time.

Monitoring momentum
Following the trend is great, but if the trend is moving quickly, you want to
know so that you can get ahead of it. If the rate of change on the trend is
going up, then rising prices are likely to occur.
To calculate momentum, take today’s closing price for a security, divide that
by the closing price ten days ago, and then multiply the result by 100. This
gives you a momentum indicator. If the price didn’t go anywhere, the momentum indicator is 100. If the price went up, the indicator is greater than 100.
And if the price went down, the indicator is less than 100.
In technical analysis, trends are usually expected to continue, so a security
with a momentum indicator above 100 is expected to keep going up, all else
being equal. But that “all else being equal” is the sticky part. Technical analysts usually track momentum indicators over time to see whether the positive momentum is, itself, a trend. In fact, momentum indicators are a good
confirmation of the underlying trend.

125

126 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Momentum is a leading technical indicator. It tells you what is likely to happen
in the future, not what has happened in the past.
Momentum trading is usually done with some attention to the fundamentals.
When key business fundamentals, such as sales or profits, are accelerating at
the same time that the security is going up in price, the momentum is likely
to continue for some time. You can learn more about momentum trading and
investing in Chapter 17.

Finding breakouts
A breakout occurs when a security price passes through and stays
above — or below — the resistance or support line, which creates a new
trend with new support and resistance levels. A one-time breakout may
just be an anomaly (what technicians sometimes call a false breakout),
but pay attention to two or more breakouts. Figure 7-7 shows what
breakouts look like.

Figure 7-7:
A breakout
indicates a
new trend.

When a true breakout occurs, a new trend starts. That means an upward
breakout is accompanied by rising prices, and a downward breakout is
accompanied by falling prices.
False breakouts can wreak havoc for a day to two of trading. With a false
breakout, some traders buy or sell, thinking that the trend will continue. When
they see that it doesn’t, they then turn around and reverse their positions at a

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
loss. During these times, the ability to size up the intelligence of the other
traders in the market can come in handy.
Good technical analysts look at several different indicators to determine
whether a change in trend is real or just one of those things that goes away
quickly as the old trend resumes. For example, they may look at short interest or overall market volatility. You can learn more about these indicators in
Chapter 8.

Reading the Charts
How long does it take to find the trend? How long does it take for the trend
to play out? When do you act on it? Do you have minutes, hours, or days
to act?
Because markets tend to move in cycles, technical analysts look for patterns in the price charts that give them an indication of how long any
particular trend may last. In this section, I show you some of the common
patterns that day traders look for when they do technical analysis.
Alas, some patterns are obvious only in hindsight, but knowing what the
patterns mean can help you make better forecasts of where a security price
should go.
This section provides just an introduction to some of the better-known
(and cleverly named) patterns. Technical analysts look for many others,
and you really need a book on the subject to understand them all. Check
out the appendix for books that provide more information on technical
analysis so that you can get a feel for how you can apply it to your
trading style.

Wave your pennants and flags
Pennants and flags are chart patterns that show retracements, short-term deviations from the main trend. With a retracement, no breakout occurs from the
support or resistance level, but the security isn’t following the trend, either.
Because there is no breakout, the trend is more short-term.
Figure 7-8 shows a pennant. Notice how the support and resistance lines of
the pennant (which occur within the support and resistance lines of a much
larger trend) converge almost to a point.

127

128 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies

Figure 7-8: In
a pennant,
support and
resistance
begin to
converge.

Figure 7-9, by contrast, is a flag. The main difference between a flag and a
pennant is that the flag’s support and resistance lines are parallel.

Figure 7-9:
A flag, like
a pennant,
usually indicates falling
volume.

Pennants and flags are usually found in the middle of the main phase of a
trend, and they seem to last for two weeks before going back to the trendline.
They are almost always accompanied by falling volume. In fact, if the trading volume isn’t falling, you are probably looking at a reversal — a change in
trend — rather than a retracement.

Not just for the shower: Head
and shoulders
The head and shoulders formation is a series of three peaks within a price
chart. The peaks on the left and right (the shoulders) should be relatively
smaller than the peak in the center (the head). The shoulders connect at

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
a price known as the neckline, and when the right shoulder formation is
reached, the price plunges down.
The head and shoulders is one of the most bearish technical patterns, and
Figure 7-10 shows an example.

Head
Figure 7-10:
In a
head and
shoulders
formation,
the price
goes
down after
the right
shoulder
formation.

Left
Shoulder

Right
Shoulder

The head and shoulders formation seems to result from traders holding
out for a last high after a security has had a long price run. At some point,
though, the trend changes, because nothing grows forever. And when the
trend changes, the prices fall.
An upside-down head and shoulders sometimes appears at the end of a
downtrend, and it signals that the security is about to increase in price.

Drink from a cup and handle
When a security hits a peak in price and falls, sometimes because of bad
news, it can stay low for a while. But eventually, the bad news works itself
out, the underlying fundamentals improve, and the time comes to buy again.
The technical analyst sees this scenario play out in a cup and handle formation, and Figure 7-11 shows you what one looks like.
The handle forms as those who bought at the old high and who felt burned
by the decline take their money and get out. But other traders, those who
haven’t the same history with the security, recognize that the price will probably resume going up now that those old sellers are out of the market.

129

130 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies

Figure 7-11:
A cup and
handle formation is a
long-term
trend.

Handle

Cup

A cup and handle formation generally shows up over a long period of
trading — sometimes as long as a year — and many subtrends occur during
that time. As a day trader, you’ll probably care more about those day-to-day
changes than the underlying trend taking place. Still, if you see that cup
formation and the hint of a handle, you can interpret that as a sign that the
security will probably start to rise in price.

Mind the gap
Gaps are breaks in prices that show up all the time, usually when some news
event takes place between trading sessions that causes an adjustment in
prices and volume. Whether the news is about an acquisition, a product line
disappointment, or a war that broke out overnight, it’s significant enough to
change the trend, and that’s why traders pay attention when they see gaps.
A gap is a break between two bars, as shown in Figure 7-12.
Gaps are usually great signals. A security that gaps up at the open usually
means a strong uptrend is beginning, so it’s time to buy. Likewise, if the
security gaps down, that’s often the start of a downtrend, so it’s better
to sell.
Day traders can get sucked into a gap, a situation known as a gap and crap (or
gap and trap, if you prefer more genteel language). Many traders view the security going up in price as a great time to sell, so the day trader who buys on the
gap up immediately gets slammed by all the selling pressure. For that reason,
some day traders prefer to wait at least 30 minutes before trading on an opening gap, while others rely on their knowledge of the buyers and sellers in a
given market to decide what to do.

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101

Gap
Figure 7-12:
A gap
down often
means it’s
time to sell.

Grab your pitchforks!
A pitchfork is sometimes called an Andrews pitchfork after Alan Andrews, the
technical analyst who popularized it. This pattern identifies long-run support
and resistance levels for subtrends by creating a channel around the main
trendline. Figure 7-13 shows what a pitchfork looks like.

Figure 7-13:
A pitchfork
makes a
channel
around the
main
trendline.

Point 2

Point 3
Point 1

The upper line shows the resistance level for upward subtrends, and the
lower line shows the support level for lower subtrends. The middle line
forms a support and a resistance line, depending on which side of it trading
takes place. If the price crosses above the midline, it can be expected to go
no higher than the highest line. Likewise, if the price crosses below the midline, it can be expected to go no lower than the lowest line.

131

132 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Considering Different Approaches
to Technical Analysis
Technical analysts tend to group themselves under different schools of
thought. Each approaches the charts differently and uses them to glean different information about how securities prices are likely to perform. In this section, I offer an introduction to a few of these approaches. If one strikes your
fancy, you can look in the appendix for resources to help you learn more.

Dow Theory
The Dow Theory was developed by Charles Dow, the founder of The Wall Street
Journal. The theory and the market indexes that are part of it helped sell newspapers; they also helped people make money in the markets. The Dow Theory
is the basis for the traditional technical analysis described in this chapter.
Dow believed that securities move in trends, that the trends form patterns
that traders can identify, and that those trends remain in place until some
major event takes place that changes them. Further, trends in the Dow Jones
Industrial Average and the Dow Jones Transportation Average can predict
overall market performance.
Not all technicians believe that the Dow Jones Industrial Average and Dow Jones
Transportation Average are primary indicators in the modern economy, but
they rely on the Dow Theory for their analysis, and they still read the Journal.

Fibonacci numbers and the Elliott Wave
Remember back when you had to take standardized tests, you’d often have
to figure the next number in a series? Well, here’s such a test. What’s the next
number in this series? (Hint: This is not a phone number in Chad.)
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21
If you answered 34, you’re right! The series is known as the Fibonacci
numbers, sometimes called the Fibonacci series or just the Fibs. You find this
number by adding together the preceding two numbers in the series, starting
with the first two digits on the number line. 0 + 1 = 1; 1 + 1 = 2; 1 + 2 = 3;
and so on into infinity. Furthermore, when the series gets well into the double
digits, the ratio of one number to the one next to it settles at 0.618, a number
known as the golden ratio, which means that the ratio of the smaller and the

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
larger of two numbers is the same as the ratio of the larger number to the
sum of the two numbers. In nature, this is the proportion of a perfect spiral,
like that found on a pinecone and a pineapple.
Ralph Elliott was a trader who believed that over the long run the market
moved in waves described by the Fibonacci series. For example, Elliott
believed that a bull market would be characterized by three down waves
and five up waves. He also believed that support and resistance levels would
be found 61.8 percent above lows and below highs. Under the Elliott Wave
system, if a security falls 61.8 percent from a high, it’s a good time to buy.
Elliott believed that these waves ranged from centuries to minutes, so both
traders and investors use the system to identify the market trends that suit
their timeframes. Others — including me — think it’s highly unlikely that the
human activity in the stock market would follow the same natural order as
the ratio of the spiral on a mollusk shell.

Japanese candlestick charting
Candlestick charts were developed by traders in the Japanese rice futures
markets in the 18th century, and they’ve carried through into the present.
The basic charts are similar to the high-low-close-open bars that I talk about
earlier in this chapter, but they are shaped a little differently to carry more
information. Figure 7-14 shows an example of a candlestick.
High
Open or close

Figure 7-14:
Candle­
sticks are
like slightly
more
sophisticated bars.

Open or close
Low

The length of the rectangle (the so-called candle, also known as the body)
between the open and the close prices gives a sense of how much volatility
the security has, especially relative to the high and low prices above and
below the rectangle (the so-called wick, also known as the shadow). The

133

134 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
shapes and colors create different patterns that traders can use to discern
the direction of future prices. (Most technical-analysis packages color the
candlesticks green on up days and red on down days, to make finding trends
even easier.)

The Gann system
William Gann supposedly made $50 million in the stock and commodities
markets in the first half of the 20th century by using a system that he may or
may not have taught to others before his death. A lot of mystery and mythology surrounds the Gann system; some traders rely on what they perceive
to be his method, whereas others dismiss it, in part because Gann relied on
astrology to build his forecasts.
The Gann system, as it is defined nowadays, looks at the relationship between
price and time. If a security moves one point in one day, that’s a 1 × 1 Gann
angle, and that’s normal trading. If a security moves two points in one day,
it is said to create a 2 × 1 Gann angle, which is bullish. An angle of less than
1 × 1 is bearish.
Furthermore, Gann recognized that the market moves back and forth while
in a general upward or downward cycle, but some of those fluctuations are
more positive than others. Just as the system looks for price movements over
time with even proportions (1 × 1, 2 × 1, and so on), it also looks for orderly
retracements. When a security moves back 50 percent, say from a low of $20
to a high of $40 and then back to $30, it would be a good time to buy under
the Gann system.
Many traders swear by the 50 percent retracement guide — even those who
think that Gann is an otherwise crazy system. This may be the origin of one
hoary trading chestnut: Buy whenever a price dips, because it’s likely to be
heading on its way back up.

Avoiding Technical-Analysis Pitfalls
A lot of people make a lot of money selling services to day traders. They produce videos, organize seminars, and (ahem) write books to tell you how to be
a success. But in the financial world, success is a combination of luck, skill,
and smarts.

Chapter 7: Technical Analysis 101
Before you commit wholeheartedly to any particular school of research and
before you plunk down a lot of money for some “proven” system demonstrated on an infomercial, think about who are you are and what you are trying
to do. Despite all the books and all the seminars and all the business-school
debates, every form of research has its drawbacks. Keep them in mind as you
develop your day-trading business plan.

If it’s obvious, there’s no opportunity
Many day trading systems work much of the time. For example, a security
gaps up, meaning that, due to positive news or high demand, the price jumps
from one trade to the next (refer to Figure 7-12 for a gap formation). This is
good, and the security is likely to keep going up. So you buy the security,
you make money. Bingo! But here’s the thing: Everyone is looking at that gap,
everyone is assuming that the stock will go up, so everyone buys, and that
bids up the security. The profit opportunity is gone. So maybe you’re better
off going short? Or avoiding the situation entirely? Who knows? And that’s
the problem. Looking for obvious patterns like gaps tells you a lot about what
is happening in the market, but only your own judgment and experience can
tell you what the next move should be.

Overanalyzing the data
Technical analysis is a useful way to gauge market psychology. That’s
what it was designed to do. However, when it was developed, most traders were human beings, with all their crazy human emotions. Nowadays,
you aren’t trading against a person. In almost all cases, you will be trading
against machines that do what they are programmed to do. They don’t
suffer from doubt, fear, or greed — but you do. The market is an aggregation of everyone in it, but you don’t want to assign human emotions to
nonhumans.
When trying to determine the mood of the market, you can easily start overanalyzing and working yourself into a knot. Should you follow the trend or
trade against it? But if everyone trades against it, would you be better off
following it?
Instead of puzzling over what’s really going on, develop a system that you
trust. Do that through backtesting, simulation, and performance analysis.
Chapter 16 has plenty of advice on how to use these techniques. The more
confident you feel in how you should react given a market situation, the
better your trading will be.

135

136 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Success may be the result of
an upward bias
Under the efficient markets theory, all information is already included in a
security’s price. Until new information comes into the market, the prices
move in a random pattern, so any security is as likely to do as well as any
other. In some markets, like the stock market, this random path has an
upward bias, meaning that as long as the economy is growing, companies
should perform well, too; therefore, the movement is more likely to be
upward than downward, but the magnitude of the movement is random.
If price movements are random, some people are going to win and some are
going to lose, no matter what systems they use to pick securities. If price
movements are random with an upward bias, then more people are going to
win than lose, no matter what systems they use to pick securities. Some of
those who win are going to tout their systems, even though random chance
was really what led to their success.
Technical analysis is a useful way to measure the relative supply and demand
in the market, and that in turn is a way to gauge the psychology of those who
are trading. But it’s not perfect. Before you plunk down a lot of money to learn
a complex trading system or to subscribe to a newsletter offering a can’t-miss
method of trading, ask yourself if the person selling it is smart or just lucky.
A good system gives you discipline and a way to think about the market
relative to your trading style. A bad system costs a lot of money and may
have worked for a brief moment in the past, with no relevance to current
conditions.

Chapter 8

Following Market Indicators and
Tried-and-True Day-Trading
Strategies
In This Chapter
▶ Studying the psychology and moods of the market
▶ Following the flow of funds
▶ Knowing what to look for during the trading day
▶ Avoiding dangerous situations
▶ Looking at strategies that many day traders use
▶ Learning how to program your trades

D

ay traders put their research to work through a range of different strategies. All strategies have two things in common: They’re designed to
make money, and they’re designed to work in a single day. And the best ones
help traders cut through the psychology of the market.
In this day and age, most trading takes place via computers. The trading is
often directed by human beings, of course, but the machines are doing the
work. Short-term profit potentials can be very small. As much as they want
to be dispassionate, human traders get sucked into hope, fear, and greed —
the three emotions that ruin people every day. To complicate matters, many
markets, such as options and futures, are zero-sum markets, meaning that
for every win, someone has to lose. Some markets, such as the stock market,
have a positive bias, meaning that winners outnumber losers in the long run,
but that doesn’t mean that’ll be the case today.

138 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
With thin profit potential and so much emotional upheaval, making money
in the long run as a day trader can be tough. This chapter may help. In it, I
cover some common day-trading strategies, and I discuss some of the cold
analysis that goes into figuring out the psychology of the markets.

Psyching Out the Markets
For every buyer, there’s a seller. (There has to be, or no transaction will take
place.) The price changes to reach the point where the buyer is willing to buy
the security and the seller is willing to part with it. This interaction is basic
supply and demand. The financial markets are more efficient at matching
supply and demand than almost any other market in existence. There are no
racks of unsold sweaters at the end of the season, no hot new cars that can’t
be purchased at any price, no long lines to get a table. The prices change to
match the demand, and those who want to pay the price or receive the price
are going to make a trade.
Despite the ruthless capitalistic efficiency underlying trading, the markets
are also dominated by human emotion and psychology. All the buyers and all
the sellers look at the same information, but they reach different conclusions.
There’s a seller out there for every buyer, so the trader looking to buy needs
to know why the seller is willing to make a deal.
Why would someone be on the other side of your trade?
✓ The other trader may have a different time horizon. For example, longterm investors may sell on bad news that changes a security’s outlook. A
short-term trader may not care about the long-term outlook if the selling
in the morning is overdone, creating an opportunity to buy now and sell
at a higher price in the afternoon.
✓ The other trader may have a different risk profile. A conservative
investor may not want to own shares in a company that’s being acquired
by a high-flying technology company. That investor will sell, and someone with more interest in growth will buy. A trading algorithm may place
a trade to manage the risk on another trade.
✓ The other trader may be engaging in wishful thinking, acting out of
fear, or trading from sheer greed. He or she may not be thinking rationally about what is happening, creating an opportunity for you.
✓ You may be engaging in wishful thinking, acting out of fear, or trading
from sheer greed. You may be the irrational trader, making mistakes that
cost you. Hey, it happens to the best of us sometimes, but the more aware
you are of your emotional tendencies, the better you can trade past them.
