
As Samuel Goldwyn said, "A verbal contract isn't worth the
paper it's written on." What happened after they closed the

account?
I was basically flat for the rest of the year because the environment
wasn't conducive to buying options. In November 1991, I signed up
for the 1992 U.S. Trading Championship, which by that time had
expanded from a four-month to a one-year contest. In preparation, I
researched all my past trades back to the 1970s to find out why I had
made money and why I had lost money. I found that Tuesdays were
my best day and Fridays my worst.
Why is that?
Because it takes me a little while to get warmed up. Mondays I am
just getting back into gear, and by Tuesday I'm ready to roll. By the
time I get to Friday, I've exhausted my energy, and if I have done well
for the week, I just don't have the drive and zeal. So what did I do in
1992? I didn't trade on any Fridays, and I traded more aggressively on
Tuesdays.
Did your trading change forever because of this analysis?
Oh yes, it was the best thing that I ever did. That's when I became a
very proficient trader.
What advice do you have for people who want to follow in your

footsteps and trade for a living?
If you decide to. trade for a living, you have to treat it just like any
other business endeavor and go into it with a plan. If you want to start
a business, and all you do is walk into a bank, smile pleasantly, and
ask for a $200,000 loan, do you think you'll get it? Are they going to
say, "You have a really nice smile; here's the money." I don't think so.
You need to have a solid business plan. The trouble is that most people start trading without any definitive plan.
What would a business plan for traders include?
It should contain specific answers to all of the following questions:
> What markets are you going to trade? You need to select a market that
fits your personality because a market is a reflection of the people
who trade it. People who trade Internet stocks are definitely different
from people who trade utility stocks.

p. What is your trading capitalization? On the one hand, you should
honestly be able to say, "If I lose all this money, it won't change my
lifestyle." On the other hand, you need a large enough account so that
making at least as much as you do from your current job is a feasible
goal. Otherwise, you will think that you are a failure because you will
work harder as a trader than you do at the job you are in now.
»• How will orders be entered? Will you scale into positions or put them
on all at once? How will you exit losing trades? How will you exit winning trades?
»• What type of drawdown will cause you to stop trading and reevaluate
your approach? What type of drawdown will cause you to shut down
trading?
^ What are your profit goals, measured on as short a time frame as is
feasible for your trading approach?
fr What procedure will you use for analyzing your trades?
>• What will you do if personal problems arise that could adversely
impact your trading?
> How will you set up your working environment so that it is conducive
to trading and maximizes your chances for success?
> How will you reward yourself for successful trading? Will you take a
special vacation, buy yourself a new car, etcetera?
>• How will you continue to improve yourself as a trader? What books
will you read? What new research projects will you do?
What other advice would you give to people who want to become
traders?
Approach trading as a vocation, not a hobby. I periodically give seminars for traders. I once had a tennis pro who attended my four-day seminar. On the third day, I asked people what they had learned so far and
how they were going to apply it. When it was his turn, he said, "I'm not
going to give up my tennis career. I give lessons on Tuesdays and Thursdays, so I'm going to trade on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays."
"If you do that," I told him, "I guarantee that Tuesdays and Thursdays will be the days when you will need to be watching the market.
You'll be making a hundred dollars giving a lesson and losing a thousand dollars in the market."

M A R K D. C O O K

"I'm not going to have that problem," he said, "because I'm going
to close out my positions every day." Six months later, he gave up trading. He did two things wrong: First, his primary passion was tennis.
Second, trading wasn't a vocation to him; it was a hobby, and hobbies
cost you money.
What are some other reasons people fail as traders?
People underestimate the time it takes to succeed as a trader. Some
people come here and think they can sit with me for a week and
become great traders. How many people when they went to college
would've thought to walk up to the professor and say, "I know the
course is for a semester, but I think a week should be enough for me
to get it." Gaining proficiency is the same in trading as in any other
profession—it requires experience, and experience takes time.
A man who attended one of my seminars a number of years ago
asked me, "How long will it take me to become a professional trader
so 1 can quit my job and support my family?"
"Three to five years," I said.
"What! I'm going to do it in six months," he answered.
"Well, you're probably a lot smarter than I am," I said. "I didn't
make any money in my first five years."
It's seven years later, and he's still not profitable as a trader. You
can't expect to become a doctor or an attorney overnight, and trading
is no different. It is a vocation that takes time, study, and experience.
Wisdom is a product of knowledge and experience. If you have more
knowledge, you can get away with less experience and vice versa. If
you can get both, the learning curve is very steep.
Why else do people fail as traders?
Another common reason is undercapitalization. Sometimes I get
people at my seminars who want to start trading with $10,000. I tell
them that they should convert the $10,000 into hundred-dollar bills
and then flush them down the toilet one at a time because if they try
trading with $10,000, the result will be the same, but it will only
prolong the agony. Ten thousand dollars is not enough money to
trade.
All the reasons for failure you have mentioned so far relate to the
attitude with which people approach trading: a lack of commit-

ment or funds going in. What flaws besides attitude cause people
to fail as traders?
It's not a matter of intelligence, or even market knowledge. I've seen
people with good trading skills fail, and those without any previous
experience succeed. The main thing is that every trader has to be
honest about his or her weakness and deal with it. If you can't learn to
do that, you will not survive as a trader.
Several years ago, an option trader who had scheduled to come
visit me at my office asked whether I would be willing to review his
trades for the past year before he came. I agreed because I genuinely
want to teach people how to trade.
He said, "I had 84 percent winning trades last year."
"Good," I said, "did you make any money?"
"Well, no," he answered, "I lost money for the year."
"Then the 16 percent is what we need to focus on," I said.
"That's why I wanted to send you my trades."
He sent me his trades, and I found that out of about four hundred
trades he did that year, five trades accounted for almost all his losses.
At first I didn't notice any common denominator. Then I checked the
dates and discovered that four out of five of these trades had been
done on expiration Fridays. I called him up and said, "I found your
problem."
"Oh good," he said. "What did you find?"
"Four out of five of your big losing trades were done on an expira- .
tion Friday."
"Oh, I knew that," he answered.
"Well, there is a way to fix this problem," I told him.
"Good, good," he said. "I knew you would have the answer."
"Don't trade on expiration Fridays."
"Mark, what are you talking about? Those are the most exciting
trading days."
"You have to decide whether you want excitement or you want to
make money. Quit trading on expiration Fridays. Go out and do something else on those days."
"Oh no, I can't do that," he said. "I can't give up the action on that
day. I'll figure out how to fix the problem."

"If you don't fix this problem by quitting," I told him, "it's going to
quit you."
Six months later, he was bankrupt. He knew indicators inside and
out. He was a workaholic and very intelligent. He even knew how to
take losses most of the time. But he just couldn't stand aside on that
one trading day. He had identified his problem, but he couldn't fix it.
Any other stories come to mind about traders you tried to help,
but who ultimately failed?
A few years ago, a man who attended one my seminars called me for
advice. He told me that he wanted to become a full-time trader but
had been unsuccessful so far. I gave him some advice about devising
a business plan for his trading. He called a couple more times for
additional advice. On one such call, his voice suddenly dropped. "I
can hardly hear you," I said. "We must have a bad connection."
"No," he whispered, "my wife just walked into the room."
"She doesn't know how much money you have lost, does she?" I
asked.
"No," he admitted.
"You have to tell her the truth. If she doesn't support you, and you
are fearful of her, nothing I teach you will help. If you keep trading
secretly, one of two things will happen: you will lose all your money, or
you will lose your marriage." He didn't listen to me, and he ended up
losing both.
What happened during September—December 1997? It was the
only sustained losing period I saw in the statements you sent me
and completely uncharacteristic in terms of your other trading. I
believe you lost over $300,000 during a four-month period.
I find that as the year progresses, I tend not to do as well. I just chalk
it up to my getting tired or sloppy toward the end the year.
But that doesn't explain it. This period was so much worse than
any other period, including the latter part of other years, that
there must be some other explanation.
[Cook rambles on further, trying to explain in general terms why he
may have done poorly during that period. Then finally, a memory
clicks.] Ah, you're absolutely right! I had forgotten about it. In July
1997, I fell and severely tore the ACL in my knee [a ligament in the

center of the knee], I wore a brace and was on pain medication. I
finally had an operation in December.
Did the pain medication make you drowsy?
It threw my focus off. I wasn't as sharp. I felt as if I were moving in
slow motion. I was also worried that 1 might never be able to play basketball with my kids again.
It sounds like you were depressed during that period.
Yes, I had gone from being physically active, both in sports and on the
farm, to barely being able to walk. I put on over thirty pounds during
those few months.
If your operation was in December, then your trading seemed to
recover immediately afterward.
Yes it did. I felt so much better. I threw myself into rehabilitation,
although I probably overdid it. I'm a gung ho type of guy. Two weeks
after my operation, the physical therapist came over to me while I was
on the weight machine and said, "We do lots of rehabilitation on ACL
injuries. I will tell you just one thing, and maybe it will hit home: No
one we had in here after ACL reconstructive surgery ever lifted as
much weight as you are now. Do you get my point?" I backed off
immediately.
[About a week after the interview, I spoke to Cook on the phone,
and he told me he had asked his assistant, Stacie, about her impression of him during this injury period. She told him, "You couldn't
walk. You even had trouble sitting because you were in such discomfort. You had pain in your face. You were just a shell of yourself, and it
poured over into your trading. Once you had your operation, you were
like a different person."]
Were there any other periods where personal turmoil interfered
with your trading?
In September 1995, my father had a heart attack. He was in intensive
care for eight days. During that period, I punished myself by doing
every damaging trading mistake in the book.
Why did you feel responsible for your dad's heart attack?
He worked so hard. On the day he had his heart attack, it was over
ninety degrees, and he was baling hay. My mom told me that he felt a
little sick during the middle of the day, came back in, and then went

H A R V E S T I N G S&P PROFITS

back out to work. He baled four hundred bales of hay on the day he
had his heart attack. I thought, "He's out there doing all that work for
$700 or $800, and I'm sitting in an air-conditioned office, making
$7,000 or $8,000." It didn't seem right to me, so I had to punish
myself. When I look back on the trades I did during that period, it
almost seems like temporary insanity.

Then you weren't doing your regular trades.
Oh no, I was doing almost the exact opposite.
Were you aware of what you were doing at the time?
I didn't care; I was totally despondent. I think I really wanted to lose
money.

For your style of trading, you have to watch the market closely all
day long. Have you had any situations where interruptions cost
you money?
The trade that sticks in my mind most was in January 1987. It was my
secretary's birthday. I never leave the office during the day when I
have a position on. But on that day, trying to be a nice guy, I took her
out for lunch to celebrate her birthday. When I left the office, the
option position I had on was up $30,000. When I came back after
lunch, the position was down $40,000. I couldn't believe the quotes.
I always remember that trade. Now I give my secretary a card for her
birthday [he chuckles].
It sounds like a very expensive lunch. Are you sure you would
have covered the position if you had stayed in the office?
Absolutely. That's one of my cardinal rules. I never let a profit turn
into a loss.
I've exhausted my questions. Any final words?
I represent the average guy out here in rural America, in the U.S.
Midwest. I sit in my great-grandfather's farmhouse, staring at a computer screen, and I can make a living trading. That's why I believe
there is hope for people anywhere to do this. But you have to be willing to work hard and pay your tuition, which is the money you lose
while you're learning how to trade. People ask me all the time, "How
long do you think it will take for me to succeed?" I tell them, "three to
five years of twelve-hour days and losing money." Very few people
want to hear that.

It's not over until you give up. Mark D. Cook didn't just
encounter initial failure, he failed repeatedly and spectacularly, losing his entire trading stake several times, and on one occasion, more
than his entire net worth. Yet despite that inauspicious beginning
and nearly a decade of false starts, Cook never gave up and ultimately triumphed, developing the methodology, business plan, and
discipline that allowed him to extract triple-digit returns from the
market with astounding consistency.
In contrast to the conventional wisdom, which advises looking for
trades that offer a profit potential several times as large as the risk,
most of Cook's trading strategies seek to make one dollar for every
two dollars risked. This observation provides two important lessons,
neither of which is that using a wider risk level than the profit objective is a generally attractive approach.
First, looking at the probability of winning is every bit as essential
as looking at the ratio of potential gain to risk. As Cook demonstrates, a strategy can lose more on losing trades than it gains on
winning trades and still be a terrific approach if its probability of
winning is high enough. Conversely, a strategy could make ten times
as much on winning trades as it gives up on losing trades and still
lead to financial ruin if the probabilities are low enough. Consider,
for example, betting continuously on the number seven in roulette:
when you win, you will win thirty-six times what you bet, but if you
play long enough, you are guaranteed to lose all your money because
your odds of success are only one in thirty-eight.
Second, in choosing a trading approach, it is essential to select a
method that fits your personality. Cook is happy to take a small profit
on a trade but hates to take even a small loss. Given his predisposition, the methodologies he has developed, which accept a low
return/risk ratio on each trade in exchange for a high probability of
winning, are right for him. But these same methods could be very
uncomfortable, and hence unprofitable, for others to trade. Trading
is not a one-size-fits-all proposition; each trader must tailor an individual approach.

M A R K D. C O O K ?
Personal problems can decimate a trader's performance. Consider, for example, Cook's uncharacteristic large losses during his
knee injury and his father's heart attack. The moral is: If you are
experiencing physical or emotional distress, either stop trading altogether, or reduce your trading activity to a level at which you can't do
much damage. If Cook himself is guilty of any serious trading sin
during the past decade, it is failing to heed this advice—a mistake he
is determined not to repeat.
Most aspiring traders underestimate the time, work, and money
required to become successful. Cook is adamant that to succeed as a
trader requires a complete commitment. You must approach trading
as a full-time business, not as a part-time interest. Just as in any
entrepreneurial venture, you must have a solid business plan, adequate financing, and a willingness to work long hours. Those seeking
shortcuts need not apply. And even if you do everything right, you
should still expect to lose money during the first few years—losses
that Cook views as tuition payments to the school of trading. These
are cold, hard facts that many would-be traders prefer not to hear or
believe, but ignoring them doesn't change the reality.

ALPHONSE "BUDDY" FLETCHER JR.
Win-Win Investing

Every investment expert knows that you can't achieve high returns, say an
average of 40 or 50 percent per year, without taking on significant risk.
Apparently, no one ever bothered to explain this basic concept to
Alphonse Fletcher Jr. Otherwise he would have known better than to try
to generate consistent high returns, with hardly any losing months, as he
has done since placing his first trade thirteen years ago.
Fletcher began his financial career at Bear Stearns as a researcher
and trader of the firm's own funds. After two very successful years, he
was lured away to a similar position at Kidder Peabody* Although he
loved working at Bear Stearns and was very reluctant to leave, Kidder's
job offer was just too lucrative to turn down. In addition to his salary, Kidder promised Fletcher a 20 to 25 percent bonus on his trading profits.
In his first year at Kidder, Fletcher made over $25 million for the firm.
Instead of the $5-million-plus bonus he had anticipated, however, Kidder
paid him $1.7 million, with a promise to make additional deferred payments over the next few years. When Fletcher protested that the company was reneging on its deal with him, he was told he shouldn't
complain because he was "one of the highest paid black males" in the
country. One company officer is alleged to have commented that the
bonus Kidder was obligated to pay Fletcher was "simply too much money
to pay a young black man." These quotes were taken from the court transcripts in the suit that Fletcher brought against his former employer with
*The facts related to Fletcher's employment at Kidder Peabody were obtained from
court-case summaries and articles appearing in Business Week (October 24, 1994),
The New Yorker (April 29 & May 6, 1996), and Fortune (July 5, 1999).
127

A L P H O N S E "BUDDY" FLETCHER JR.

other specifics derived from published articles; Fletcher himself was very
reluctant to discuss the details of the episode. Fletcher was ultimately
awarded an additional $ 1.26 million by an arbitration panel. After leaving
Kidder, Fletcher founded his own firm, Fletcher Asset Management.
I visited Fletcher on one of those brutally hot, humid New York City
summer afternoons. I always prefer to walk in cities whenever possible as
opposed to taking taxis or public transportation. But 1 was running a bit
late for my scheduled interview with Fletcher, so I hopped a cab. The
Midtown traffic was horrendous. After going two short blocks in five minutes, about one-third of my normal walking pace, I handed the driver a
$5 bill and jumped out, still a mile and a half from my destination.
By the time I arrived at Fletcher Asset Management, I must have
looked as if I had walked through a shower. The offices are located in a
120-year-old limestone townhouse on the Upper East Side. I stepped
through the large, heavy wooden door, moving from the heat and noise of
the modern city into a cool, quiet, and elegant interior. The entranceway
led to a large circular reception area with soaring ceilings and a handcrafted spiral wooden staircase that rose to the offices on the four upper
floors. The walls were painted in warm, rich complementary colors,
which when combined with the lofty ceilings, wide ornamental moldings,
and antique furniture created an atmosphere of a different time and
place, far removed from New York City circa 1999. If I were filming a
movie with a scene at an old-line Swiss investment firm catering to clients
with tens or hundreds of millions of dollars, this would be the perfect set.
I was led into a library that served as a waiting room and was offered
a large pitcher of ice water, which I rapidly gulped down as soon as the
attendant left the room. After about ten minutes, I was escorted up the
staircase to Fletcher's office.
It is clear that Fletcher has deliberately created an environment that
is in striking contrast to the typical modern Manhattan office. The result
is very effective in creating a tranquil sanctuary from the frenzy of the
city outside, with a sense of style that must send a subliminal message to
investors: your money will be safe here.
Fletcher, however, doesn't need impressive offices to attract investors.
His performance results almost defy belief. That is not to say that he has
the highest returns around—not by a long shot. However, those who look

WIN-WIN INVESTING

only at returns suffer from extreme naivete. It is not return that matters,
but rather return relative to risk. Here Fletcher shines. The Fletcher
Fund, his flagship fund, founded in September 1995, has realized an
average annual compounded return of 47 percent. Although this is quite
impressive on its own, here is the lacker: He has achieved this return
with only four losing months, the largest of these being a minuscule 1.5
percent decline.
Fletcher's track record prior to launching his fund is, if anything, even
more astounding. During the first four years of its existence, Fletcher's
firm, which was founded in 1991, primarily traded its own proprietary
account. This account, which was traded at much higher leverage than
his fund, garnered an incredible average annual compounded return of
380 percent during that period. (Although returns in these earlier years
