
A : Sometimes it could be small like a 10, 20, 30 contracts, but
usually a few hundred. There are some days when I'll trade a
thousand contracts.

192


THE TREASURE HUNTER

: More important than even the size is how many trades do
you do during those three hours? Are those quick succession of
trades? Or do are you usually building one position that you let go
at the end of that session?

A : No it’s quick. I’m getting in and out and doing things and
reacting to what’s going to on.

Q:s0 you're moving between 20 to 100 round turns during that
three-hour period?

A : Oh easily, easily. Yes. It’s active and intense.

: You could be holding these trades for minutes at a time
literally?

A: Oh yeah. I don’t recall if it was last night or the night before,
but I got in and out in about two minutes on a trade.

Q.: Do you feel like this is the same way you were trading when
you were in the pit? Very quickly? In and out scalping? Or have
you changed?

A : It’s very similar but the electronic element is slightly different
than open outcry. There are no computer, phone, or fax that can
react as fast as a human can react in an open outcry pit. I mean, I
could literally do three things at once in open outcry, and I’m lucky
to get one guy on the phone in electronic trading. So, I mean, I
could be hitting bids in the pit, yelling at my clerk to get another
guy who had an order that was resting, that I want to hit, and
hedging myself immediately in open outcry within a microsecond.
To do that electronically, to get one person on the deal, you got
to phone them, then you got to execute that, then you have to key

193


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

it in, and if you're like me, and sometimes not so finger friendly,
you've got to study, buy 10 futures, go.

: Most of the contracts that you're dealing with are still phone-
based transactions, they're not pure electronic, straight-through
processing?

A : What I find in the foreign markets is that it’s electronic, but
a lot of it seems like an over-the-counter Forex-type thing. Where
you're also talking to the guys and kind of just booking a deal
through electronically, especially with complex options spreads.

: When it’s not simply an outright position, and you have
to do lots of different spreads, is it very difficult to do it purely
electronically?

A : You got it.

QO: How do you find these brokers—usually by word of mouth
or do you have connections? This must be particularly difficult in
the foreign markets.

A : You pretty much go there and they get flushed out of the wood-
work. They'll see you on the screen offering or bidding. They'll
phone the brokerage firm that you’re trading with. That firm will
contact you and say, “Hey, we're getting calls from this broker.
They want to do this structure, are you interested?” Yes. So that’s
pretty much it and you go to whatever functions are there, like if
there’s a hedge fund conference. You go and meet all of the people.
If there’s agriculture conference somewhere on a new commodity
exchange, you go. A lot of these exchanges or a lot of these associ-
ations have their annual meeting, where the official business gets
done and then afterwards there is a party. You go to the party, even
though you might not be able to vote at their board or whatever,
you go to the party afterwards, and you meet a lot of the people in
the markets.

194


THE TREASURE HUNTER

OQ: Now that you're trading by yourself, do you ever have people
that you speak to on a daily basis? Or are you pretty much doing it
on your own?

A : L always try to talk to a lot of different people in the markets.

Q - Every single day?

A : Yes. People whose opinion I respect, and also there’s the
proverbial dumb money. I think it’s valuable information. You
want to talk to as many people as you can and decide whether
you're going to trade or fade these guys today, It gives you a huge
amount of information. For example, ifthe markets first rally today
because a crop report came out and it’s looking good, and you’ve
talked to four people, two really good traders—who say, “Yeah
we're bullish, we'll get long today.”—and two guys who are slow
behind the curve—and they also said it’s obvious that it’s going
higher today—and all the sudden the market starts acting really
bad at the end of the day, that might give me the guts to go short
or to bet against these guys or to squeeze it on the downsize.

Q.:s0 a lot of sentiment work goes into your analysis?

A : Yes. I want to talk to people in the market every day. You try to
pick the people who you think are the most sophisticated traders,
but you also get sentiment from a broad spectrum of people.

Qut sounds like most of your strategies are in and out, in and
out, do you ever carry anything overnight?

A: Yes.

Is it in a different portfolio, same portfolio, and/or different
broker?

A : Yes. I'll describe it as briefly as I can. I have one limited
liability company that I set up for my aggressive trading. That’s

195


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

where the fast-and-furious stuff is going to be done and that is
my trading business. Then I have two other accounts that I use,
which sometimes are as frenetic as the trading level. But I would
characterize them more as my investment accounts. In the trading
account, I can have stuff held anywhere from a second to a few
minutes. Sometimes the nature of the option market is such that
you'll have stuff on for a year or so because you put them on, and
you just can’t get out of them. So that’s why I would say anything
from a few seconds to up to maybe a year maximum. Then, on
my investment accounts, that’s where it’s a more buy and hold.
I wouldn't call it exactly that because I’m a trader, but it’s more
longer term. I might even have structures that I end up holding
for two or three years.

: These structures you're talking about, are they essentially
complex option and futures strategies that have some sort of either
positional or volatility bias to them?

A : With the structures I’ve found some great securities. Two of
my favorites are betting on the Japanese stock market using the
Nikkei MITTS, the Market Index Tracking Securities. These are
great because they have option-related properties, bond-related
properties, and allow you to take a very long-term, safe bet on the
Japanese stock market.

: Structures actually mean unique instruments that you find
across the world, which contain lots of different properties of the
common instruments that we have in the United States?

A : Yes. I’m doing one now that’s more along your line of business,
I'm bullish long term on the Asian currencies. I just think that at
some stage one of the ways that these imbalances are going to get
cured is the Chinese currency and all the tag-a-longs, like Japan,
and Singapore, and Malaysia, are going to get stronger as well.
It’s been hard to pick that thing. The currencies acted really badly
earlier this year, which was surprising to me. So one low-risk way
that I’ve decided to take advantage of that is to buy one of these

196


THE TREASURE HUNTER

securities where it’s got five Asian currencies in it. It’s trading
at a discount to what the bank is going to pay in 2008 when it
expires. So the way I’ve structured it is I’m either going to eam
4 percent a year in the basket of Asian currencies, or make big
on the appreciation and interest. The basket has the Korean won,
Taiwan dollar, Australian dollar, Indian rupee, and the Malaysian
ringitt, and I roughly added up the rates and saw that if 1 hopped
on a plane and went to the different countries, the rates would not
be much different. Singapore’s interest rate is about three, Taiwan
is like one or two, Thailand is like six, and I found out that if I
physically went over there and opened up accounts in the four or
five different countries, I would get about the same yield, but waste
money on a plane ride. So I bought this security, which is going
to pay me 4 percent plus the rate of return of these currencies,
which is a great low risk way to play the Asian boom, and if it never
happens, I'll make 4 percent in dollars, which is not the end of the
world. I’m going to hold that for two or three years.

Q.: How do you discover these hidden gems across the world?

A: I read everything in terms of investments letters, and I talk to
a lot of different people in the business. It fascinates me. This is a
treasure hunt to me and I’m Indiana Jones. I’m not looking for the
Holy Grail. I’m looking for good investments. I want to go around
and find treasure just like Indiana Jones. I’m not looking for great
artifacts. I’m looking for great trades. And I’m going to hear that
from people and from newsletters.

Q.:can you tell us how many newsletters do you subscribe to?

A : One of them that I think is really great is the Gartman Letter.
I subscribe to that. Another one I subscribe to is Grant’s Interest
Rate Observer. Some that I’ve subscribed to in the past include
Harry Shultz’s letter and Richard Russell’s Dow Theory.

197


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- would you say 10 or 20 newsletters then?

A : I'd say about 10 newsletters.

Q.: do you also read blogs on the Internet now?

A : Yes I do, I go into all the investment chat rooms to see what’s
hot and what’s not, and what I want to trade with and what I want
to fade against. So, yes, that’s part of the sentiment stuff. In fact,
there’s a huge glaring gap in sentiment, especially overseas. They
don’t have the bulls/bears consensus like they do here. They don’t
have the Daily Sentiment Index.

Q.: What about the Commitment of Trader's Report?

A : Well, the Commitment of Trader's Report they also don’t have.
You need to gauge sentiment a little bit differently over there, and
one of the good ways is the blogs or talking to a handful of people
every day. Finding out what sentiment is like in those markets is
basically the same as doing an informal poll.

Q.:s0 it sounds like you spend about four hours trading every
single day?

A : At least.

Q.: and then three or four hours doing research and reading,
and contacting people?

A : My trading day could be anytime. At a minimum, it’s going to
be about three hours, most of it trading. It could also depend on if

I’m doing stuff first overseas and then moving to the U.S. markets.
If I’m doing a campaign of buying Canadian royalty trust and

198


THE TREASURE HUNTER

writing options against it, that could maybe extend my day longer.
Sometimes I find opportunities where you can arbitrage the S&P
MITTS and mark their strikes against S&P futures and options. So
it takes time to build that type of thing. In that scenario I might be
trading three hours overseas, maybe about another three or four
in U.S., so seven or eight hours of trading total. Then each day I’ve
got about an hour or two minimum of preparation. I look at what
my positions are, what do I look like, what are the risk scenarios of
what I’m doing. What trades do people want to do, I have to risk
study them and see if can handle this in my option book, etc.

: You're still making sure what your worst-case scenarios are
every single time.

A:yes.

Q.: Before you place the trade on?

Avyes.

: During risk analysis review, do you have any hard-and-fast
rules per trade? For example, do you say, I never want to lose more
than 5 percent of my equity in any given trade? Do you have any

kind of formulas that you follow internally to always control your
risk?

A : When I’m doing the trades, in those options scenarios I don’t
actually have a fixed fraction of my capital that I'll commit, but
I look at the risk versus the reward ratio. In other words, when
I’m right, what’s the amount of money that I’m making given my
scenario? When I’m wrong, what’s the amount I’m losing? The
amount I’m the losing—can I live with that? I mean, is this an
earth-shattering thing? Or is this a percentage of capital that is
devastating and mind-blowing to me in terms of intellectually being
wrong and stuff—but it’s not going to put me out of the business?

199


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Quis there any percentage number that you could lay down that
would be just psychologically hobbling? On one trade?

A : Yes. I don’t like to lose more than 5 percent on a position or
any amount of capital that I’m committing. So, if I'm in some type
of deal and this is threatening my account equity by five percent,
warning bells and warning alarms are going off. I’m not quite
interested in putting myself in that situation. You guys had asked
what is your number one rule of trading and it actually occurred to
me, this might have been about a year ago I was on a business trip
in the Caribbean and the movie came on, Million Dollar Baby. 1
think Clint Eastwood would be a great commodity trader because
he told the Million Dollar Baby that rule number one in boxing is
to protect yourself. And I think the same is true in trading, if you
love trading. If you want to trade, your capital is everything. So if
you want to be a great trader, you have got to protect that capital.
No capital, no trading, no life and its the same whether you want
to be a Million Dollar Baby in boxing or a Million Dollar Baby
in commodity trading, I think it’s the same thing—protect your
capital. I don’t have solid formulas or Kelly formulas, or betting
things like that. But I do study what I’m risking on each trade, what
the risk reward ratios are. What my worst-case scenarios are, and
is it strategically threatening to me.

Q.Now along those lines, how often do you revisit your earnings?
Do you pay yourself on a weekly, monthly, yearly, or quarterly
basis?

A : I'll tell you how I deal with it honestly, I get paid w-e-a-k-l-y
[laughter]. Very weakly. In other words, I live below my means.
It’s like I said, capital to me is the most important thing, I want to
be in the trading business, that’s what I know and love. So what
I do is I pay myself as weakly as possible. I think that you asked
about how you deal with the pressure to make money. I think
that the pressure on a trader to make money is what kryptonite
is to Superman. It will hurt you. I am not aware of any market

200


THE TREASURE HUNTER

wizard who thinks that putting pressure on themselves to make
money is a good thing. You have got to get as far away from that as
possible.

: Yet how do you pragmatically resolve the need to have spend-
ing cash with the psychological necessity of not worrying about that
in order to be successful?

A : All I can say is the following. I don’t put any unnecessary
pressure on myself to make money. You have to meet your daily
expenses, you have to meet your medical bills, you have to meet
your insurance, you have meet your basic life expenses, put food
on the table. If you are going to go into trading and you can’t do
that, then don’t go into it. Don’t live on a shoestring. Meeting your
basic life expenses is one margin call that you have to meet and
don’t think otherwise because you can’t live in a cocoon. I wish
it were different, that you could isolate yourself in cocoon, not
have medical expenses, not have basic life expenses or insurance
and trade until you became profitable, but the world isn’t like
that.

: If you were to give advice to a starting trader, how many
months of daily basic bare bones expenses would you recommend
he have, aside from his trading capital, in order for him to give it a
fair shot?

A : I never looked at it that way. When I went into trading in
the ring for myself, I knew that this was now a time where I could
end up with no paycheck. I started coming up with contingency
plans—if I wasn’t making money in the ring or if I lost my $25,000
capital, what would I be doing? It was stuff like friends lined up
who were loading UPS trucks at night making $8 an hour and I
had them put me on a list there, where in a month or so, I'll be
doing these trucks and I'll be back making a living again. So I had
fallback provisions where, if trading didn’t work out, I was going

201


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

to pay the bills by doing things like delivering pizza and unloading
trucks.

Q.-you are much older now, so has your perspective changed on
that?

A : Well, I've been fortunate now where I built up capital and
what I’ve done is compartmentalized my life. So I put stuff in trusts
or charitable foundations, things that I can’t touch, things that you
can’t sue me for, things that, if I blow out trading, they can’t get. I
now have stop-losses on my life in terms of assets, which are better
than working at UPS or delivering pizza. That will deliver me at
least a living if I go out tomorrow and totally screw something up on
a few hundred lots or few thousand lots or miscalculate something
and then lose everything. I'll still be able to live.

Q: Doe you have a goal in terms how much you're looking to earn
every day?

A : No. I just think it’s crazy when people always say, for example,
“I'm going to aim for $300 a day.” “I’m going to make a billion
dollars this year.” You know, to me that’s nonsense, I mean, we live
in an uncertain world you cannot quantify these things. You’re not
selling encyclopedias door to door in a market. You're not selling
Amway products. I mean you don’t know what’s going to happen
in the markets. You don’t know what opportunities will be given
to you and whether you can capitalize on them. What I’ve seen
in the markets is this: We live in an uncertain and ever-changing
world, and it’s been like that ever since I got into trading and even
now it is. What I have found out is that opportunities come along
from time to time. Some of them you're able to capitalize on and
expand your capital. What I try to do is the Million Dollar Baby
thing: protect my capital at all cost. Analyze it, check the worst-
case scenarios, check the risk/reward ratio, try to set yourself up
so you're not committing more than 5 percent of your capital on

202


THE TREASURE HUNTER

any one day, trade, deal, or whatever. And then wait for these
opportunities to come along, because you will find them. If you are
patient, you'll see a time where you're in the zone and the markets
are behaving just like your script says it should—now let’s give it
gas and try to build up some equity and then, when it comes back
to the situations where I don’t know what’s going on, things are
getting too uncertain. Then you turn to protecting your capital,
maybe even go to cash and just clear your head. So that’s how I
deal with it, and for me to tell you, oh my goal is to make $300
a day, I mean, yeah, that’s nonsense—or if I want to think big
and think positive like Donald Trump and make millions of dollars
a year. That’s just nonsense to me to either way understate or
overstate your goals. I mean maybe 10 years ago I used to do that
and I would tell my dad this year is starting off really slow, I think
I’m going to struggle to make a $100,000 trading on the floor this
year. But I might end up making $700,000 that year. Then there’d
be other years where I think, oh, this year is great, I’m going to
make a killing, ’'m going to make probably a million this year and
Tend up making $150,000. I just found that it is ridiculous to think
that way.

QO: Your sense of forecasting your own equity is the worst?

A. It’s the worst, it’s horrible. Some people take this stuff seriously
though, which brings me to another war story: Several years ago I
was on the floor of the New York Commodity Exchanges and there
was a prominent trader who used to work for Richard Dennis of
the Turtles fame. I overheard him talking to his clerk about a chart
of his account equity, and he was going on and on about how
perfect the chart was and how this could mean that new highs in
his account equity were just around the corner. Well, I couldn’t
resist, and so I went up to these guys and asked: “Wow what chart
is that because I want to sell the heck out of that market?” He
looked up at me as if he wanted to kill me and then exploded at me
with every curse word you could imagine. I mean this guy really
believed in this stuff.

203


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: any other worst trades?

A : No. The baptism under fire coffee trade, that’s the worst.
Anything worst than that and I would not be here today talking to
you guys about trading, if I were in your office today, I would be
asking you guys something along the lines of who ordered the Big
Mac [laughter].

Q.: Do you average down into a trade?

A : This is going to cause some controversy—but a qualified yes.
Let me stop the controversy though as much as I can. I realize as
much as anyone else that averaging down has led to some of the
biggest debacles in our industry. The idea of averaging down is
where if you are buying an asset and then it goes against you. You
start buying more. You are getting hurt by reverse compounded
interested. Not only are you wrong, not only is your net worth
declining, but you're also increasing your risk. Now I know that
is a recipe for disaster and most people should not even do it.
However, there is one other thing that’s been happening in the
past few years and that is you identify a great asset class that you
want to own for whatever reason. You're thinking about buying it,
and you're sitting there and sitting there, and because of the world
we live in and the amount of money that is going into these markets,
all the managed money as well, and the amount of people who are
using black box or some type of trend following system designed to
basically exploit trends. You might be watching this asset class with
a whole bunch of other trend followers. They're going to get into
the asset class make it go further and further away from you. You
have a choice to make because you may think that this is a great
asset class that I want to own it. I hope to own it at lower levels, but
the trend guys are in there and they're pushing it and pushing and
it’s getting away from me. I’ve got to buy some now and get some
exposure because the worst thing you can ever do is be right about
an investment, researched it, it’s correct and it goes dramatically
in your favor and you're not even on board. I mean that’s going to
lead to huge underperformance or maybe losses for the year. So

204


THE TREASURE HUNTER

they're going to get in, you're going to get in with them, and the
Achilles heel of every trend follower is this following sentence: You
cannot pick up a trading book without reading it. In fact, you’ve
heard it all before. To be a good trend follower you've got to cut
your losses and let your profits run. In that statement is the Achilles
heel of their trading strategy. They're going to cut losses, which
means they're going to take a lot of whipsaws and they're going
to let their profits ride, which means they've got to suffer huge
drawdowns before they get out of their trades. Let’s focus just on
the cut your losses side because that is what is applicable to my
averaging down. What happens is that I’m going to get in with
all the trend followers and you then have the reaction, which is
then going to cause the trend followers to further that reaction by
cutting their losses, which is going to create more pressure on the
down side. At that stage I may relook at this thing and say, “You
know, it still looks like a great asset class, I still want to own this
thing for whatever reason.” I know it’s gone against me, but I have
to commit more capital here. Usually I'll let it drop two, three, four
days against me, and I'll wait for it to show that the trend is going
to continue before I pull the trigger again.
