
Q.: What do you think got you? Did you use stops? Or was there
just so much volatility?

A : I wasn’t using stops when it comes to the stock market, I’ve
never used stops, ever—even on a short, which was probably a bad
move [laughter].

Q:s0 about six months later you blew up your account. What
made you want to get back into trading?

A : Right. I just felt like I'd made several big mistakes. I hadn’t
really listened to anyone in the market. I just thought I knew how
to do it. I didn’t want to listen to anyone, and didn’t feel the need
to diversify. But I also didn’t want this portfolio that just grows
5 percent per year. That didn’t interest me because this was money

217


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

I wanted to play with. So, when I went back in, I was a little more
conservative, I did a little more research on the company I would
trade in. I realized if the stock dips, I don’t feel bad buying a little
more, whereas before I would just exit out.

Q.- when did you introduce options trading to the mix?

A : Quite honestly, I got bored with the low volatility in the
stock market. Just after the big crash it just seemed like nothing
really moved and the stuff that did move everybody was playing.
So I wanted something that had more action and was more of
a challenge and, of course, options fit the bill. I don’t claim to
be an expert, but I got so lucky with my first trade in options. I
bought 30 dollar options and I sold them out for a 1,000 percent
profit.

Q.: How long did that take?

A : [was hooked [laughter]. That was over one-month and it was
a stock that you wouldn't think would move. It was amazing, I just

got lucky [laughter].

Q.: How were you introduced to options? Did you take a class or
seminar to learn how to trade them?

A : Well. our company actually gave us stock options, and I was
so curious about what it meant to have stock options. I started
doing research and figuring out what options were. I thought,
“Hey I could use a put and call to help me out in the market, to
hedge against different plays.” So I started using them especially
for companies that I thought were going to have the high level of
volatility coming up like the release of drug studies. Stuff like that
actually worked quite a bit for me.

218


THE NEWS JUNKIE

QO): Were you worried about things like time decay?

A : Yes. The time decay did kill me in the beginning. I hadn't
really factored that in. It took me a couple of trades to realize what
time does and I found myself holding some options that ended up
being worthless, of course.

Q.: pia you change anything in terms of your trading strategy
when you started trading options versus stocks or were you doing
them in tandem?

A : I tend to do both of them in tandem. One would hedge
the other. To be honest, I haven’t really traded very much in the
options market, probably only about a hundred times. So I don’t
have a lot of experience there, but I mostly use it for a hedge.
Eventually, though I sort of lost interest. I was doing well, but
I got more interested in my job and I said I'll just throw some
money in the account every once in a while and play with it. I just
had too much going on. But then I found currencies. That’s when
everything changed for me. I realized that was my passion. I would
start trading and I couldn't pull myself away from the computer. I
knew this was it.

Q.: How long ago did you discover currencies?

A : It’s been about three years.

Q.: How did you learn about currencies for the first time?

A : Quite honestly, I just did some research on the Internet. I
was curious about it. I traveled a little to Asia and Europe. So I
was aware of currency exchange. But I didn’t know how people
actually traded it. I did a lot of research online. I read a couple
books—basically taught myself. I couldn’t find anyone that knew
anything about currencies, quite honestly.

219


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

: Did you trade currencies based upon fundamentals like you
did stocks? Or did you introduce technicals into the picture?

A : Lactually mixed them. That’s when I really started getting into
the charting. I would say I traded the majors primarily at first. I
traded euro/U.S. dollars almost exclusively for the first few months
just to get a feel for the pair. Then I started seeing a lot of volatility
in the Japanese yen, so I wanted to trade it as well. Mostly I would
trade the majors. I tried to stay away from the crosses because I
didn’t really understand how they were working.

Q.:can you walk us through the thought process of one of your
trades?

A : Well, I am contrarian just about all the way. When everyone
is bullish, I’m normally looking the other direction. I always like
to look at a psychological level that seems to be a big mover,
and I like to be in the market around that time. If it’s a solid
figure, 1.25 in the euro/U.S. dollar, for example, I want to be there
when the market sells through that level. I realize that there’s risk
there, but technically I know a lot of people are getting pushed
out of their positions at that level. I want to be the guy selling
at that point if the market’s moving down. If the news pushes
it through a technical level, that’s just fantastic, and everybody's
going the other way. I know they're trapped because I’ve been
there.

Q.: How do you manage stops then?

A : I'm very careful with placement of my stops. I really don’t
like to use them unless I’m going to be away from the computer.
If I’m in front of it, I want full control because I want to make
the decision right then. I have a general idea every time I place
my trade where my stop will be. But I don’t want to just leave it
hanging out there for anyone to pick off.

220


THE NEWS JUNKIE

Q : How often do you actually end up staring at the screen,
because it sounds like you trade pretty actively?

A : Ido. See, I just don’t consider it work. So it’s not big deal. I
put my laptop up in front me, turn on the TV, and I’m watching
both at the same time. I would say if it’s an active day, maybe that
window from 2 A.M. until 10 or 11 A.M. Central Time, which is an
excellent time to trade for that eight- to ten-hour window.

Q.: You're up pretty early, you’re up overnight, basically.

A : ’'m awake when there’s volatility. I can feel it, and it wakes
me up.

Q.: What is a typical day like?

A : [ wake up at around 2 A.M. I'll watch the markets. If it’s
relatively quiet, then I'll go back to sleep for a few hours. I prefer
to trade from 2 A.M. to 4 AM., get a few hours sleep, and then the
U.S. news normally comes around 7 A.M. my time and that’s a good
time to be awake and ready to trade. The first thing I do when I am
ready to trade is, obviously, glance at the numbers see where the
market is trading. I want to know if it moved while I happened to
be asleep. Then I will read over the news, various market reports.
[ll start looking at the price charts, see what it did overnight, where
are the highs, where are the lows. I start getting an idea of which
pair I want to trade and start watching it and planning an entry
ahead of time. Of course, I know in advance when all the news is
coming out. So if there is a big news item, I won't position in front
of it, normally, I'll wait for it to come out.

Q.:s0 you are day trading during that time?

A : Normally I’m in and out within the time I just discussed.
Sometimes I'll hold a position. It really depends on why I entered

221


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

the trade. If the trade is still viable, I will stay in it. I don’t have a
problem holding it overnight.

Q. do you go in all in one shot or do you tend to average in to
get a better price on the move?

A : That to me is absolutely the key to my success. I average in
on every trade I make and I average out whenever I exit. I have
a tendency where, as soon as I buy a currency, it will dip 10 pips.
Before I would get upset, but now I love it because I feel like I can
get in at a better price, so I hope it dips another 10 pips. I know
the price I want, so I will average into that price.

Q.: How many times would you average into a trade?

A : Normally four’s about right. If it goes much further than four
average downs, I have to start considering whether this is the right
trade to be in, but 9 times out of 10 that strategy works for me.

Q.: You average out as well, right?

A : | most definitely do. I tend to get rid of half of it and then
bring my stop on a quarter of it up to a nice amount of profit, then
bring the stop on the other quarter just to my entry price.

Q.: How much leverage do you use?

A : Fifty to 1 or 100 to 1. Just depends on which account I’m
trading in.

Q.: do you care about carry or interest rates? If something has a
high negative interest rate does it matter to you?

A : It does to some degree. I won’t short something that has a
super-high interest rate right before they're about to do the turn

222


THE NEWS JUNKIE

because it will cost me aton of interest. However don’t worry about
it too much. I mean, I bought the British pound against the yen a
while back and enjoyed getting that interest. But to me the market
moves so quickly that it ends up meaning very little to me.

QO: Are there certain currencies that you might avoid trading?

A. I avoid the British pound/Japanese yen now. I don’t know why
I wanted to trade it that day. I have to be careful to pull myself
away from those because they look very interesting sometimes.

Q.: What about currencies that are your favorite?

A : Oh, I love to trade the New Zealand dollar, that one has a
personality of its own. So I can trade maybe euro/U.S. dollar and
it’s not really acting right, it’s not doing what I want it do and I can
take my mind off that trade. Go over and trade “Kiwi” and it’s just
a different animal. I enjoy trading that.

Q.: What type of timeframe charts do you like to look at?

A : It obviously depends on the trade. But right before a news
release, I normally like to look at a five-minute chart and see what
ranges we have been trading in. Where are people’s stops at?
Where am I looking for this market to go? Where do I want to get
out if I get into trouble? So normally the five-minute is the one I
like to look at.

Q:t sounds like you talk a lot about news. Do you feel like
you're usually positioning for news or reacting to it?

A : Normally I position after the news. I tend to go for the meat of
the move, I don’t care about the beginning and I don’t care about
end. I tried to catch the beginning of a move quite a few times and
ended up with a losing trade. Nowadays, I let the news come out.

223


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

I let the market move in its direction. I watch for the pullback,
make sure it’s not a reversal, and then normally I'll move in on that
pullback. If it’s a reversal I'll go short, if it’s just a pullback Tl go
long. On 7 out of 10 trades that’s a successful move.

Q.- what kind of resources do you use for news?

A: CNBC—but [ also have another news feed that I use through
my brokerage company.

: Do you have to pay for any extra services, or does it tend to
be pretty low cost?

A : It’s fairly low cost. I haven’t pulled the trigger on a big invest-
ment yet.

Q.: Do you pay for your news service provider?
A : I do, but I use a free charting package.

Q.: Do you feel it’s necessarily for a trader, a new trader, to have
fancy equipment and resources?

A : I think people need to start out learning the markets. I don’t
think that paying for that stuff up front is important because you
probably don’t know how to use it yet. So I would say no in the
beginning. But later on paying $50 or $100 a month for a service
is well worth it.

Q.: what about your equipment and set up? Do you have one
screen or three screens up at one time?

A : I use a variety of laptops. I do a lot of traveling so I have
four laptops. Normally I have two or three of them on at once with

224


THE NEWS JUNKIE

different accounts up. I have different brokerages. So it’s just easier
to have them on different machines so I can access them quickly.
That’s one area I feel strongly about investing a lot of money in
because you can control that aspect of having the best computers,
the best Internet connects, that’s all controllable. So if I can control
those, I want the best and I think I do have the best right now.

Q:in terms of various brokers that you look at, is there a reason
why you feel you need to look at so many market markers?

A : Yes. I think each one has its own thing that it does well. The
one I use now is very good. They execute orders well during the
news, but the spreads are a little bit high. So in times when there’s
no volatility or low volatility, I want to make a trade and maybe it’s
in a currency pair they don’t offer, I have another market maker
that I use.

: So basically you may alternate depending on who gives you
the best price on your trade, right?

A : Correct. It’s alternated based on best price. But it doesn’t
necessarily have to have the best spread because one of my bro-
kers has a variable spread the other is a fixed spread account. So,
depending on the news that I’m trading, I'll use one or the other.

Q.: Do you trade other products right now? Or just exclusively
FX?

A : FX and a little bit of gold. I still have long-term accounts in
stock. But I don’t trade those too often. Sometimes I'll pay myself
that way whenever I have a good month. I'll take 10 percent out of
my currency account, send it over to my long-term stock account,
and just throw it in there and invest in something.

225


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: Doe you have a weekly profit target or do you just look for

trends and wait for the account to build?

A : I honestly don’t have a pip goal because I don’t want to
pressure myself. I already have enough pressure. At the end of the
month I know if I’m trading well, and I know when I look that
statement what it’s going to represent. So I do want a month-over-
month gain. It doesn’t have to be 50 percent, but as long as it’s 5 to
10 percent over last month, then I feel like it’s been worth my time
and effort.

Q.- Let's say you have a handful of bad trades, at what point do
you decide to stop trading?

A : If 1 am having a bad streak, I'll try to change currency pairs.
I'll try to look at myself, analyze myself, figure out what I’m doing
wrong. I’ve had 5 to 10 trades in a row that just have gone against
me and I’m not sure why. At that point I did take a couple of weeks
off. I paper-traded for a while. I went on vacation. I did a few other
things, and when I came back I was fresh. I was ready to go. I
missed the markets a lot and got back in there and I was ready to

go.

Q.: Do you ever review your trades to see if there’s a common
mistake?

A : I probably should, but I don’t. Once a trade is over, it’s over
for me, and I don’t want to relive it [laughter].

Q_ : Throughout the week, how many trades do you think you
actually make?

A : Lwould say probably 5 to 10 a day, so maybe 50 to 60 a week.

226


THE NEWS JUNKIE

QO: That's pretty active. You mentioned that sometimes, when
you make profit, you put it back into your stock account. Do you
pay yourself in any other way?

A : I pay myself in equipment. I'll go out and buy something
nice—maybe a better computer. Last year I traveled to Asia be-
cause I made a lot of money on the yen, so I took myself to Japan.
I would take a small portion out of the account—and normally it’s
less than 10 percent of the profit, so it’s very little.

Q.: How is your performance now?

A : It’s been very good. This is one of the best years I’ve had. I
just feel like I have a grip on the market. I can feel how it should it
be traded, and once you get in that rhythm, you can just feel when
the market is going to move. To me it’s about market psychology,
knowing what other people are doing and trying to take advantage
of that. I’ve been on the wrong side of many trades. I want to make
sure that I’m not on that side and I’m on the side that’s taking the
money out.

Q.: 80 you don’t think you've changed anything in terms of
style?

A : The main thing I’ve changed is incorporating market psychol-
ogy. I never used that before. In the past I would simply see that
the euro dipped, so it must be on sale and therefore I’m going to
buy it, which was a very poor strategy in the beginning because,
as you know, once a trend starts it normally continues for quite
some time. So, in the beginning, I would make those mistakes. I
wouldn't get on the trend. I would fight a trend all the way. Now
I try to follow the trend and take it where it’s going to go. But if
everybody gets on board, that trend does mature and I know when
to get off.

227


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q : How do you gauge psychology? Do you look at the COT

[Commitment of Traders] reports or just watch price action?

A : do look at the COT report. But I really like to watch the price
action. Particularly around the figures or anywhere that I know I
would have placed my stop if I was on the other side of the trade,
those areas tend to make you the most money.

Q.: you said you tend to go in the direction of a trend and you
like to be in the meat of the move and not the beginning or the
end, but do you buy ahead of the number? Let’s say we're going
from 1.27 to 1.26 euro/dollar and it breaks down, do you tend to
just go ahead and buy at 1.26, assuming that it will reverse? Or do
you wait for some sort of signal of a reversal first before getting in?

A : Normally I like to watch the level break and I'll get in right
about when it’s breaking through that figure. This can be very
dangerous; it tends to move back up against you. But like I said,
I think 7 out of 10 times, once that level is breached, you may
get a minor pullback, I'll add more to the trade and it generally
continues in my direction.

Q.:s0 basically you pick key levels, right?

A : Right, the key levels are imperative.

Q.- Doe you have any alarm alerts in case something happens, or
your levels are breached, when you are asleep?

A : Yes, I certainly do. I normally sleep very close by my PC. Some
people think it’s strange. But I have my laptop open right beside
me. I also have a plasma TV that I can glance up at just to see the
numbers real quickly and fall back to sleep.

228


THE NEWS JUNKIE

Q, : spoken like a true trader. How does your family feel about
this?

A: Oh, they think I’m crazy [laughter]. They didn’t understand at
first. They thought I was spending probably too much time doing
it. But I’m not married and I don’t have any children, so that helps
a lot. I still visit my family and they’re aware of the number of
hours I spend doing this. After I explained the market to them and
how it works, they have, in fact, become pretty interested.

Q.:s0 have they started trading as well?

A : They haven't. I’m trying to train my sister to trade, but we'll
see how that turns out.

: Do you have any trading buddies or do you pretty much do
this by yourself?

A : I do talk to a few people. I try not to let them influence my
trade ideas because it just seems like you know the market is always
changing. So if I told you to go long the dollar right now, you know,
four hours from now I could be telling you to go short. So I try
not to make any predictions. But I do discuss the markets with a
few key people. We talk about things, but we never discuss exactly
what we're going to do. We just talk about the economy in general.

Q.- How often would you talk to them?

A : I would say that we probably brainstorm or talk markets once
a week. During my downtime, I do enjoy reading trade ideas on
different forums or online bulletin boards. I normally don’t take
any ideas from them, but I like to read what the consensus is, what
everyone is thinking, and I may go against that or I may go with it.

229


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:s0 forums are where you go most often for some interaction
with other traders, right?

A : Right. That’s the part that I enjoy, just the interaction with
other people who are doing the same thing. Trading can get a little
lonely [laughter].

Q.; Have you ever attended seminars or participated in any
courses?

A : L really haven't. ’'ve wanted to go to a few, but just haven’t
found the time.

Q.: Given your experience, do you think it’s important for new
traders to get formal training.

A : Obviously they have to start small. For me to learn I had to
lose money. So people say trade a demo account to get started.
Yes, if you want to learn the mechanics go ahead and open a demo
account. But if you want to really feel what it’s like to be in the
market, open a $1,000-2,000 account, get in there, trade some
mini lots, and start to learn what it’s like to get stopped out, how to
take profits. The most important thing is to get in there and start
educating yourself because the market will teach a lot. Then, later,
I think you should read some trading books.

Q:s0 practical trading is what you suggest people do to learn
the ropes?

A : Right and they have to start small. It is very different to trade
a demo versus a live account. I’ve tried to trade a demo account
and it loses my interest. I just have to have money on the line to
really pay attention and focus. I’ve done a little bit of paper trading

230


THE NEWS JUNKIE

and that’s fine when I’m in a down streak. But when it’s time to
trade, I want to be there—to have real money in the market.

: Let’s talk about your results. You said you've done very well
in the markets, what was your return like in the currency market
and in the stock markets?

A : My stock account I did pretty well in. I was able to double it
in 2002. At that point I got a little more conservative, and then I
started dabbling in the currency markets. I felt like it had higher
leverage. There’s a higher amount of money to be made. So once I
learned a little bit about it, I put a couple thousand in the account,
started trading it, and didn’t take long to blow that one up. I did
it again, started trading it, just like I trade stocks, got it up from
$2,000 to maybe $7,000 and then blew that one out.

Q.rm surprised you didn’t lose your confidence.

A: No [laughter], I knew I didn’t know what I was doing. So the
third time was the charm. I put in $10,000 this time and started
trading, actually drove it down to around $5,000 and then all of
a sudden I switched, things turned around, and I started having
successful trades. They would be small, $400 to $500, but they
would build. I would just check the statement at the end of the
month and realize, “Hey I made 70 percent. That’s pretty good.”
Just over the course of the year 2005, I went from $5,000 to over
$100,000. Well, the amazing part was I was sitting in an Internet
café in Thailand and I was trading. Itwas an NFP [nonfarm payroll]
day, I had like $60,000 in the account, I put $40,000 to work, the
trade went my way, and I realized when I closed out that day I
had a $100,000 in my account, and I thought, I’m on vacation. I’m
enjoying life. I just tipped everyone in the Internet café and bought
everyone drinks and it cost me $10. So I was very excited, but I
got a little scared once I had that amount of money in the account
because that was a lot for me at the time. I took some of it out and
