
greater part of it to St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, by whom it was studded with precious
stones, and deposited in the principal church of that city. It was carried away by the
Huns, by whom it was burnt, after they had extracted the valuable jewels it contained.
Fragments, purporting to have been cut from it were, in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries, to be found in almost every church in Europe, and would, if collected together
in one place, have been almost sufficient to have built a cathedral. Happy was the sinner
who could get a sight of one of them; happier he who possessed one! To obtain them the
greatest dangers were cheerfully braved. They were thought to preserve from all evils,
and to cure the most inveterate diseases. Annual pilgrimages were made to the shrines
that contained them, and considerable revenues collected from the devotees.
Next in renown were those precious relics, the tears of the Saviour. By whom and in what
manner they were preserved, the pilgrims did not often inquire. Their genuineness was
vouched by the Christians of the Holy Land, and that was sufficient. Tears of the Virgin
Mary, and tears of St. Peter, were also to be had, carefully enclosed in little caskets,
which the pious might wear in their bosoms. After the tears the next most precious relics
were drops of the blood of Jesus and the martyrs. Hair and toe-nails were also in great
repute, and were sold at extravagant prices. Thousands of pilgrims annually visited
Palestine in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, to purchase pretended relics for the home
market. The majority of them had no other means of subsistence than the profits thus
obtained. Many a nail, cut from the filthy foot of some unscrupulous ecclesiastic, was
sold at a diamond's price, within six months after its severance from its parent toe, upon
the supposition that it had once belonged to a saint. Peter's toes were uncommonly
prolific, for there were nails enough in Europe, at the time of the Council of Clermont, to
have filled a sack, all of which were devoutly believed to have grown on the sacred feet
of that great apostle. Some of them are still shown in the cathedral of Aix-la-Chapelle.
The pious come from a distance of a hundred German miles to feast their eyes upon
them.
At Port Royal, in Paris, is kept with great care a thorn, which the priests of that seminary
assert to be one of the identical thorns that bound the holy head of the Son of God. How it
came there, and by whom it was preserved, has never been explained. This is the famous
thorn, celebrated in the long dissensions of the Jansenists and the Molenists, and which
worked the miraculous cure upon Mademoiselle Perrier: by merely kissing it, she was
cured of a disease of the eyes of long standing. [Voltaire, Siecle de Louis XIV.]
What traveller is unacquainted with the Santa Scala, or Holy Stairs, at Rome? They were
brought from Jerusalem along with the true cross, by the Empress Helen, and were taken
from the house which, according to popular tradition, was inhabited by Pontius Pilate.
They are said to be the steps which Jesus ascended and descended when brought into the
presence of the Roman governor. They are held in the greatest veneration at Rome: it is
sacrilegious to walk upon them. The knees of the faithful must alone touch them in
ascending or descending, and that only after they have reverentially kissed them.
Europe still swarms with these religious relics. There is hardly a Roman Catholic church
in Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, or Belgium, without one or more of them. Even the

poorly endowed churches of the villages boast the possession of miraculous thigh-bones
of the innumerable saints of the Romish calendar. Aix-la-Chapelle is proud of the
veritable chasse, or thigh-bone of Charlemagne, which cures lameness. Halle has a
thighbone of the Virgin Mary; Spain has seven or eight, all said to be undoubted relics.
Brussels at one time preserved, and perhaps does now, the teeth of St. Gudule. The
faithful, who suffered from the tooth-ache, had only to pray, look at them, and be cured.
Some of these holy bones have been buried in different parts of the Continent. After a
certain lapse of time, water is said to ooze from them, which soon forms a spring, and
cures all the diseases of the faithful. At a church in Halle, there is a famous thigh-bone,
which cures barrenness in women. Of this bone, which is under the special
superintendence of the Virgin, a pleasant story is related by the incredulous. There
resided at Ghent a couple who were blessed with all the riches of this world, but whose
happiness was sore troubled by the want of children. Great was the grief of the lady, who
was both beautiful and loving, and many her lamentations to her husband. The latter,
annoyed by her unceasing sorrow, advised her to make a pilgrimage to the celebrated
chasse of the Virgin. She went, was absent a week, and returned with a face all radiant
with joy and pleasure. Her lamentations ceased, and, in nine months afterwards, she
brought forth a son. But, oh! the instability of human joys! The babe, so long desired and
so greatly beloved, survived but a few months. Two years passed over the heads of the
disconsolate couple, and no second child appeared to cheer their fire-side. A third year
passed away with the same result, and the lady once more began to weep. "Cheer up, my
love," said her husband, "and go to the holy chasse, at Halle; perhaps the Virgin will
again listen to your prayers." The lady took courage at the thought, wiped away her tears,
and proceeded on the morrow towards Halle. She was absent only three days, and
returned home sad, weeping, and sorrow-stricken. "What is the matter?" said her
husband; "is the Virgin unwilling to listen to your prayers ?" "The Virgin is willing
enough," said the disconsolate wife, "and will do what she can for me; but I shall never
have any more children! The priest! the priest!--He is gone from Halle, and nobody
knows where to find him!"
It is curious to remark the avidity manifested in all ages, and in all countries, to obtain
possession of some relic of any persons who have been much spoken of, even for their
crimes. When William Longbeard, leader of the populace of London, in the reign of
Richard I, was hanged at Smithfield, the utmost eagerness was shown to obtain a hair
from his head, or a shred from his garments. Women came from Essex, Kent, Suffolk,
Sussex, and all the surrounding counties, to collect the mould at the foot of his gallows. A
hair of his beard was believed to preserve from evil spirits, and a piece of his clothes
from aches and pains.
In more modern days, a similar avidity was shown to obtain a relic of the luckless
Masaniello, the fisherman of Naples. After he had been raised by mob favour to a height
of power more despotic than monarch ever wielded, he was shot by the same populace in
the streets, as if he had been a mad dog. His headless trunk was dragged through the mire
for several hours, and cast at night-fall into the city ditch. On the morrow the tide of
popular feeling turned once more in his favour. His corpse was sought, arrayed in royal
robes, and buried magnificently by torch-light in the cathedral, ten thousand armed men,

and as many mourners, attending at the ceremony. The fisherman's dress which he had
worn was rent into shreds by the crowd, to be preserved as relics; the door of his hut was
pulled off its hinges by a mob of women, and eagerly cut up into small pieces, to be made
into images, caskets, and other mementos. The scanty furniture of his poor abode became
of more value than the adornments of a palace; the ground he had walked upon was
considered sacred, and, being collected in small phials, was sold at its weight in gold, and
worn in the bosom as an amulet.
Almost as extraordinary was the frenzy manifested by the populace of Paris on the
execution of the atrocious Marchioness de Brinvilliers. There were grounds for the
popular wonder in the case of Masaniello, who was unstained with personal crimes. But
the career of Madame de Brinvilliers was of a nature to excite no other feelings than
disgust and abhorrence. She was convicted of poisoning several persons, and sentenced to
be burned in the Place de Greve, and to have her ashes scattered to the winds. On the day
of her execution, the populace, struck by her gracefulness and beauty, inveighed against
the severity of her sentence. Their pity soon increased to admiration, and, ere evening,
she was considered a saint. Her ashes were industriously collected, even the charred
wood, which had aided to consume her, was eagerly purchased by the populace. Her
ashes were thought to preserve from witchcraft.
In England many persons have a singular love for the relics of thieves and murderers, or
other great criminals. The ropes with which they have been hanged are very often bought
by collectors at a guinea per foot. Great sums were paid for the rope which hanged Dr.
Dodd, and for those more recently which did justice upon Mr. Fauntleroy for forgery, and
on Thurtell for the murder of Mr. Weare. The murder of Maria Marten, by Corder, in the
year 1828, excited the greatest interest all over the country. People came from Wales and
Scotland, and even from Ireland, to visit the barn where the body of the murdered woman
was buried. Every one of them was anxious to carry away some memorial of his visit.
Pieces of the barn-door, tiles from the roof, and, above all, the clothes of the poor victim,
were eagerly sought after. A lock of her hair was sold for two guineas, and the purchaser
thought himself fortunate in getting it so cheaply.
So great was the concourse of people to visit the house in Camberwell Lane, where
Greenacre murdered Hannah Brown, in 1837, that it was found necessary to station a
strong detachment of police on the spot. The crowd was so eager to obtain a relic of the
house of this atrocious criminal, that the police were obliged to employ force to prevent
the tables and chairs, and even the doors, from being carried away.
In earlier times, a singular superstition was attached to the hand of a criminal who had
suffered execution. It was thought that by merely rubbing the dead hand on the body, the
patient afflicted with the king's evil would be instantly cured. The executioner at
Newgate, sixty or seventy years ago, derived no inconsiderable revenue from this foolish
practice. The possession of the hand was thought to be of still greater efficacy in the cure
of diseases and the prevention of misfortunes. In the time of Charles II as much as ten
guineas was thought a small price for one of these disgusting relics.

When the maniac, Thom, or Courtenay, was shot, in the spring of 1838, the relic-hunters
were immediately in motion to obtain a memento of so extraordinary an individual. His
long, black beard and hair, which were cut off by the surgeons, fell into the hands of his
disciples, by whom they are treasured with the utmost reverence. A lock of his hair
commands a great price, not only amongst his followers, but among the more wealthy
inhabitants of Canterbury and its neighbourhood. The tree against which he fell when he
was shot, has already been stripped of all its bark by the curious, and bids fair to be
entirely demolished within a twelvemonth. A letter, with his signature to it, is paid for in
gold coins; and his favourite horse promises to become as celebrated as his master.
Parties of ladies and gentlemen have come to Boughton from a distance of a hundred and
fifty miles, to visit the scene of that fatal affray, and stroke on the back the horse of the
"mad Knight of Malta." If a strict watch had not been kept over his grave for months, the
body would have been disinterred, and the bones carried away as memorials.
Among the Chinese no relics are more valued than the boots which have been worn by an
upright magistrate. In Davis's interesting Description of the Empire of China, we are
informed, that whenever a judge of unusual integrity resigns his situation, the people all
congregate to do him honour. If he leaves the city where he has presided, the crowd
accompany him from his residence to the gates, where his boots are drawn off with great
ceremony, to be preserved in the hall of justice. Their place is immediately supplied by a
new pair, which, in their turn, are drawn off to make room for others before he has worn
them five minutes, it being considered sufficient to consecrate them that he should have
merely drawn them on.
Among the most favourite relics of modern times, in Europe, are Shakspeare's mulberrytree, Napoleon's willow, and the table at Waterloo, on which the Emperor wrote his
despatches. Snuffboxes of Shakspeare's mulberry-tree, are comparatively rare, though
there are doubtless more of them in the market than were ever made of the wood planted
by the great bard. Many a piece of alien wood passes under this name. The same may be
said of Napoleon's table at Waterloo. The original has long since been destroyed, and a
round dozen of counterfeits along with it. Many preserve the simple stick of wood; others
have them cut into brooches and every variety of ornament; but by far the greater number
prefer them as snuff-boxes. In France they are made into bonbonnieres, and are much
esteemed by the many thousands whose cheeks still glow, and whose eyes still sparkle at
the name of Napoleon.
Bullets from the field of Waterloo, and buttons from the coats of the soldiers who fell in
the fight, are still favourite relics in Europe. But the same ingenuity which found new
tables after the old one was destroyed, has cast new bullets for the curious. Many a one
who thinks himself the possessor of a bullet which aided in giving peace to the world on
that memorable day, is the owner of a dump, first extracted from the ore a dozen years
afterwards. Let all lovers of genuine relics look well to their money before they part with
it to the ciceroni that swarm in the village of Waterloo.
Few travellers stop at the lonely isle of St. Helena, without cutting a twig from the willow
that droops over the grave of Napoleon. Many of them have since been planted in

different parts of Europe, and have grown into trees as large as their parent. Relichunters, who are unable to procure a twig of the original, are content with one from these.
Several of them are growing in the neighbourhood of London, more prized by their
cultivators than any other tree in their gardens. But in relics, as in everything else, there is
the use and the abuse. The undoubted relics of great men, or great events, will always
possess attractions for the thinking and refined. There are few who would not join with
Cowley in the extravagant wish introduced in his lines "written while sitting in a chair
made of the remains of the ship in which Sir Francis Drake sailed round the world:"-And I myself, who now love quiet too, Almost as much as any chair can do, Would yet a
journey take An old wheel of that chariot to see, Which Phaeton so rashly brake.

MODERN PROPHECIES.
As epidemic terror of the end of the world has several times spread over the nations. The
most remarkable was that which seized Christendom about the middle of the tenth
century. Numbers of fanatics appeared in France, Germany, and Italy at that time,
preaching that the thousand years prophesied in the Apocalypse as the term of the world's
duration, were about to expire, and that the Son of Man would appear in the clouds to
judge the godly and the ungodly. The delusion appears to have been discouraged by the
church, but it nevertheless spread rapidly among the people. [See Gibbon and Voltaire for
further notice of this subject.]
The scene of the last judgment was expected to be at Jerusalem. In the year 999, the
number of pilgrims proceeding eastward, to await the coming of the Lord in that city, was
so great that they were compared to a desolating army. Most of them sold their goods and
possessions before they quitted Europe, and lived upon the proceeds in the Holy Land.
Buildings of every sort were suffered to fall into ruins. It was thought useless to repair
them, when the end of the world was so near. Many noble edifices were deliberately
pulled down. Even churches, usually so well maintained, shared the general neglect.
Knights, citizens, and serfs, travelled eastwards in company, taking with them their wives
and children, singing psalms as they went, and looking with fearful eyes upon the sky,
which they expected each minute to open, to let the Son of God descend in his glory.
During the thousandth year the number of pilgrims increased. Most of them were smitten
with terror as with a plague. Every phenomenon of nature filled them with alarm. A
thunder-storm sent them all upon their knees in mid-march. It was the opinion that
thunder was the voice of God, announcing the day of judgment. Numbers expected the
earth to open, and give up its dead at the sound. Every meteor in the sky seen at
Jerusalem brought the whole Christian population into the streets to weep and pray. The
pilgrims on the road were in the same alarm :-Lorsque, pendant la nuit, un globe de lumiere S'echappa quelquefois de la voute des
cieux, Et traca dans sa chute un long sillon de feux, La troupe suspendit sa marche
solitaire. [Charlemagne. Pomme Epique, par Lucien Buonaparte.]
Fanatic preachers kept up the flame of terror. Every shooting star furnished occasion for a
sermon, in which the sublimity of the approaching judgment was the principal topic.
The appearance of comets has been often thought to foretell the speedy dissolution of this
world. Part of this belief still exists; but the comet is no longer looked upon as the sign,
but the agent of destruction. So lately as in the year 1832 the greatest alarm spread over
the Continent of Europe, especially in Germany, lest the comet, whose appearance was
then foretold by astronomers, should destroy the earth. The danger of our globe was
gravely discussed. Many persons refrained from undertaking or concluding any business
during that year, in consequence solely of their apprehension that this terrible comet
would dash us and our world to atoms.

During seasons of great pestilence men have often believed the prophecies of crazed
fanatics, that the end of the world was come. Credulity is always greatest in times of
calamity. Prophecies of all sorts are rife on such occasions, and are readily believed,
whether for good or evil. During the great plague, which ravaged all Europe, between the
years 1345 and 1350, it was generally considered that the end of the world was at hand.
Pretended prophets were to be found in all the principal cities of Germany, France, and
Italy, predicting that within ten years the trump of the Archangel would sound, and the
Saviour appear in the clouds to call the earth to judgment.
No little consternation was created in London in 1736 by the prophecy of the famous
Whiston, that the world would be destroyed in that year, on the 13th of October. Crowds
of people went out on the appointed day to Islington, Hampstead, and the fields
intervening, to see the destruction of London, which was to be the "beginning of the end."
A satirical account of this folly is given in Swift's Miscellanies, vol. iii. entitled, "A True
and Faithful Narrative of what passed in London on a Rumour of the Day of Judgment."
An authentic narrative of this delusion would be interesting; but this solemn witticism of
Pope and Gay is not to be depended upon.
In the year 1761 the citizens of London were again frightened out of their wits by two
shocks of an earthquake, and the prophecy of a third, which was to destroy them
altogether. The first shock was felt on the 8th of February, and threw down several
chimneys in the neighbourhood of Limehouse and Poplar; the second happened on the
8th of March, and was chiefly felt in the north of London, and towards Hampstead and
Highgate. It soon became the subject of general remark, that there was exactly an interval
of a month between the shocks; and a crack-brained fellow, named Bell, a soldier in the
Life Guards, was so impressed with the idea that there would be a third in another month,
that he lost his senses altogether, and ran about the streets predicting the destruction of
London on the 5th of April. Most people thought that the first would have been a more
appropriate day; but there were not wanting thousands who confidently believed the
prediction, and took measures to transport themselves and families from the scene of the
impending calamity. As the awful day approached, the excitement became intense, and
great numbers of credulous people resorted to all the villages within a circuit of twenty
miles, awaiting the doom of London. Islington, Highgate, Hampstead, Harrow, and
Blackheath, were crowded with panic-stricken fugitives, who paid exorbitant prices for
accommodation to the housekeepers of these secure retreats. Such as could not afford to
pay for lodgings at any of those places, remained in London until two or three days
before the time, and then encamped in the surrounding fields, awaiting the tremendous
shock which was to lay their high city all level with the dust. As happened during a
similar panic in the time of Henry VIII, the fear became contagious, and hundreds who
had laughed at the prediction a week before, packed up their goods, when they saw others
doing so, and hastened away. The river was thought to be a place of great security, and all
the merchant vessels in the port were filled with people, who passed the night between
the 4th and 5th on board, expecting every instant to see St. Paul's totter, and the towers of
Westminster Abbey rock in the wind and fall amid a cloud of dust. The greater part of the
fugitives returned on the following day, convinced that the prophet was a false one; but
many judged it more prudent to allow a week to elapse before they trusted their dear

limbs in London. Bell lost all credit in a short time, and was looked upon even by the
most credulous as a mere madman. He tried some other prophecies, but nobody was
deceived by them; and, in a few months afterwards, he was confined in a lunatic asylum.
A panic terror of the end of the world seized the good people of Leeds and its
neighbourhood in the year 1806. It arose from the following circumstances. A hen, in a
village close by, laid eggs, on which were inscribed, in legible characters, the words
"Christ is coming." Great numbers visited the spot, and examined these wondrous eggs,
convinced that the day of judgment was near at hand. Like sailors in a storm, expecting
every instant to go to the bottom, the believers suddenly became religious, prayed
violently, and flattered themselves that they repented them of their evil courses. But a
plain tale soon put them down, and quenched their religion entirely. Some gentlemen,
hearing of the matter, went one fine morning, and caught the poor hen in the act of laying
one of her miraculous eggs. They soon ascertained beyond doubt that the egg had been
inscribed with some corrosive ink, and cruelly forced up again into the bird's body. At
this explanation, those who had prayed, now laughed, and the world wagged as merrily as
of yore.
At the time of the plague in Milan, in 1630, of which so affecting a description has been
left us by Ripamonte, in his interesting work "De Peste Mediolani", the people, in their
distress, listened with avidity to the predictions of astrologers and other impostors. It is
singular enough that the plague was foretold a year before it broke out. A large comet
appearing in 1628, the opinions of astrologers were divided with regard to it. Some
insisted that it was a forerunner of a bloody war; others maintained that it predicted a
great famine; but the greater number, founding their judgment upon its pale colour,
thought it portended a pestilence. The fulfilment of their prediction brought them into
great repute while the plague was raging.
Other prophecies were current, which were asserted to have been delivered hundreds of
years previously. They had a most pernicious effect upon the mind of the vulgar, as they
induced a belief in fatalism. By taking away the hope of recovery - that greatest balm in
every malady - they increased threefold the ravages of the disease. One singular
prediction almost drove the unhappy people mad. An ancient couplet, preserved for ages
by tradition, foretold, that in the year 1630 the devil would poison all Milan. Early one
morning in April, and before the pestilence had reached its height, the passengers were
surprised to see that all the doors in the principal streets of the city were marked with a
curious daub, or spot, as if a sponge, filled with the purulent matter of the plague-sores,
had been pressed against them. The whole population were speedily in movement to
remark the strange appearance, and the greatest alarm spread rapidly. Every means was
taken to discover the perpetrators, but in vain. At last the ancient prophecy was
remembered, and prayers were offered up in all the churches that the machinations of the
Evil One might be defeated. Many persons were of opinion that the emissaries of foreign
powers were employed to spread infectious poison over the city; but by far the greater
number were convinced that the powers of hell had conspired against them, and that the
infection was spread by supernatural agencies. In the mean time the plague increased
fearfully. Distrust and alarm took possession of every mind. Everything was believed to
