
Becoming a registered representative
Registered representatives are licensed by the FINRA to sell various kinds of
securities. The type of security a registered representative is allowed to sell
depends on the tests he or she has taken and passed. What follows are discussions of some of the key licensure tests.

Chapter 20: Trading for Others: Obtaining Trading Licenses and Certifications
Series 3: National Commodity Futures
The FINRA administers the National Commodity Futures Examination (Series
3), but it’s actually required by the National Futures Association (NFA),
which regulates the futures markets. Topics covered on this test include
options and contracts, futures theory, hedging, margins and settlements,
rules of the NFA and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and managing customer accounts and orders.
Test takers are given 150 minutes to answer 120 multiple-choice questions.

Series 6: Investment Co./Variable Contract Representative
The Investment Company Products/Variable Contracts Limited Representative
(Series 6) Examination is FINRA’s licensing test and is for individuals who want
to sell only mutual funds or variable annuities.
Test takers will find 100 multiple-choice questions on this exam and have 135
minutes to complete it. Test questions are grouped under six topic areas:
✓ Securities and markets (8 questions)
✓ Securities and tax regulations (23 questions)
✓ Marketing, prospecting, and sales presentations (18 questions)
✓ Evaluation of customers (13 questions)
✓ Product information (26 questions)
✓ Opening and servicing customer accounts (12 questions)

Series 7: General Securities Representative
If you want to sell securities, the General Securities Representative (Series
7) Examination is the primary FINRA test that you need to pass. Candidates
who pass this exam can solicit, purchase, and/or sell all securities products,
including corporate securities like stocks and bonds, municipal securities,
municipal fund securities, options, direct participation programs, investment
company products, and variable contracts.
In the general information it provides about the exam, FINRA says the primary purpose for this exam is “to safeguard the investing public by helping
to insure that registered representatives are competent to perform their jobs.
Given this purpose, the Series 7 Examination seeks to measure accurately
and reliably the degree to which each candidate possesses the knowledge,
skills and abilities needed to perform the critical functions of a registered
representative (RR).”
Test takers face 250 multiple-choice questions, 10 of which are experimental
questions that are being evaluated for future use. The test is given in two

321

322 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
180-minute segments. The test focuses on the seven critical functions about
which registered representatives need to be tested. The number of questions
on the test devoted to each function is shown in parentheses below. The registered representative must have the ability to
✓ Seek business for the broker-dealer through customers and potential
customers (9 questions).
✓ Evaluate customers in terms of financial needs, current holdings, and
available investment capital, and help them identify their investment
objectives (4 questions).
✓ Provide customers and prospective customers with information about
investments and make suitable recommendations (123 questions).
✓ Open, transfer, and close customer accounts and maintain appropriate
account records (27 questions).
✓ Explain the organization, participants, and functions of various securities markets and the principal factors that affect them (53 questions).
✓ Obtain and verify the customer’s purchase and sale instructions, enter
orders, and follow up on the completion of transactions (13 questions).
✓ Monitor the customer’s portfolio and make recommendations consistent
with changes in economic and financial conditions and with changes in
the customer’s needs and objectives (21 questions).

Series 9 and 10: General Securities Sales Supervisor
Branch office managers and regional and national sales managers must take
additional testing to supervise the sales activities in corporate, municipal,
and options securities; investment company products; variable contracts;
and direct participation programs. The General Securities Sales Supervisor
(Series 9) Examination focuses on the regulation of options, and the Series
10 exam with the same name focuses on sales supervision. Supervisors must
pass these tests to be able to register with FINRA. A valid Series 7 license is
required before you can take the Series 9 and Series 10 tests.
The combined exams include 200 multiple-choice questions covering these
categories:
✓ Regulation of options (55 questions)
✓ Hiring, qualifications, and continuing education (9 questions)
✓ Supervision of accounts and sales activities (94 questions)
✓ Conduct of associated persons (14 questions)
✓ Recordkeeping requirements (8 questions)
✓ Municipal securities regulation (20 questions)

Chapter 20: Trading for Others: Obtaining Trading Licenses and Certifications
Test takers have 90 minutes to take the Series 9 portion of the exam
(Regulation of Options — 55 questions) and 240 minutes to take the Series
10 portion. The two sections can be taken in any order, at any time, as long
as they’re completed within a 120-day enrollment-period window. To pass
the exams, candidates must correctly answer 70 percent of the questions on
each portion of the exam.

Series 22: Direct Participation Programs Limited Representative
Representatives who want to sell limited partnerships, limited liability companies, and S Corporation offerings that provide pass-through tax benefits
must get a Series 22 license, which can include programs involving oil and
gas real estate, equipment leasing and cable, and commodity programs.
It doesn’t, however, include real estate investment trusts, securities, and
options. To sell other types of securities, they would need to take other limited exams, or to sell all types of securities, they must take the Series 7 exam.
Topics covered on the Direct Participation Programs Limited Representative
Exam include the following:
✓ Investment entities for direct participation programs (12 questions)
✓ Types of direct participation programs (11 questions)
✓ Offering practices applicable to direct participation (14 questions)
✓ Tax issues applicable to direct participation programs (20 questions)
✓ Regulation of direct participation programs (32 questions)
✓ Factors to consider in evaluating direct participation programs
(11 questions)
Test takers need to answer 100 multiple-choice questions within 135 minutes
to complete the exam.

Series 42: Registered Options Representative
Representatives who only want to sell options take the Series 42 exam to
become registered options representatives. This exam deals with topics such
as options accounts, equity, debt, foreign currency, and index options. In
addition to a Series 42 license, registered options representatives must also
earn a Series 62 license for corporate securities limited representatives (see
the “Series 62: Corporate Securities Limited Representative” section, later
in this chapter), so they can demonstrate a functional understanding of the
securities products that underlie options contracts.

323

324 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
The test features 50 questions that must be answered within 90 minutes.
Topics covered on the Series 42 exam include these:
✓ Terminology, types of options, investment strategies, and taxation
(20 questions)
✓ Handling options accounts (14 questions)
✓ Trading and settlement practices qualifications and business conduct
(10 questions)
✓ Options representatives; reporting and recordkeeping requirements
(6 questions)

Series 55: Limited Representative Equity Trader
If you want to trade equity and convertible debt on a principal or agency
basis, you must take the Limited Representative Equity Trader (Series 55)
Examination. Before taking this exam, you first need to pass either the Series
7 or the Series 62 examination.
Test takers must answer 70 percent of the 100 questions on the exam correctly within 180 minutes to pass the exam. Topics covered on this exam
include
✓ NASDAQ and over-the-counter markets (42 questions)
✓ Display, execution, and trading systems (12 questions)
✓ Trade reporting requirements (22 questions)
✓ General industry standards (24 questions)

Series 62: Corporate Securities Limited Representative
Representatives who want to sell corporate stocks, corporate bonds, rights,
warrants, real estate investment trusts, collateralized mortgage obligations,
or securities of closed-end companies must take the Series 62 exam for corporate securities limited representatives to get their licenses.
Test takers face a total of 115 multiple-choice questions and are given 150
minutes to finish the examination. Topics covered on this exam include
these:
✓ Types and characteristics of securities and investments (25 questions)
✓ The market for corporate securities (40 questions)
✓ Evaluation of securities and investments (14 questions)
✓ Handling customer accounts and securities industry regulation
(36 questions)

Chapter 20: Trading for Others: Obtaining Trading Licenses and Certifications
Series 63: Uniform Securities Agent State Law Examination
The Uniform Securities Agent State Law Examination was developed by the
North American Securities Administrators Association in cooperation with
FINRA. This examination covers the principles of state securities regulation
reflected in the Uniform Securities Act (with the amendments adopted by
NASAA and rules prohibiting dishonest and unethical business practices).
The examination is intended to provide a basis for state securities administrators to determine an applicant’s knowledge and understanding of state
law and regulations. Test takers are given 75 minutes to answer 60 multiplechoice questions.

Series 82: Limited Representative/Private Securities Offerings
Representatives who sell private placement securities as part of a primary
offering must get a Series 82 license. The Limited Representative/Private
Securities Offering Exam has a total of 100 multiple-choice questions. Test
takers are given 150 minutes to complete it. Topics covered by this examination include the following:
✓ Characteristics of corporate securities (13 questions)
✓ Regulation of the market for registered and unregistered securities (45
questions)
✓ Analyzing corporate securities and investment planning (16 questions)
✓ Handling customer accounts and industry regulations (26 questions)

Becoming a registered principal
If you want to manage an office in investment banking or the securities business, you must pass at least one additional exam to be registered as a principal. Principals supervise, solicit, and conduct business, and train persons
associated with the offices they manage. All principals must have their Series
7 licenses. The principal exam that is required depends on the types of businesses you’ll be managing. Some of the key principal exams are covered in
the following sections.

Series 23 or 24: General Securities Principal
People who want to manage or supervise others in investment banking or
the securities business, including the sales of direct participation programs,
investment company products, and variable contracts, must fulfill either the
Series 23 or Series 24 requirements for becoming a general securities principal. Candidates who already have successfully completed the Series 9 and
10 exams take the Series 23 exam, which covers material from the Series 24
exam that was not on the sales supervisor’s Series 9 and Series 10 exams.
Managers seeking to be a principal who don’t have their Series 9 and 10
licenses take the Series 24 exam.

325

326 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
The Series 23 examination includes 100 questions that must be completed
within 150 minutes. The Series 24 examination includes 150 questions that
must be completed within 230 minutes. Both exams include questions on
these topics:
✓ Supervising investment banking underwriting activities and research (30
questions on the Series 23 exam and 33 questions on the Series 24 exam)
✓ Supervision of trading and market-making activities (24 questions on the
Series 23 exam and 31 questions on the Series 24 exam)
✓ Supervising brokerage office operations (12 questions on the Series 23
exam and 29 questions on the Series 24 exam)
✓ Sales supervision, general supervision of employees (23 questions on
the Series 23 exam and 43 questions on the Series 24 exam)
✓ Compliance with financial responsibility rules (11 questions on the
Series 23 exam and 14 questions on the Series 24 exam)

Series 26: Investment Company Products/Variable Contracts Principal
Managers who plan to supervise activities limited to the sales of mutual
funds and annuities need only to get the Series 26 license instead of the
Series 23 or Series 24 license. A total of 110 multiple-choice questions are on
the Investment Company Products/Variable Contracts Principal Examination.
Test takers have 150 minutes to complete it. Topics covered on this examination include the following:
✓ Hiring and qualification (11 questions)
✓ Training of representatives (19 questions)
✓ Supervision (24 questions)
✓ Sales practices (32 questions)
✓ Business processing and recordkeeping rules (24 questions)
This exam is not required for someone who already has a Series 23 or 24
license.

Series 4: Registered Options Principal
Managers who supervise options sales personnel or supervise compliance with options regulations must pass the Registered Options Principal
(Series 4) Exam. Topics tested on this exam include option strategies, equity
options, debt options, index options, foreign currencies, supervision and
compliance, and the management of customer accounts and orders.

Chapter 20: Trading for Others: Obtaining Trading Licenses and Certifications
The test features 125 multiple-choice questions that must be completed
within 180 minutes. Principals with Series 23 and Series 24 licenses must take
this exam if they plan to manage options sales personnel or supervise compliance with options regulations. The questions cover these three basic areas:
✓ Options investment strategies (34 questions)
✓ Supervising sales activities and trading practices (75 questions)
✓ Supervision of employees, business conduct, and recordkeeping and
reporting requirements (16 questions)

Series 27: Financial and Operations Principal
The Financial and Operations Principal (Series 27) Exam tests the candidate’s
knowledge of applicable rules relating to broker/dealer financial responsibility and recordkeeping and to investor protections under the Securities
Investor Protection Act of 1970.
Test takers are given 210 minutes to finish the 145 multiple-choice questions.
Principals who have their Series 23 or Series 24 licenses must take this exam
if they want to operate as a financial and operations principal. Test questions
include these topics:
✓ Keeping and preserving records and broker/dealer financial report
requirements (15 questions)
✓ Net capital requirements (44 questions)
✓ Customer protection (36 questions)
✓ Municipal securities rulemaking board regulations (9 questions)
✓ Federal Reserve Board Regulations (8 questions)
✓ Uniform practice rules (12 questions)
✓ Other relevant regulations and interpretations (21 questions)

The ABCs of Financial Advisors
When you get a business card from a broker or other type of investment advisor, you may see a long list of initials that indicate professional certifications.
Some of these require extensive training, education, and testing, but others
require only minimal education and testing. In addition to the initial testing,
some require continuing education and offer a disciplinary process and ways
to check on a professional’s status online. The sections that follow break
down the key designations for financial advisors and what getting and keeping the designation takes.

327

328 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Accredited Asset Management Specialist
The Accredited Asset Management Specialist (AAMS) certification is issued
by the College for Financial Planning. It has no work experience requirements. Candidates must take a self-study course that includes 11 modules
totaling 96 to 120 hours. Topics include asset management process, risk,
return, investment performance, asset allocation and selection, investment
strategies, taxation of investment products, investment opportunities for an
individual’s retirement, investment considerations for small-business owners,
investment considerations for highly compensated executives, insurance
products for investment clients, estate planning for investment clients, and
regulatory and ethical issues.
After coursework is completed, candidates must pass a final certification
exam. This certification has no continuing education requirements, no investor complaint or public disciplinary processes, and no way to check the professional status of an AAMS designee online.

Chartered Financial Analyst
A Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) designation is issued by the CFA
Institute (www.cfainstitute.org). Before you can get this designation,
you must meet educational and work experience requirements. Candidates
can have either an undergraduate degree plus three years of professional
experience involving investment decision-making or four years of qualified
work experience.
In addition to the work requirements, candidates must complete 250 hours of
self study for each of these three levels of examination:
✓ Level I, which focuses on investment evaluation and portfolio
management
✓ Level II, which focuses on applying the analytical tools for valuing
investments
✓ Level III, which focuses on the entire portfolio management process
Many CFA candidates fulfill their work experience requirements as they prepare to take the three required exams.

Certified Financial Planner
A Certified Financial Planner (CFP) designation is awarded by the Certified
Financial Planner Board of Standards (www.cfp.net). Candidates must meet

Chapter 20: Trading for Others: Obtaining Trading Licenses and Certifications
work experience and educational requirements. To be recognized as a CFP,
candidates must have either three years of personal financial planning experience plus a bachelor’s degree or five years of personal financial planning
experience.
In addition to the work experience requirements, CFP candidates must complete either a five-course, CFP board-registered program or qualify to take the
final CFP examination by having earned one of the following designations:
✓ Certified Public Accountant (CPA)
✓ Chartered Financial Consultant (ChFC)
✓ Chartered Life Underwriter (CLU)
✓ Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA)
✓ A doctoral (PhD) degree in business or economics, Doctor of Business
Administration, or an attorney’s license
Courses that must be taken include financial planning process and insurance,
investment planning, income tax planning, retirement planning and employee
benefits, and estate planning. After earning the CFP designation, planners
must complete 30 hours of continuing education every two years thereafter
to maintain their CFP status.

Certified Fund Specialist
Certified Fund Specialist (CFS) certificates are issued by the Institute of
Business and Finance (www.icfs.com). No work experience is required
before getting this designation. However, about 60 hours of coursework are
required before you can take the certification exam. Topics covered include
understanding mutual funds, fixed income, analysis, when to sell, closed-end
funds, money market funds, diversification, global investing, asset allocation,
risk, matching clients’ goals and portfolios, and retirement strategies. After a
specialist is certified, he or she must take 15 hours of continuing education
courses only during the first five years after certification.

Chartered Financial Consultant
The Chartered Financial Consultant (ChFC) designation is issued by The
American College www.theamericancollege.edu/subpage.php?
pageId=254. Candidates must complete three years of full-time personal
finance or insurance experience and take six core and three elective courses
at The American College.

329

330 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
The core courses include insurance and financial planning, income taxation, planning for retirement needs, investments, and fundamentals of estate
planning. The three elective courses can be chosen from four offerings that
include financial systems in the economy, financial planning applications,
estate planning applications, and financial decision-making at retirement.
As a candidate completes each course, a final exam is given. The candidate
must pass each final exam before being awarded the ChFC designation. After
getting the designation, consultants must take 30 credits of continuing education courses every two years to maintain the designation.

Chartered Life Underwriter
The Chartered Life Underwriter (CLU) designation also is issued by The
American College and focuses on insurance and coursework. Candidates
must complete three years of full-time related business experience, five core
courses, and three elective courses. Core courses include insurance and
financial planning, individual life insurance, life insurance law, fundamentals of estate planning, and planning for business owners and professionals.
The three elective courses can be chosen from courses on individual health
insurance, income taxation, group benefits, planning for retirement needs,
investments, and estate planning applications. After earning this designation,
consultants must take 30 credits of continuing education courses every two
years to maintain their status as a CLU.

Chartered Market Technician
The Chartered Market Technician (CMT) is issued by the Market Technicians
Association (www.mta.org). Candidates must be a member of the association to enter the CMT program. To become a member, a person must be
employed professionally as an analyst or professional investment manager
for five years. Membership must be maintained in the MTA to get and hold
the CMT certification. Certification includes three exams. The first is a
multiple-choice exam on the basic definitions related to technical analysis.
The second is also a multiple-choice exam that tests the candidate’s ability to
apply advanced analytical techniques. The third exam can be satisfied with
either a research paper or an essay exam related to portfolio strategies or
trading decisions.
