
sufficiently charged with this fluid, fall into a state of somnambulism, or magnetic
ecstasy; and, when in this state, "they see the fluid encircling the magnetiser like a halo of
light, and issuing in luminous streams from his mouth and nostrils, his head, and hands;
possessing a very agreeable smell, and communicating a particular taste to food and
water."
One would think that these absurdities were quite enough to be insisted upon by any
physician who wished to be considered sane, but they only form a small portion of the
wondrous things related by M. Deleuze. He further said, "When magnetism produces
somnambulism, the person who is in this state acquires a prodigious extension of all his
faculties. Several of his external organs, especially those of sight and hearing, become
inactive; but the sensations which depend upon them take place internally. Seeing and
hearing are carried on by the magnetic fluid, which transmits the impressions
immediately, and without the intervention of any nerves or organs directly to the brain.
Thus the somnambulist, though his eyes and ears are closed, not only sees and hears, but
sees and hears much better than he does when awake. In all things he feels the will of the
magnetiser, although that will be not expressed. He sees into the interior of his own body,
and the most secret organization of the bodies of all those who may be put en rapport, or
in magnetic connexion, with him. Most commonly, he only sees those parts which are
diseased and disordered, and intuitively prescribes a remedy for them. He has prophetic
visions and sensations, which are generally true, but sometimes erroneous. He expresses
himself with astonishing eloquence and facility. He is not free from vanity. He becomes a
more perfect being of his own accord for a certain time, if guided wisely by the
magnetiser, but wanders if he is ill-directed."
According to M. Deleuze, any person could become a magnetiser and produce these
effects, by conforming to the following conditions, and acting upon the following rules:-Forget for a while all your knowledge of physics and metaphysics.
Remove from your mind all objections that may occur.
Imagine that it is in your power to take the malady in hand, and throw it on one side.
Never reason for six weeks after you have commenced the study.
Have an active desire to do good; a firm belief in the power of magnetism, and an entire
confidence in employing it. In short, repel all doubts; desire success, and act with
simplicity and attention.
That is to say, "be very credulous; be very persevering; reject all past experience, and do
not listen to reason," and you are a magnetiser after M. Deleuze's own heart.
Having brought yourself into this edifying state of fanaticism, "remove from the patient
all persons who might be troublesome to you: keep with you only the necessary witnesses
-- a single person, if need be; desire them not to occupy themselves in any way with the

processes you employ and the effects which result from them, but to join with you in the
desire of doing good to your patient. Arrange yourself so as neither to be too hot nor too
cold, and in such a manner that nothing may obstruct the freedom of your motions; and
take precautions to prevent interruption during the sitting. Make your patient then sit as
commodiously as possible, and place yourself opposite to him, on a seat a little more
elevated, in such a manner that his knees may be betwixt yours, and your feet at the side
of his. First, request him to resign himself; to think of nothing; not to perplex himself by
examining the effects which may be produced; to banish all fear; to surrender himself to
hope, and not to be disturbed or discouraged if the action of magnetism should cause in
him momentary pains. After having collected yourself, take his thumbs between your
fingers in such a way that the internal part of your thumbs may be in contact with the
internal part of his, and then fix your eyes upon him! You must remain from two to five
minutes in this situation, or until you feel an equal heat between your thumbs and his.
This done, you will withdraw your hands, removing them to the right and left; and at the
same time turning them till their internal surface be outwards, and you will raise them to
the height of the head. You will now place them upon the two shoulders, and let them
remain there about a minute; afterwards drawing them gently along the arms to the
extremities of the fingers, touching very slightly as you go. You will renew this pass five
or six times, always turning your hands, and removing them a little from the body before
you lift them. You will then place them above the head; and, after holding them there for
an instant, lower them, passing them before the face, at the distance of one or two inches,
down to the pit of the stomach. There you will stop them two minutes also, putting your
thumbs upon the pit of the stomach and the rest of your fingers below the ribs. You will
then descend slowly along the body to the knees, or rather, if you can do so without
deranging yourself, to the extremity of the feet. You will repeat the same processes
several times during the remainder of the sitting. You will also occasionally approach
your patient, so as to place your hands behind his shoulders, in order to descend slowly
along the spine of the back and the thighs, down to the knees or the feet. After the first
passes, you may dispense with putting your hands upon the head, and may make the
subsequent passes upon the arms, beginning at the shoulders, and upon the body,
beginning at the stomach."
Magnetisers - 4
Such was the process of magnetising recommended by Deleuze. That delicate, fanciful,
and nervous women, when subjected to it, should have worked themselves into
convulsions will be readily believed by the sturdiest opponent of Animal Magnetism. To
sit in a constrained posture -- be stared out of countenance by a fellow who enclosed her
knees between his, while he made passes upon different parts of her body, was quite
enough to throw any weak woman into a fit, especially if she were predisposed to
hysteria, and believed in the efficacy of the treatment. It is just as evident that those of
stronger minds and healthier bodies should be sent to sleep by the process. That these
effects have been produced by these means there are thousands of instances to show. But
are they testimony in favour of Animal Magnetism? - do they prove the existence of the
magnetic fluid? Every unprejudiced person must answer in the negative. It needs neither
magnetism, nor ghost from the grave, to tell us that silence, monotony, and long

recumbency in one position must produce sleep, or that excitement, imitation, and a
strong imagination, acting upon a weak body, will bring on convulsions. It will be seen
hereafter that magnetism produces no effects but these two; that the gift of prophecy supernatural eloquence - the transfer of the senses, and the power of seeing through
opaque substances, are pure fictions, that cannot be substantiated by anything like proof.
M. Deleuze's book produced quite a sensation in France; the study was resumed with
redoubled vigour. In the following year, a journal was established devoted exclusively to
the science, under the title of "Annales du Magnetisme Animal;" and shortly afterwards
appeared the "Bibliotheque du Magnetisme Animal," and many others. About the same
time, the Abbe Faria, "the man of wonders," began to magnetise; and the belief being that
he had more of the Mesmeric fluid about him, and a stronger will, than most men, he was
very successful in his treatment. His experiments afford a convincing proof that
imagination can operate all, and the supposed fluid none, of the resuits so confidently
claimed as evidence of the new science. He placed his patients in an arm-chair; told them
to shut their eyes; and then, in a loud commanding voice, pronounced the single word,
"Sleep!" He used no manipulations whatever -- had no baquet, or conductor of the fluid;
but he nevertheless succeeded in causing sleep in hundreds of patients. He boasted of
having in his time produced five thousand somnambulists by this method. It was often
necessary to repeat the command three or four times; and if the patient still remained
awake, the Abbe got out of the difficulty by dismissing him from the chair, and declaring
that he was incapable of being acted on. And here it should be remarked that the
magnetisers do not lay claim to a universal efficacy for their fluid; the strong and the
healthy cannot be magnetised; the incredulous cannot be magnetised; those who reason
upon it cannot be magnetised; those who firmly believe in it can be magnetised; the weak
in body can be magnetised, and the weak in mind can be magnetised. And lest, from
some cause or other, individuals of the latter classes should resist the magnetic charm, the
apostles of the science declare that there are times when even they cannot be acted upon;
the presence of one scorner or unbeliever may weaken the potency of the fluid and
destroy its efficacy. In M. Deleuze's instructions to a magnetiser, he expressly says,
"Never magnetise before inquisitive persons!" ["Histoire Critique du Magnetisme
Animal," p. 60.] Yet the followers of this delusion claim for it the rank of a science!
The numerous writings that appeared between the years 1813 and 1825 show how much
attention was excited in France. With every succeeding year some new discovery was put
forth, until at last the magnetisers seemed to be very generally agreed that there were six
separate and distinct degrees of magnetisation. They have been classed as follow:In the first stage, the skin of the patient becomes slightly reddened; and there is a feeling
of heat, comfort, and lightness all over the body; but there is no visible action on the
senses.
In the second stage, the eye is gradually abstracted from the dominion of the will (or, in
other words, the patient becomes sleepy). The drooping eyelids cannot be raised; the
senses of hearing, smelling, feeling, and tasting are more than usually excited. In

addition, a variety of nervous sensations are felt, such as spasms of the muscles and
prickings of the skin, and involuntary twitchings in various parts of the body.
In the third stage, which is that of magnetic sleep, all the senses are closed to external
impressions; and sometimes fainting, and cataleptic or apoplectic attacks may occur.
In the fourth stage, the patient is asleep to all the world; but he is awake within his own
body, and consciousness returns. While in this state, all his senses are transferred to the
skin. He is in the perfect crisis, or magnetic somnambulism; a being of soul and mind -seeing without eyes -- hearing without ears, and deadened in body to all sense of feeling.
In the fifth stage, which is that of lucid vision, the patient can see his own internal
organisation, or that of others placed in magnetic communication with him. He becomes,
at the same time, possessed of the instinct of remedies. The magnetic fluid, in this stage,
unites him by powerful attraction to others, and establishes between them an
impenetration of thought and feeling so intense as to blend their different natures into
one.
In the sixth stage, which is at the same time the rarest and the most perfect of all, the
lucid vision is not obstructed by opaque matter, or subject to any barriers interposed by
time or space. The magnetic fluid, which is universally spread in nature, unites the
individual with all nature, and gives him cognizance of coming events by its universal
lucidity.
So much was said and written between the years 1820 and 1825, and so many converts
were made, that the magnetisers became clamorous for a new investigation. M. de
Foissac, a young physician, wrote to the Academie Royale du Medicine a letter, calling
for inquiry, in which he complained of the unfairness of the report of Messrs. Bailly and
Franklin in 1784, and stating that, since that time, the science had wholly changed by the
important discovery of magnetic somnambulism. He informed the Academy that he had
under his care a young woman, whose powers of divination when in the somnambulic
state were of the most extraordinary character. He invited the members of that body to go
into any hospital, and choose persons afflicted with any diseases, acute or chronic, simple
or complex, and his somnambulist, on being put en rapport, or in magnetic connexion,
with them, would infallibly point out their ailings and name the remedies. She, and other
somnambulists, he said, could, by merely laying the hand successively on the head, the
chest, and the abdomen of a stranger, immediately discover his maladies, with, the pains
and different alterations thereby occasioned. They could indicate, besides, whether the
cure were possible, and, if so, whether it were easy or difficult, near or remote, and what
means should be employed to attain this result by the surest and readiest way. In this
examination they never departed from the sound principles of medicine. "In fact," added
M. de Foissac, "I go further, and assert that their inspirations are allied to the genius
which animated Hippocrates!"
In the mean time experiments were carried on in various hospitals of Paris. The epileptic
patients at the Salpetriere were magnetised by permission of M. Esquirol. At the Bicetre

also the same resuits were obtained. M. de Foissac busied himself with the invalids at the
Hospice de la Charite, and M. Dupotet was equally successful in producing sleep or
convulsions at Val de Grace. Many members of the Chamber of Deputies became
converts, and M. Chardel, the Comte de Gestas, M. de Laseases, and others, opened their
saloons to those who were desirous of being instructed in animal magnetism. [Dupotet's
Introduction to the Study of Animal Magnetism, page 23.] Other physicians united with
M. de Foissac in calling for an inquiry; and ultimately the Academy nominated a
preliminary committee of five of its members, namely, Messrs Adelon, Burdin, Marc,
Pariset, and Husson, to investigate the alleged facts, and to report whether the Academy,
without any compromise of its dignity, could appoint a new commission.
Before this committee, M. de Foissac produced his famous somnambulist; but she failed
in exhibiting any one of the phenomena her physician had so confidently predicted: she
was easily thrown into the state of sleep, by long habit and the monotony of the passes
and manipulations of her magnetiser; but she could not tell the diseases of persons put en
rapport with her. The committee of five framed excuses for this failure, by saying, that
probably the magnetic fluid was obstructed, because they were "inexperienced,
distrustful, and perhaps impatient." After this, what can be said for the judgment or the
impartiality of such a committee? They gave at last their opinion, that it would be
advisable to appoint a new commission. On the l3th of December 1825, they presented
themselves to the Academie to deliver their report. A debate ensued, which occupied
three days, and in which all the most distinguished members took part. It was finally
decided by a majority of ten, that the commission should be appointed, and the following
physicians were chosen its members:-- They were eleven in number, viz. Bourdois de la
Motte, the President; Fouquier, Gueneau de Mussy, Guersent, Husson, Itard, Marc, J. J.
Leroux, Thillay, Double, and Majendie.
These gentlemen began their labours by publishing an address to all magnetisers, inviting
them to come forward and exhibit in their presence the wonders of animal magnetism. M.
Dupotet says that very few answered this amicable appeal, because they were afraid of
being ridiculed when the report should be published. Four magnetisers, however,
answered their appeal readily, and for five years were busily engaged in bringing proofs
of the new science before the commission. These were M. de Foissac, M. Dupotet, M.
Chapelain, and M. de Geslin. It would be but an unprofitable, and by no means a pleasant
task to follow the commissioners in their erratic career, as they were led hither and thither
by the four lights of magnetism above mentioned; the four "Wills-o'-the-Wisp" which
dazzled the benighted and bewildered doctors on that wide and shadowy region of
metaphysical inquiry -- the influence of mind over matter. It will be better to state at once
the conclusion they came to after so long and laborious an investigation, and then
examine whether they were warranted in it by the evidence brought before them.
The report, which is exceedingly voluminous, is classed under thirty different heads, and
its general tenor is favourable to magnetism. The reporters expressly state their belief in
the existence of the magnetic fluid, and sum up the result of their inquiries in the four
assertions which follow:--

1. Magnetism has no effect upon persons in a sound state of health, nor upon some
diseased persons.
2. In others its effects are slight.
3. These effects are sometimes produced by weariness or ennui, by monotony, and by the
imagination.
4. We have seen these effects developed independently of the last causes, most probably
as the effects of magnetism alone.
It will be seen that the first and second of these sentences presuppose the existence of that
magnetic power, which it is the object of the inquiry to discover. The reporters begin, by
saying, that magnetism exists, when after detailing their proofs, they should have ended
by affirming it. For the sake of lucidity, a favourite expression of their own, let us put the
propositions into a new form and new words, without altering the sense.
1. Certain effects, such as convulsions, somnambulism, &c. are producible in the human
frame, by the will of others, by the will of the patient himself, or by both combined, or by
some unknown means, we wish to discover, perhaps by magnetism.
2. These effects are not producible upon all bodies. They cannot be produced upon
persons in a sound state of health, nor upon some diseased persons; while in other eases,
the effects are very slight.
3. These effects were produced in many cases that fell under our notice, in which the
persons operated on were in a weak state of health, by weariness or ennui, by monotony,
and by the power of imagination.
4. But in many other eases these effects were produced, and were clearly not the result of
weariness or ennui, of monotony, or of the power of the imagination. They were,
therefore, produced by the magnetic processes we employed: -- ergo -- Animal
Magnetism exists.
Every one, whether a believer or disbeliever in the doctrine, must see that the whole gist
of the argument will be destroyed, if it be proved that the effects which the reporters
claimed as resulting from a power independent of weariness, monotony, and the
imagination, did, in fact, result from them, and from nothing else. The following are
among the proofs brought forward to support the existence of the magnetic fluid, as
producing those phenomena:-"A child, twenty-eight months old, was magnetised by M. Foissac, at the house of M.
Bourdois. The child, as well as its father, was subject to attacks of epilepsy. Almost
immediately after M. Foissac had begun his manipulations and passes, the child rubbed
its eyes, bent its head to one side, supported it on one of the cushions of the sofa where it
was sitting, yawned, moved itself about, scratched its head and its ears, appeared to strive

against the approach of sleep, and then rose, if we may be allowed the expression,
grumbling. Being taken away to satisfy a necessity of nature, it was again placed on the
sofa, and magnetised for a few moments. But as there appeared no decided symptoms of
somnolency this time, we terminated the experiment."
And this in all seriousness and sobriety was called a proof of the existence of the
magnetic fluid! That these effects were not produced by the imagination may be granted;
but that they were not produced by weariness and monotony is not so clear. A child is
seated upon a sofa, a solemn looking gentleman, surrounded by several others equally
grave, begins to play various strange antics before it, moving his hands mysteriously,
pointing at his head, all the while preserving a most provoking silence. And what does
the child? It rubs its eyes, appears restless, yawns, scratches its head, grumbles, and
makes an excuse to get away. Magnetism, forsooth! 'Twas a decided case of botheration!
The next proof (so called), though not so amusing, is equally decisive of the mystification
of the Commissioners. A deaf and dumb lad, eighteen years of age, and subject to attacks
of epilepsy, was magnetised fifteen times by M. Foissac. The phenomena exhibited
during the treatment were a heaviness of the eyelids, a general numbness, a desire to
sleep, and sometimes vertigo:-- the epileptic attacks were entirely suspended, and did not
return till eight months afterwards. Upon this case and the first mentioned, the Committee
reasoned thus:-- "These cases appear to us altogether worthy of remark. The two
individuals who formed the subject of the experiment, were ignorant of what was done to
them. The one, indeed, was not in a state capable of knowing it; and the other never had
the slightest idea of magnetism. Both, however, were insensible of its influence; and most
certainly it is impossible in either case to attribute this sensibility to the imagination." The
first case has been already disposed of. With regard to the second, it is very possible to
attribute all the results to imagination. It cannot be contended, that because the lad was
deaf and dumb he had no understanding, that he could not see the strange manipulations
of the magnetiser, and that he was unaware that his cure was the object of the
experiments that were thus made upon him. Had he no fancy merely because he was
dumb? and could he, for the same reason, avoid feeling a heaviness in his eyelids, a
numbness, and a sleepiness, when he was forced to sit for two or three hours while M.
Foissac pointed his fingers at him? As for the amelioration in his health, no argument can
be adduced to prove that he was devoid of faith in the remedy; and that, having faith, he
should not feel the benefit of it as well as thousands of others who have been cured by
means wholly as imaginary.
The third case is brought forward with a still greater show of authority. Having
magnetised the child and the dumb youth with results so extraordinary, M. Foissac next
tried his hand upon a Commissioner. M. Itard was subjected to a course of manipulations;
the consequences were a flow of saliva, a metallic savour in the mouth, and a severe
headach. These symptoms, say the reporters, cannot be accounted for by the influence of
imagination. M. Itard, it should be remarked, was a confirmed valetudinarian; and a
believer, before the investigation commenced, in the truth of magnetism. He was a man,
therefore, whose testimony cannot be received with implicit credence upon this subject.
He may have repeated, and so may his brother Commissioners, that the results above
