
Rounded Tops and Saucers

261

FIGURE 10.25 One of the big winners of the telecom bubble of 1999/2000 was
Lucent (symbol LU). Once the bubble burst, heralded by the rounded top, LU descended from $50 to nearly $0.

Every stock chart tells a different story, and even though patterns often play out with similar directional movements, the speed of those movements varies quite a bit. Figure 10.26 provides a nice contrast to the LU
graph. We see the classic signs of a rounded top: the well-defined support
line, the break beneath support, and the subsequent recovery up to the former support level. Unlike Lucent, however, this stock subsequently took
only about a week to wipe out virtually all of its equity value. Those who
entered short positions at the recovery level of about $7 would have enjoyed very rapid profits in this case.
Another crucial aspect of rounded tops is that, to be profitable, they
need to be preceded by a meaningful ascent in price. If a stock has traded
between $10 and $12 for years, and then it creates a rounded top between
$12 and $13, it’s not going to matter very much if it falls beneath its support
level. The reason is that there is already a huge mass of buyers from $10
to $12 to support it. A more exciting pattern would be for a stock that has
gone from $1 to $80 and forms a rounded top between $80 and $90. In that
instance, the stock has plenty of room to fall.
Take Ipsco (symbol IPS) as an example, shown in Figure 10.27. There
is a rounded top over the span of about two and a half months starting
in March and ending in mid-May. In less than a year, the stock has risen
from $42.50 to $110, thus providing plenty of empty air for the stock to

262

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.26 A failure following a rounded top can be extremely swift. It took
only a few trading sessions to wipe out virtually the entire value of this security.

start falling. A rounded top, therefore, has to be at the top of something. It
cannot simply be a curvature in a graph that hasn’t moved up much in the
first place.
A more dramatic example of this concept is shown with Coventry
Health (Figure 10.28), which also points out how multiple patterns or techniques can be used together. Coventry Health had climbed from $2 to

FIGURE 10.27 This is what a reversal formation in the form of a rounded top
looks like. In this instance, the security is Ipsco (symbol IPS).

Rounded Tops and Saucers

263

FIGURE 10.28 This rounded top for Coventry Health (CVH) took place at the end
of a major ascending trend line.

$62 in about six years. Three things happened, however, to indicate this
would be a good stock to sell or even sell short. First, the ascending trend
line spanning back to 1999 had been broken; second, a rounded top had
formed over the span of about half a year; and third, the price had subsequently climbed back both to the rounded top’s former support level and
to the trendline itself, indicating a low-risk/high-return place to short the
security.
The more rapid the ascent, the more rapid the subsequent fall. This is
not true every single time, but it’s a good general rule to remember. The
NASDAQ Corporation (Figure 10.29) enjoyed an almost 10-fold increase in
just over a year. Once the support level at $35 was broken, however, the
move down did not take long. This graph illustrates just the beginning of
the fall, but prices lower than this happened soon, simply because there
were not many owners of the stock at these levels. If a price is falling on a
stock whose ascent was swift, the downward fall can resemble a hot knife
through butter.
Although support lines are easiest to perceive if they are perfectly horizontal, there are times when this isn’t the case. The support line has to
be straight, but it can be at a slight angle, such as is illustrated by Figure
10.30. Psychologically, it’s clearest if the line is horizontal, because everyone shares a similar panic price. But from a chartist’s perspective, a slightly
angled line (either upward or downward) is acceptable.

264

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.29 The NASDAQ (symbol NDAQ) Corporation went through a major
reversal that culminated in this rounded top.

PATTERN FAILURES AND BREAKDOWNS
It can be very tempting, having seen the charts in this chapter that show
subsequent explosions (or collapses) in price, to rush out and try to find every saucer pattern and rounded top you can locate. Keep in mind that these
charts are particularly good examples of such patterns, and it is absolutely

FIGURE 10.30 Not all tops have to be perfectly horizontal. This rounded top
shows that the pullback was based on a tilted support/resistance line.

Rounded Tops and Saucers

265

not the case that a price will behave as it is supposed to behave once a particular pattern is completed. Let us examine some charts where just about
everything seemed perfect, but the price action contradicted the prediction. It is important to see these examples to understand how the predictive power of patterns is limited and to understand what to watch out for
so you don’t hold a position that isn’t working out the way you anticipated.
Figure 10.31 provides an extraordinary example. Notice first the basing action in the left three-quarters of the chart. The resistance line is very
well defined at $10, and when the price does push past this line, it explodes
higher. Indeed, the stock rises almost 20-fold, so savvy owners of this stock
would indeed have benefited from recognizing the saucer and the importance of moving above $10. However, the stock’s rise was short-lived, and
the price fell so hard and fast it even dipped briefly below $10 again. Patient owners of this stock would have been profoundly frustrated that their
1,900 percent gains had withered away to 50 percent.
Far worse than having profits attenuated is to wind up with an outright
loss. Bookham Technologies (symbol BKHM) had formed a magnificent
pattern between about $7 and $30 (Figure 10.32). It broke cleanly above
$30, and savvy buyers at this level surely must have had hopes that the
stock would reach $100, $150, or even beyond. The breakout faltered, however, and the fact that the price sank beneath its former support level
should have set off alarm bells for experienced chartists.
If a stock moves above its resistance level, it’s perfectly acceptable
for it to tumble back to that level after its initial rise. But if it clearly
moves beneath that level, then the breakout has virtually no value. For our

FIGURE 10.31 In spite of the explosive rise of this stock, in the long term, the
price wound up little changed.

266

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.32 Bookham (symbol BKHM) broke above a nicely-formed saucer, but
after failing to follow through, it lost virtually its entire value.

purposes, the breakout no longer exists, because the price couldn’t sustain
its new level. In the case of BKHM, the stock slipped to $25, then to $20,
and ultimately collapsed to near $0. You can plainly see how it is a mistake
to hold onto a stock once its pattern breakout has been neutralized by
subsequent price failure.
Arbinet (symbol ARBX, shown in Figure 10.33) buyers experienced a
similar disappointment. For nearly a year, the stock had moved between
$6 and $8, accumulating buyers and interest at those price levels. At last,
late in April, the stock pushed above $8, and it spent several sessions
above that price, appearing to ready itself for a much higher price level.
But in one trading session early in May, the price moved to the other side
of the former resistance line. Knowledgeable chartists would have seen
this as an opportunity to exit the position immediately. Indeed, it would
be wise for buyers of this stock to have placed stop-loss orders at the
$7.99 level (or somewhat lower to allow for market noise) to protect their
positions.
The chart for 7/24 Solutions (Figure 10.34, symbol SVNX) is especially
interesting since it has not one but two resistance lines. The stock had
fallen terrifically from 2000 to 2002, losing virtually all of its value. In 2003
and 2004, the price steadied, and a near textbook-quality saucer pattern
was hammered out, illustrated by the lower horizontal line representing
resistance. It moved above this level and made an assault on the
higher horizontal line, representing the next level of resistance. This,

Rounded Tops and Saucers

267

FIGURE 10.33 Arbinet (symbol ARBX) pushed above a nearly year-long resistance line only to quickly fall back beneath it.

too, was pierced, indicating what seemed like a great future for this
stock.
Sadly, the price faltered. It fell beneath the upper horizontal line, and
it wasn’t long before it was below even the lower horizontal line. The stock
was back to its old ways, floundering at a very low price level, the disheartened buyers of the stock having given up on it. Skilled chartists would have

FIGURE 10.34 7/24 Solutions (symbol SVNX) had a textbook-quality saucer pattern, but the stock swiftly weakened and plunged back to its historic lows.

268

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.35 Compare this chart of Owens Illinois to Figure 10.2. In spite of
the initial gains, the stock eventually weakened and went on to a substantial loss.

saved themselves much of this pain by recognizing that they should get out
immediately when the higher line was violated.
A stock can be very successful for you but then turn sour. Much
earlier in this chapter, Figure 10.2 showed how Owens Illinois enjoyed
multihundred percent gains from 1996 through mid-1998. Taking the
longer-term perspective, however, we can see these gains were temporary
(Figure 10.35). By 2000, the stock was down to about $2.50, a staggering
loss in value. Waiting until the stock fell all the way below its former resistance level would not be recommended for a stock that had already
climbed so much—an ascending trend line would have given you much
earlier warning. The point is, however, that patterns do not guarantee future results. They simply aid in predicting short-term direction.
To close this topic as well as this chapter, let us look at one final stock
example: Avalon Bay (symbol AVB), which helps illustrate again how much
protection technical analysis can provide when used properly. Figure 10.36
shows a rounded top that would thrill most individuals hoping to sell the
stock short. Everything about the top seems proper, and using traditional
measurement techniques, we could conclude this stock was going to fall
from $28 to $18, generating a handsome profit for those who were short
the stock or long put options.
The fact is, however, that even though the stock did indeed sink below
$28, it didn’t stay there long. It paused there briefly and then began moving
higher. That would have been the signal for bears to close their positions

Rounded Tops and Saucers

269

FIGURE 10.36 This chart of Avalon Bay (symbol AVB) appears to be breaking
beneath support and on its way to a major fall.

at once for a very small loss. If a stock in this kind of pattern can muster
the kind of strength to shake off a pattern of this size, the stock buyers are
far too strong for the sellers (Figure 10.37). It is wise to move out of the
way quickly. In this instance, once the stock recomposed itself, it moved
higher many hundreds of percent. Those short the stock who refused to
cover their positions would have been wiped out.

FIGURE 10.37 The longer-term chart of AVB, as compared with Figure 10.36,
shows that the stock recovered quickly from its weakness and went on to a multihundred percent return.

270

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

SUMMARY
This chapter has given us two powerful tools for recognizing major turning
points in a stock’s direction: saucers (which establish a base from which a
stock may launch itself higher) and rounded tops (which show the exhaustion of a stock’s upward movement and provide an opportunity to sell the
stock short). In the next chapter, we will examine a more specialized form
of a basing pattern known as a cup with handle.

CHAPTER 11

Cup with Handle

n the previous chapter we learned (among other subjects) about the
saucer pattern, in which prices consolidate beneath a resistance level
and gradually ramp up to burst above that resistance level. The saucer
pattern can be very powerful if it is at the bottom of a chart after a long
descent and if it is accompanied by a substantial volume increase during
the breakout.
A relative of the saucer pattern is one identified by newspaper publisher and author William O’Neil as the “cup with handle” pattern (which
he introduced in his 1988 book, How to Make Money in Stocks). This pattern has a saucer shape, but instead of breaking above resistance, it pauses
and hammers out a smaller, shallower saucer referred to as the handle.
When the pattern is complete, it roughly resembles an edge-on view of a
teacup. It is formed in this manner:

I

r Sellers are in control of the market as the stock price decreases (this
is the left side of the cup).

r An equilibrium is created between buyers and sellers as the price stabilizes (this is the base of the cup).

r A rise in price takes place as buying interest and strength increase (this
is the right side of the cup).

r A hesitation on the part of the market occurs as the price again moves
away from resistance, but not nearly as deep as before.

r A renewed interest in the stock comes about, completed by a breakout
above resistance (this completes the handle and the entire pattern).

271

272

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 11.1 This chart of Red Hat shows an almost perfect cup with handle
formation: The left side is a well-formed cup, and the right side is a much smaller
dip, forming the handle. The volume also increases substantially on the breakout.

Figure 11.1 shows an outstanding example of this pattern. For nearly
two years, the price for Red Hat (symbol RHAT) fluctuated in what probably seemed at the time to be a relatively random fashion. In retrospect,
it is easy to see the formation. This pattern has been highlighted with
the straight lines on the chart to emphasize where the saucer and the
handle are.
Notice also the change in volume, highlighted in the lower-right portion
of the chart. Volume begins to swell as the handle completes, and when the
breakout takes place, volume increases dramatically. This is an extremely
bullish sign for the stock, since it affirms a significant increase in interest
among buyers of the stock.
What happened following this breakout (Figure 11.2) is typical of wellformed cup with handle patterns: the stock increased in value significantly.
In this case, the stock went up by 200 percent in less than one year. Carefully selected call options would have had even more sensational gains
than this.
In the last chapter, we saw that saucer patterns can repeat for a stock.
In fact, if you notice that a particular stock is prone to a particular pattern,
it is likely that you will see that same pattern in the future with that stock.

Cup with Handle

273

FIGURE 11.2 Following the breakout, indicated by the arrow, Red Hat tripled in
price. Volume also remained strong during this period.

The same holds true for the cup with handle pattern, and Red Hat again
provides us with a fitting example (Figure 11.3). After the initial pattern and
200 percent increase in price, illustrated in Figures 11.1 and 11.2, the stock
price eased back significantly. It then began forming another (smaller) cup
with handle pattern, and as before, the stock nearly tripled in price. Both
of these breakouts are highlighted with arrows on the graph.
Before continuing, one other fact that should be pointed out is that
these price charts are split-adjusted. For long-term charts, this can be extremely significant. A stock split has the effect of reducing the price of a
stock in proportion to the number of the new shares issued. As a simple
example, assume a stock had five million shares on the market and had a
price of $100. Further assume that the board of directors for this company
approved a two-for-one stock split. Assuming no further price movement in
the stock, on the day of the split, the stock would be priced at $50 (half the
former price) and 10 million shares would be outstanding (twice as many
as before). So the value of the stock as a whole hasn’t changed, although
the division of the company’s shares has.
When you are looking at the chart of a stock that has split a number of
times, the price of the shares many years ago may seem extremely cheap.
That is simply a result of the prices being adjusted to take account of the

274

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 11.3 Red Hat actually had two cup with handle patterns in this chart,
and in each instance, the stock approximately tripled in value.

splits. If the chart showed the actual price for every day of the stock’s history, the chart would be useless for a technician, because it would have
huge gaps in the price every time a split took place. Using split-adjusted
data is essential for analyzing the chart, which explains why a stock that
traded for $75 in 1974 might show up with a price of $1 during the same
time frame when you examine its graph in the present day.
As you have read earlier in this book, the length and strength of a
pattern are often related. 3M Corporation provides a remarkable example
of a very large cup with handle pattern and its resulting price movement.
Figure 11.4 shows a cup being formed from 1974 through 1983 and a handle being formed from 1983 to 1986. Although this is an exceptionally
well-formed pattern, even a pattern this good isn’t smooth. We are, after
all, not looking at a drawing of a physical cup. This is price movement measured over thousands of days, so you can expect a relatively high amount
of noise. The experienced chartist learns to filter this out so the pattern
is easy to discern. The resistance (on a split-adjusted basis) was at about
$1.03, which was hit in 1974, 1983, and 1986.
Figure 11.5 shows one of those kinds of charts that make a person wish
for a time machine—3M increased 85-fold in price. A $10,000 investment at
the breakout in 1986 would have grown to $850,000 by 2004. There is a

Cup with Handle

275

FIGURE 11.4 3M forms a massive cup with handle pattern over a 12-year period.

FIGURE 11.5 Following the breakout from the pattern, 3M went on to an incredible 8,500 percent gain.

276

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

rectangle drawn around the cup with handle pattern in the lower-left portion of the graph, and the rise afterward was virtually uninterrupted.

USING THE HORIZONTAL LINE TOOL
You learned how to use the trendline tool in Chapter 8 and the channel tool
in Chapter 9. Now we can learn about what is the simplest (but still very
useful) tool on the toolbar, the horizontal line tool (Figure 11.6). As the
name states, the purpose of this tool is to draw a horizontal line. You could
do the same thing with the trendline tool, but if you want a perfectly flat
line, it is much easier to simply use the horizontal line tool instead. This is
ideal for drawing resistance and support levels, which makes it handy for
patterns such as saucers, rounded tops, and cup with handle patterns.
To put a horizontal line on your chart, do the following:
1. Click on the horizontal line tool, as shown in Figure 11.6.
2. Click on the graph approximately at the place you want to place the

line; a horizontal line will appear.
3. As you move up and down, the line will move up and down. As you
move left and right, the line will shrink and grow. Move the mouse until
the line is at the length and position you desire, then click the mouse a
second time to complete it.
As with any drawn object, you can right-click on a completed horizontal line to modify it (Figure 11.7). The choices presented are:
Move: Allows you to move the line or change its length. When you select this, two handles appear: one at the start point on the left and
the other at the completion point on the right. Dragging the left
handle lets you shorten or lengthen the line on the left, and dragging the right handle lets you move the line up or down as well as
shorten or lengthen the line on the right.
Duplicate: This creates an identical line (same size, color) near the first
one, and this duplicate line will have both handles preselected so
you can immediately move it to the desired location.

FIGURE 11.6 The horizontal tool is the ﬁfth selection on the toolbar, located
between the channel and text tools.

Cup with Handle

277

FIGURE 11.7 Right-clicking on a horizontal line produces this pop-up menu to
modify the object.

Change Style/Color: Brings up the same dialog box as was shown in
Figure 8.16, allowing you to change the color, opacity, weight, and
pattern of the line. You can also preserve these settings so they are
used as the default for all future horizontal line drawings.
Extend: As with the same option for trendlines, the Extend function
makes the horizontal line extend infinitely into the future.
Show Value: Choosing this puts the price value (that is, the y-axis
value) on the top left of the line so you can read what the support
or resistance level is for the line you’ve drawn.
Delete: Choosing this deletes the selected line. If you make a mistake, you can always undo your decision with the Undo command
(Ctrl-Z).
Delete All Drawings: Choosing this deletes all the drawn objects on the
current chart. If you make a mistake, you can always undo your
decision with the Undo command (Ctrl-Z).

MORE CUP WITH HANDLE EXAMPLES
Not all patterns are as perfect as the ones we have seen so far. Let’s look
at some other historical examples to help train your eyes to find these patterns in your own analysis. Figure 11.8 shows an example of a somewhat
rougher cup with handle. But even though there is a lot of noise in the
chart, the rules we established early in the chapter still hold here: we have
a saucer (albeit a rough one) followed by a smaller, shallower saucer on
the right, completed by a breakout above resistance.

278

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 11.8 The stock ACMR consolidated between $2 and $4.70 over a period
of several years while creating this pattern.

The arrow in Figure 11.9 shows where the stock ACMR pushed above
its resistance level to enjoy a fivefold increase in price. The shape and clarity of the pattern are much easier to see on this scale. Only those who
are able to discern the pattern at the time of the breakout are the ones
who wind up profiting. Finding patterns in retrospect once they are much
cleaner and easier to see is simply an academic exercise.
The stock CNP provides another example of a stock that increased
fivefold subsequent to its pattern (Figure 11.10). This basing behavior took
a while to complete, spanning 1977 to 1985.
Patient observers of this stock were rewarded, as Figure 11.11 shows.
We see here another important aspect of stocks that perform well: a series of higher highs and higher lows. In 1989, 1994, 1997, and 2001, the
stock sank to short-term lows. But every one of these lows was higher
than the prior low, and every subsequent high was higher than the prior
high. This stairstep movement can be frustrating and nerve-wracking for
holders of the stock, but in the aggregate, that’s where major profits are
made.
The next example illustrates the largest return of any of the charts
in this chapter. The stock is EMC, and Figure 11.12 shows how the stock
moved between a 6-cent and 26-cent range (split-adjusted) in the late 1980s
and early 1990s. Those trading the stock at the time perhaps were frustrated at its performance. During just a couple of trading sessions, the stock
lost more than half its value (plunging from a split-adjusted 26 cents to 10
cents). But once the pattern was complete, an amazing thing happened.
