In the semidarkness of his small apartment, Marco went through his earlymorning routine with his usual efficiency. Except for prison, when he had
little choice and no motivation to hit the ground running, he'd never been
one to linger after waking. There was too much to do, too much to see. He'd
often arrived at his office before 6:00 a.m. breathing fire and looking for the
day's first brawl, and often after only three or four hours of sleep.
Those habits were returning now. He wasn't attacking each day, wasn't
looking for a fight, but there were other challenges.
He showered in less than three minutes, another old habit that was aided
mightily on Via Fondazza by a severe shortage of warm water. Over the
lavatory he shaved and worked carefully around the quite handsome growth
he was cultivating on his face. The mustache was almost complete; the chin
was solid gray. He looked nothing like Joel Backman, nor did he sound like
him. He was training himself to speak much slower and in a softer voice.
And of course he was doing so in another language.
His quick morning routine included a little espionage. Beside his bed was a
chest of drawers where he kept his things. Four drawers, all the same size,
with the last one six inches above the floor. He took a

- 173 -

John Grisham

The Broker

very thin strand of white thread he'd unraveled from a bed sheet; the same
thread he used every day. He licked both ends, leaving as much saliva as
possible, then stuck one end under the bottom of the last drawer. The other
end was stuck to the side brace of the chest, so that when the drawer was
opened the invisible thread was pulled out of position.
Someone, Luigi he presumed, entered his room every day while he was
studying with either Ermanno or Francesca and went through the drawers.
His desk was in the small living room, under the only window. On it he kept
an assortment of papers, notepads, books; Ermanno's guide to Bologna, a
few copies of the Herald Tribune, a sad collection of free shopping guides
he'd gathered from Gypsies who passed them out on the streets, his wellused Italian-English dictionary, and the growing pile of study aids Ermanno
was burdening him with. The desk was only moderately well organized, a
condition that irritated him. His old lawyer's desk, one that wouldn't fit in his
current living room, had been famous for its meticulous order. A secretary
fussed over it late every afternoon.
But amid the rubble was an invisible scheme. The desk's surface was some
type of hardwood that had been nicked and marked over the decades. One
defect was a small stain of some sort-Marco had decided it was probably
ink. It was about the size of a small button and was located almost in the
dead center of the desk. Every morning, as he was leaving, he placed the
corner of a sheet of scratch paper directly in the center of the ink stain. Not
even the most diligent of spies would have noticed.
And they didn't. Whoever sneaked in for the daily sweep had never, not
once, been careful enough to place the papers and books back in their
precise location.
Every day, seven days a week, even on the weekends when he was not
studying, Luigi and his gang entered and did their dirty work. Marco was
considering a plan whereby he would wake up one Sunday morning with a
massive headache, telephone Luigi, still the only person he talked to on the
cell phone, and ask him to fetch some aspirin or whatever they used in Italy.
He would go through the ruse of nursing himself, staying in bed, keeping the
apartment dark, until late in the afternoon when he would call Luigi again
and announce he felt

- 174 -

John Grisham

The Broker

much better and needed something to eat. They would walk around the
corner, have a quick bite, then Marco would suddenly feel like returning to
his apartment. They would be gone, for less than an hour.
Would someone else handle the sweep?
The plan was taking shape. Marco wanted to know who else was watching
him. How large was the net? If their concern was simply to keep him alive,
then why would they sift through his apartment every day? What were they
afraid of?
They were afraid he would disappear. And why should that frighten them
so? He was a free man, perfectly free to move about. His disguise was good.
His language skills were rudimentary but passable and improving daily.
Why should they care if he simply drifted away? Caught a train and toured
the country? Never came back? Wouldn't that make their lives easier?
And why keep him on such a short leash, with no passport and very little
cash?
They were afraid he would disappear.
He turned off the lights and opened the door. It was still dark outside under
the arcaded sidewalks of Via Fondazza. He locked the door behind him and
hurried away, off in search of another early- morning cafe.
Through the thick wall, Luigi was awakened by a buzzer somewhere in the
distance; the same buzzer that awakened him most mornings at such
dreadful hours.
"What's that?" she said.
"Nothing," he said as he flung the covers in her direction and stumbled,
naked, out of the room. He hurried across the den to the kitchen, where he
unlocked the door, stepped inside, closed and locked it, and looked at the
monitors on a folding table. Marco was leaving through his front door, as
usual. And at ten minutes after six, again, nothing unusual about that. It was
a very frustrating habit. Damn Americans.
He pushed a button and the monitor went silent. Procedures required him to
get dressed immediately, hit the streets, find Marco, and watch him until
Ermanno made contact. But Luigi was growing tired of procedures. And he
had Simona waiting.
She was barely twenty, a student from Naples, an absolute doll he'd met a
week earlier at a club he'd discovered. Last night had been

- 175 -

John Grisham

The Broker

their first together, and it would not be their last. She was already sleeping
again when he returned and buried himself under the blankets.
It was cold outside. He had Simona. Whitaker was in Milan, probably still
asleep and probably in bed with an Italian woman. There was absolutely no
one monitoring what he, Luigi, would do for the entire day. Marco was
doing nothing but drinking coffee.
He pulled Simona close and fell asleep.
It was a clear, sunny day in early March. Marco finished a two- hour session
with Ermanno. As always, when the weather cooperated, they walked the
streets of central Bologna and spoke nothing but Italian. The verb of the day
had been "fare," translated as "to do" or "to make," and as far as Marco
could tell it was one of the most versatile and overused verbs in the entire
language. The act of shopping was "fare la spesa," translated as "to make the
expenses, or to do the acquisitions." Asking a question was "fare la
domanda," "to make a question." Having breakfast was "fare la colazione,"
"to do breakfast."
Ermanno signed off a little early, again claiming he had studies of his own to
pursue. More often than not, when a strolling lesson came to an end, Luigi
made his appearance, taking the handoff from Ermanno, who vanished with
remarkable speed. Marco suspected that such coordination was meant to
give him the impression that he was always being watched.
They shook hands and said goodbye in front of Feltrineili's, one of the many
bookstores in the university section. Luigi appeared from around a corner
and offered the usual hearty "Buon giorno. Pranziamo?" Are we having
lunch?
"Certamente."
The lunches were becoming less frequent, with Marco getting more chances
to dine by himself and handle the menu and the service.
"Ho trovato un nuovo ristorante." I have found a new restaurant.
"Andiamo." Let's go.
It wasn't clear what Luigi did with his time during the course of a day, but
there was no doubt he spent hours scouring the city for different cafes,
trattorias, and restaurants. They had never eaten at the same place twice.

- 176 -

John Grisham

The Broker

They walked through some narrow streets and came to Via dell'
Indipendenza. Luigi did most of the talking, always in very slow, deliberate,
precise Italian. He'd forgotten English as far as Marco was concerned.
''Francesca can't study this afternoon," he said.
"Why not?"
"She has a tour. A group of Australians called her yesterday. Her business is
very slow this time of the year. Do you like her?"
'Am I supposed to like her?"
"Well, that would be nice."
"She's not exactly warm and fuzzy."
"Is she a good teacher?"
"Excellent. Her perfect English inspires me to study more."
"She says you study very hard, and that you are a nice man."
"She likes me?"
"Yes, as a student. Do you think she's pretty?"
"Most Italian women are pretty, including Francesca."
They turned onto a small street, Via Goito, and Luigi pointed just ahead.
"Here," Luigi said, and they stopped at the door to Franco Rossi's. "I've
never been here, but I hear it's very good."
Franco himself greeted them with a smile and open arms. He wore a stylish
dark suit that contrasted nicely with his thick gray hair. He took their coats
and chatted with Luigi as if they were old friends. Luigi was dropping names
and Franco was approving of them. A table near the front window was
selected. ''Our best one," Franco said with a gush. Marco looked around and
didn't see a bad table.
"The antipasti here are superb," Franco said modestly, as if he hated to brag
about his food. "My favorite of the day, however, would be the sliced
mushroom salad. Lino adds some truffles, some Parmesan, a few sliced
apples . . ." At that point Franco's words faded as he kissed the tips of his
fingers. "Really good," he managed to say with his eyes closed, dreaming.
They agreed on the salad and Franco was off to welcome the next guests.
"Who's Lino?" asked Marco.
"His brother, the chef." Luigi dipped some Tuscan bread in a bowl of olive
oil. A waiter stopped by and asked about wine. "Certainly," Luigi said. "I'd
like something red, from the region."
There was no question about it. The waiter stabbed his pen at the

- 177 -

John Grisham

The Broker

wine list and said, "This one here, a Liano from Imola. It is fantastic." He
took a whiff of air just to emphasize the point. Luigi had no choice. "We'll
try it."
"We were talking about Francesca," Marco said. "She seems so distracted. Is
something wrong with her?"
Luigi dipped some bread in the olive oil and chewed on a large bite while
debating how much to tell Marco. "Her husband is not well," he said.
"Does she have children?"
"I don't think so."
"What's wrong with her husband?"
"He's very sick. I think he's older. I've never met him."
II Signore Rossi was back to guide them through the menus, which wasn't
really needed. He explained that the tortellini just happened to be the best in
Bologna, and particularly superb that day. Lino would be happy to come out
of the kitchen and verify this. After the tortellini, an excellent choice would
be the veal filet with truffles.
For more than two hours they followed Franco's advice, and when they left
they pushed their stomachs back down Via dell' Indipendenza and discussed
their siestas.
He found her by accident at the Piazza Maggiore. He was having an espresso
at an outdoor table, braving the chill in the bright sunshine, after a vigorous
thirty-minute walk, when he saw a small group of fair-haired seniors coming
out of the Palazzo Comunale, the city's town hall. A familiar figure was
leading, a thin, slightly built woman who held her shoulders high and
straight, her dark hair falling out from under a burgundy beret. He left one
euro on the table and headed toward them. At the fountain of Neptune, he
eased in behind the group-ten in all-and listened to Francesca at work. She
was explaining that the gigantic bronze image of the Roman god of the sea
was sculpted by a Frenchman over a three-year period, from 1563 to 1566. It
was commissioned by a bishop under an urban beautification program aimed
at pleasing the pope. Legend has it that before he began the actual work, the
Frenchman was concerned about the ample nudity of the project-Neptune is
stark naked-so he sent the design

- 178 -

John Grisham

The Broker

to the pope in Rome for approval. The pope wrote back, "For Bologna, it's
okay."
Francesca was a bit livelier with the real tourists than she was with Marco.
Her voice had more energy, her smile came quicker. She was wearing a pair
of very stylish eyeglasses that made her look ten years younger. Hiding
behind the Australians, he watched and listened for a long time without
being noticed.
She explained that the Fontana del Nettuno is now one of the most famous
symbols of the city, and perhaps the most popular backdrop for photos.
Cameras were pulled from every pocket, and the tourists took their time
posing in front of Neptune. At one point, Marco managed to move close
enough to make eye contact with Francesca. When she saw him she
instinctively smiled, then said a soft "Buon giorno."
"Buon giorno. Mind if I tag along?" he asked in English.
"No. Sorry I had to cancel."
"No problem. How about dinner?"
She glanced around as if she'd done something wrong.
"To study, of course. Nothing more," he said.
"No, I'm sorry," she said. She looked beyond him, across the piazza to the
Basilica di San Petronio. "That little cafe over there," she said, "beside the
church, at the corner. Meet me there at five and we'll study for an hour."
"Va bene."
The tour continued a few steps to the west wall of the Palazzo Comunale,
where she stopped them in front of three large framed collections of blackand-white photos. The history lesson was that during World War II the heart
of the Italian Resistance was in and around Bologna. The Bolognesi hated
Mussolini and his fascists and the German occupiers, and worked diligently
in the underground. The Nazis retaliated with a vengeance-their wellpublicized rule was that they would murder ten Italians for every one
German soldier killed by the Resistance. In a series of fifty-five massacres in
and around Bologna they murdered thousands of young Italian fighters.
Their names and faces were on the wall, forever memorialized.
It was a somber moment, and the elderly Australians inched closer to look at
the heroes. Marco moved closer too. He was struck by

- 179 -

John Grisham

The Broker

their youthfulness, by their promise that was forever lost-slaughtered for
their bravery.
As Francesca moved on with her group, he stayed behind, staring at the
faces that covered much of the long wall. There were hundreds, maybe
thousands of them. A pretty female face here and there. Brothers. Fathers
and sons. An entire family.
Peasants willing to die for their country and their beliefs. Loyal patriots with
nothing to give but their lives. But not Marco. No sir. When forced to choose
between loyalty and money, Marco had done what he always did. He'd gone
for the money. He'd turned his back on his country.
All for the glory of cash.
She was standing inside the door of the cafe, waiting, not drinking anything
but, of course, having a smoke. Marco had decided that her willingness to
meet so late for a lesson was further evidence of her need for the work.
"Do you feel like walking?" she said before she said hello.
"Of course." He'd walked several miles with Ermanno before lunch, then for
hours after lunch waiting on her. He'd walked enough for one day, but then
what else was there to do? After a month of doing several miles a day he
was in shape. "Where?"
"It's a long one," she said.
They wound through narrow streets, heading to the southwest, chatting
slowly in Italian, discussing the morning's lesson with Ermanno. She talked
about the Australians, always an easy and amiable group. Near the edge of
the old city they approached the Porta Saragozza and Marco realized where
he was, and where he was going.
"Up to San Luca," he said.
"Yes. The weather is very clear, the night will be beautiful. Are you okay?"
His feet were killing him but he would never think of declining. "Andiamo,"
he said. Let's go.
Sitting almost one thousand feet above the city on the Colle della Guardia,
one of the first foothills of the Apennines, the Santuario di San Luca has, for
eight centuries, looked over Bologna as its protector and guardian. To get up
to it, without getting wet or sun

- 180 -

John Grisham

The Broker

burned, the Bolognesi decided to do what they'd always done best- build a
covered sidewalk. Beginning in 1674, and continuing without interruption
for sixty-five years, they built arches; 666 arches over a walkway that
eventually runs for 3.6 kilometers, the longest porticoed sidewalk in the
world.
Though Marco had studied the history, the details were much more
interesting when they came from Francesca. The hike up was a steady climb,
and they paced themselves accordingly. After a hundred arches, his calves
were screaming for relief. She, on the other hand, glided along as if she
could climb mountains. He kept waiting for all that cigarette smoking to
slow her down.
To finance such a grandiose and extravagant project, Bologna used its
considerable wealth. In a rare display of unity among the feuding factions,
each arch of the portico was funded by a different group of merchants,
artisans, students, churches, and noble families. To record their achievement,
and to secure their immortality, they were allowed to hang plaques opposite
their arches. Most had disappeared over time.
Francesca stopped for a brief rest at the 170th arch, where one of the few
remaining plaques still hung. It was known as "la Madonna grassa," the fat
Madonna. There were fifteen chapels en route. They stopped again between
the eighth and ninth chapels, where a bridge had been built to straddle a
road. Long shadows were falling through the porticoes as they trudged up
the steepest part of the incline. "It's well lighted at night," she assured him.
"For the trip down."
Marco wasn't thinking about the trip down. He was still looking up, still
gazing at the church, which at times seemed closer and at other times
seemed to be sneaking away from them. His thighs were aching now, his
steps growing heavier.
When they reached the crest and stepped from under the 666th portico, the
magnificent basilica spread before them. Its lights were coming on as
darkness surrounded the hills above Bologna, and its dome glowed in shades
of gold. "It's closed now," she said. "We'll have to see it another day."
During the hike up, he'd caught a glimpse of a bus easing down the hill. If he
ever decided to visit San Luca again for the sole purpose of wandering
through another cathedral, he'd be sure to take the bus.

- 181 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"This way," she said softly, beckoning him over. "I know a secret path."
He followed her along a gravel trail behind the church to a ledge where they
stopped and took in the city below them. "This is my favorite spot," she said,
breathing deeply, as if trying to inhale the beauty of Bologna.
"How often do you come here?"
"Several times a year, usually with groups. They always take the bus.
Sometimes on a Sunday afternoon I'll enjoy the walk up."
"By yourself?"
"Yes, by myself."
"Could we sit somewhere?"
"Yes, there is a small bench hidden over there. No one knows about it." He
followed her down a few steps, then along a rocky path to another ledge with
views just as spectacular.
"Are your legs tired?" she asked.
"Of course not," he lied.
She lit a cigarette and enjoyed it as few people could possibly enjoy one.
They sat in silence for a long time, both resting, both thinking and gazing at
the shimmering lights of Bologna.
Marco finally spoke. "Luigi tells me your husband is very ill. I'm sorry."
She glanced at him with a look of surprise, then turned away. "Luigi told me
the personal stuff is off-limits."
"Luigi changes the rules. What has he told you about me?"
"I haven't asked. You're from Canada, traveling around, trying to learn
Italian."
"Do you believe that?"
"Not really."
"Why not?"
"Because you claim to have a wife and a family, yet you leave them for a
long trip to Italy. And if you're just a businessman off on a pleasure trip,
then where does Luigi fit in? And Ermanno? Why do you need those
people?"
"Good questions. I have no wife."
"So it's all a lie." Yes.
"What's the truth?"

- 182 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"I can't tell you." "Good. I don't want to know." "You have enough
problems, don't you, Francesca?" "My problems are my business."
She lit another cigarette. "Can I have one of those?" he asked. "You smoke?"
"Many years ago." He picked one from the pack and lit it. The lights from
the city grew brighter as the night engulfed them. "Do you tell Luigi
everything we do?" he asked. "I tell him very little." "Good."

- 183 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Teddy's last visit to the White House was scheduled for 10:00 a.m. He
planned to be late. Beginning at seven that morning, he met with his
unofficial transition team-all four deputy directors and his senior people. In
quiet little conferences he informed those he'd trusted for many years that he
was on the way out, that it had been inevitable for a long time, that the
agency was in good shape and life would go on.
Those who knew him well sensed an air of relief. He was, after all, pushing
eighty and his legendary bad health was actually getting worse.
At precisely 8:45, while meeting with William Lucat, his deputy director for
operations, he summoned Julia Javier for their Backman meeting. The
Backman case was important, but in the scheme of global intelligence it was
mid-list.
How odd that an operation dealing with a disgraced former lobbyist would
be Teddy's downfall.
Julia Javier sat next to the ever vigilant Hoby, who was still taking notes that
no one would ever see, and began matter-of-factly. "He's in place, still in
Bologna, so if we had to activate now we could do so."

- 184 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"I thought the plan was to move him to a village in the countryside,
someplace where we could watch him more closely," Teddy said.
"That's a few months down the road."
"We don't have a few months." Teddy turned to Lucat and said, "What
happens if we push the button now?"
"It'll work. They'll get him somewhere in Bologna. It's a nice city with
almost no crime. Murders are unheard of, so his death will get some
attention if his body is found there. The Italians will quickly realize that he's
not-what's his name, Julia?"
"Marco," Teddy said without looking at notes. "Marco Lazzeri."
"Right, they'll scratch their heads and wonder who the hell he is."
Julia said, "There's no clue as to his real identity. They'll have a body, a fake
ID, but no family, no friends, no address, no job, nothing. They'll bury him
like a pauper and keep the file open for a year. Then they'll close it."
"That's not our problem," Teddy said. "We're not doing the killing."
"Right," said Lucat. "It'll be a bit messier in the city, but the boy likes to
wander the streets. They'll get him. Maybe a car will hit him. The Italians
drive like hell, you know."
"It won't be that difficult, will it?"
"I wouldn't think so."
"And what are our chances of knowing when it happens?" Teddy asked.
Lucat scratched his beard and looked across the table at Julia, who was
biting a nail and looking over at Hoby, who was stirring green tea with a
plastic stick. Lucat finally said, "I'd say fifty-fifty, at the scene anyway.
We'll be watching twenty-four/seven, but the people who'll take him out will
be the best of the best. There may be no witnesses."
Julia added, "Our best chance will be later, a few weeks after they bury the
pauper. We have good people in place. We'll listen closely. I think we'll hear
it later."
Lucat said, "As always, when we're not pulling the trigger, there's a chance
we won't know for sure."
"We cannot screw this up, understand? It'll be nice to know that Backman is
dead-God knows he deserves it-but the goal of the op
