
118

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

going to use SPY and QQQQ as your primary indicators
of general market direction. Over the course of several
years of watching and trading these broader indexes, we
have come to note ﬁve different types of market conditions.
They are:
• Bullish strongly trending
• Bullish weakly trending
• Bearish strongly trending
• Bearish weakly trending
• Range-bound (or nontrending)

In general, we want to focus on long plays in the ﬁrst two
types of market, short plays in the next two types, and a
mix of longs and shorts in the last type of market. Let’s ﬁrst
deﬁne the parameters of these different market types.

BULLISH: STRONGLY TRENDING
The Focus It should be on long setups, particularly
breakout plays (to be explained later).
Characteristics This is everyone’s favorite kind of
market—except, of course, those “permabears” who always
think the U.S. economy is going to collapse at any moment.
This is the sort of market that sparked the day-trading
frenzy in the late 1990s: everything goes up, and up a lot,
nearly every day. The bulls are completely in control and
win every battle with the bears. Making money is easy in
a bullish strongly trending market, as long as you have the
right entry system. But the drawback is that when this kind

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

119

of market reaches a top, the sell-off can be quick and harsh
and can wipe out months of hard-won gains in a matter
of days. So in a strong bull market you must always be
careful to play defensively against a possible reversal of
momentum.
What to Look For Bullish strongly trending markets are
easy to spot. Here are the key indicators:
• The 20 MA is above the 50 MA.
• Both the 20 MA and the 50 MA are rising.
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA

is large and/or getting larger.
• Pullbacks in price reach only to the 20 MA, or at
the most between the 20 MA and 50 MA; they do
not reach all the way to the 50 MA.
How to Play It Use one of our systems as outlined later.
Here we can say that a bullish strongly trending market is
a great market to be in if you are already long. But if you
are coming late to the party (and hopefully not too late),
your best play is to look for stocks that are breaking out to
new highs from periods of consolidation. You must make
sure these breakout plays are conﬁrmed by the various
technical indicators we use. If price is making a new high
but the indicators are not making new highs, then you have
bearish divergence and you should move on to another
chart.
Chart Example The chart of SPY in Figure 7.1 shows a
classic bullish strongly trending market. Note that the 20

120

Figure 7.1

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

SPY—bullish: strongly trending.

MA (dotted line) is above the 50 MA (solid line), and that
both MAs are in a rising uptrend. Further, the 20 MA is
quite far away from the 50 MA, and the distance between
is getting larger rather than smaller. Finally, note that the
mid-August pullback and the two pullbacks in September
traveled only as far as the 20 MA before the trend upward
resumed again.

BULLISH: WEAKLY TRENDING
The Focus It should be on long setups, particularly pullback plays (to be explained later).
Characteristics This is a tougher market to trade, since
the pullbacks tend to be more frequent, steeper, and
longer-lived. In a weakly trending market, corrections can
last a couple of weeks. This can be frustrating if you are

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

121

sitting on open long positions. Ultimately, the bulls are in
control, but it can seem for days on end that the bears have
moved in and made themselves right at home. However,
this is one of the best markets in which to ﬁnd great
risk/reward scenarios in our setups. Those lengthier pullbacks serve to take a lot of the risk out of a trade, so our
stop-loss can be closer to entry, and our exit targets can be
that much further away.
What to Look For Bullish weakly trending markets are
not quite as obvious as their strong counterparts, but with
some experience you should be able to recognize them.
Here are the key indicators:
• The 20 MA is mostly (though not always) above

the 50 MA.
• The 50 MA is rising, but the 20 MA is ﬂuctuating
(though mostly rising).
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA
changes frequently.
• Pullbacks reach all the way to the 50 MA
(sometimes beyond but only brieﬂy).
How to Play It Use one of our systems outlined later.
Here we can say that a bullish weakly trending market is an
ideal market for trend trading. You should ﬁnd stocks that
are showing strong trending action (normally stronger than
the general market itself ) but have pulled back to an area
of support. This pullback should be conﬁrmed by oversold
indicators, and the current daily candlestick should put in
a reversal bar of some kind before you consider an entry.

122

Figure 7.2

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

SPY—bullish: weakly trending.

Chart Example The chart of SPY in Figure 7.2 shows a
classic bullish weakly trending market. Note that the 20
MA remains above the 50 MA, and that the 50 MA is
clearly in a rising uptrend. But also note that there are ﬂuctuations in the 20 MA, indicating that sell-offs in the index
are quite sharp and deep. You should also note that the various pullbacks seen in every month of this chart period
traveled as far as the 50 MA, and sometimes beyond, before
the trend upward resumed.

BEARISH: STRONGLY TRENDING
The Focus It should be on short setups, particularly
breakdown plays (to be explained later).
Characteristics This is perhaps the most difﬁcult market to trade. There are two reasons for this. First, bear
markets always ﬁght the long-term trend of the stock mar-

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

123

ket (which is up) and, as such, tend to be short-lived. The
second reason has to do with the extremely volatile nature
of short-covering. Strong downtrends can cause a market
to get so oversold so quickly that automated buy programs
kick in to scoop up cheap shares. This causes traders and
fund managers to cover their short positions in order to
lock in proﬁts. As they do so, they are forced to buy back
shares they have borrowed, and the result is a sharp and
quick short-covering rally (what traders call a dead cat
bounce). But the advantage of bearish strongly trending
markets is that they tend to go down faster than bullish
strongly trending markets go up. When the bears are in
control of a market, as they are in this type of market, they
tend to go wild and overdo things. Can you blame them?
For over 200 years, they have had to play second ﬁddle to
the ﬂashier bulls, and ﬁnally this is their chance in the spotlight. But you can take advantage of this. If you are willing
to play the short side—to trend-trade for a living you must
be willing to short—you can potentially make a lot more
money in less time in a bearish strongly trending market
than in any other type of market. And it is always a thrill
to make money while 90 percent of the investing world is
losing theirs.
What to Look For A bearish strongly trending market
is as easy to spot as its bullish cousin. Here are the key indicators:
• The 20 MA is below the 50 MA.
• Both the 20 MA and the 50 MA are falling.
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA

is large and/or getting larger.

124

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• Rallies reach only to the 20 MA or, at the most

between the 20 MA and the 50 MA.
How to Play It Use one of our systems outlined later.
Here we can say that a bearish strongly trending market is
a great market to be in if you are already short. But if you
are coming late to the party (and hopefully not too late),
your best play is to look for stocks that are breaking down
to new lows from periods of consolidation. You must make
sure these breakdown plays are conﬁrmed by the various
technical indicators we use. If price is making a new low, but
the indicators are not making new lows, then you have bullish divergence and you should move on to another chart.
Chart Example The chart of SPY in Figure 7.3 shows a
classic bearish strongly trending market. Note that once the
bear market begins in earnest in late April, the 20 MA

Figure 7.3

SPY—bearish: strongly trending.

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

Figure 7.4

125

SPY—a quick rally ends the bearish trend.

crosses below the 50 MA and remains there throughout the
period. Also note that both MAs are falling, and that the
20 MA is falling at a faster pace than the 50 MA. You
should also note that the various rallies seen in this chart,
once the strong trend is established, travel only as far as the
20 MA before the dominant trend downward resumes.
As a follow-up, keep in mind our previous warning:
bearish strongly trending markets can end very abruptly if
a short-covering frenzy sets in. Check out what happened
just two weeks after SPY tested the 20 MA in a bearish
strongly trending market: instead of resuming the dominant trend, it reversed and killed it.

BEARISH: WEAKLY TRENDING
The Focus It should be on short setups, particularly rallies into resistance (to be explained later).

126

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Characteristics This is an easier bear market to trade
than the strongly trending version, since the rallies into
resistance that trigger our setups take a lot of the risk out
of the trade. But it still suffers from the two problems associated with bear markets we mentioned previously. In a
weakly trending market, corrections (rallies) can last a couple of weeks, which can be frustrating if you are sitting on
open short positions. Ultimately, the bears are in control,
but it can seem for days on end that the bulls have moved
in and made themselves right at home. However, just like
its bullish cousin, this is one of the best markets in which
to ﬁnd great risk/reward setups. Those lengthier corrections to the dominant trend serve to take a lot of the risk
out of a trade, so our stop-loss can be closer to entry, and
our exit targets can be that much farther away.
What to Look For Bearish weakly trending markets are
also easy to spot. Here are the key indicators:
• The 20 MA is mostly (though not always) below

the 50 MA.
• The 50 MA is falling, but the 20 MA is
ﬂuctuating (though mostly falling).
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA
changes frequently.
• Rallies reach all the way to the 50 MA
(sometimes beyond but only brieﬂy).
How to Play It Use one of our systems outlined later.
Here we can say that a bearish weakly trending market is

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

127

a good market for trend trading. You should ﬁnd stocks
that are showing strong downwardly trending action (normally stronger than the general market itself ) but have rallied up into an area of resistance. This rally should be
conﬁrmed by overbought indicators. The daily candlestick
should put in a reversal bar of some kind before you consider an entry.
Chart The chart of SPY in Figure 7.5 shows a classic
bearish weakly trending market. Note that the 20 MA
remains for the most part below the 50 MA. There is a
period in February where the 20 MA rises above the 50
MA—a sign that the index might be moving into a rangebound condition. But then the trend resumes with another
bearish crossover. Note that the 50 MA is clearly in a falling
trend throughout the period. Also note that there are ﬂuc-

Figure 7.5

SPY—bearish: weakly trending.

128

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

tuations in the 20 MA, indicating that the rallies in the
index are quite sharp and prolonged. These various rallies
traveled as far as the 50 MA, and sometimes beyond, before
the trend downward resumed again.

RANGE-BOUND (NONTRENDING)
The Focus It should be on both long and short setups,
particularly trendline breakout/breakdown plays (to be
explained later).
Characteristics Range-bound markets are the bane of a
buy-and-holder’s existence, but for the technical trader they
are a godsend. This is because the technical indicators we
use (stochastics, CCI, RSI) register overbought and oversold signals that work most robustly in range-bound markets. Moreover, if you are willing to trade more frequently,
you can make a lot of money in a range-bound market. It
is essential therefore to learn how to identify range-bound
markets, because the general market spends a majority of
its time in such a condition. In a range-bound market, price
bounces up and down between roughly parallel pivot points
of support (on the low side) and resistance (on the high
side). Such a market suggests that bulls and bears are waging a war with each other, but no one side is clearly winning. Trading ranges between parallel pivot points can be
either wide or narrow, and it is a general rule that the wider
the trading range, the longer price stays within it. Narrower ranges tend to be broken to the upside or downside
more easily.

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

129

What to Look For Range-bound markets are not always
easy to spot, but there are rules to follow. Here are the key
indicators:
• The 20 MA spends about as much time above as

below the 50 MA.
• The 50 MA is mostly ﬂat, while the 20 MA varies
from rising to falling.
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA
varies greatly.
• Rallies and sell-offs easily pass through both
moving averages.
How to Play It Use one of our systems outlined later.
Here it can be said that it is frustrating for traders when a
range-bound market ﬁrst appears, especially when it follows
a strong up- or downtrend. Traders can be reluctant to transition from a fast-money, momentum environment (strong
trend) to the more strategic, labor-intensive environment
of the range-bound condition. But once the trading range
is established, it can be an ideal trading environment. In a
trading range, we use trendlines to highlight and delimit the
minitrends within the range and our technical indicators to
spot oversold and overbought levels as well as bullish and
bearish divergence. We are looking to play reversals right
off the pivot points of support and resistance, conﬁrmed by
a break of the intrarange trendline. Indicator divergence is
often a key to locating the best reversal trades and will often
let us pinpoint with extreme accuracy the tops and bottoms
of movements within the range.

130

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Chart The chart of SPY in Figure 7.6 shows a rather
wide trading range or range-bound condition. Note that
the 50 MA remains relatively ﬂat throughout this period,
while the 20 MA bounces up and down following price.
Also note that price does not pause much at either moving
average but for the most part continues up and down as if
they were not even there (in trending markets the MAs
tend to act as support and resistance). That snake-ish look
to the 20 MA, up and down like a roller coaster, is a telltale sign that we are in a range-bound market.
Once you understand the type of market you are currently trading in, you will have a better sense of the type
of trade to look for: long or short, breakout or breakdown,
pullback to support or rally into resistance, and so on. As
indicated at the beginning of this section, this piece of your
trading strategy is far from being the most important. The

Figure 7.6

SPY—trading range.

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

131

vital key to your success as a trend trader is ﬁnding the
best-looking chart, regardless of what the rest of the market is doing. But if you can consistently get yourself on the
same side as the market’s net money ﬂow, you will give your
trading an extra edge. Sometimes that can make the difference between long-term success and a short-term wipeout.

This page intentionally left blank

put your marketreading skills to
the test

CHAPTER
8

I the following pages I am going to display a number of
N

charts from the ETF proxies that represent the three primary stock averages: SPY (S&P 500), DIA (Dow Jones
Industrial Average), and QQQQ (Nasdaq 100). Take a
piece of paper and jot down what market type you think
each chart displays. It might be helpful ﬁrst to review the
rules for each of the market types.
Bullish: Strongly Trending
• The 20 MA is above the 50 MA.
• Both the 20 MA and the 50 MA are rising.
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA
is large and/or getting larger.
• Pullbacks reach only to the 20 MA or, at the
most, between the 20 MA and 50 MA.
Bullish: Weakly Trending
• The 20 MA is mostly (though not always) above
the 50 MA.
• The 50 MA is rising, but the 20 MA is ﬂuctuating
(though mostly rising).
133

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

134

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA

changes frequently.
• Pullbacks reach all the way to the 50 MA
(sometimes beyond but only brieﬂy).
Bearish: Strongly Trending
• The 20 MA is below the 50 MA.
• Both the 20 MA and the 50 MA are falling.
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA
is large and/or getting larger.
• Rallies reach only to the 20 MA or, at the most,
between the 20 MA and 50 MA.
Bearish: Weakly Trending
• The 20 MA is mostly (though not always) below
the 50 MA.
• The 50 MA is falling, but the 20 MA is
ﬂuctuating (though mostly falling).
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA
changes frequently.
• Rallies reach all the way to the 50 MA
(sometimes beyond but only brieﬂy).
Range-Bound
• The 20 MA spends about as much time above as
below the 50 MA.
• The 50 MA is mostly ﬂat, while the 20 MA varies
from rising to falling.
• The distance between the 20 MA and the 50 MA
varies greatly.

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

135

• Rallies and sell-offs easily pass through both

moving averages.
Now, see how many of the following charts (Figures
8.1–8.20) you can correctly identify. The correct answers
are located after the charts, along with commentary. Note
that some of these charts will show transitional periods
between one type and another. To answer correctly in these
cases you will need to identify both market types on either
side of the transition. There may be a few charts that
clearly show more than two types of market. So think carefully about your answers. Review the rules and stay
focused!

1. Dow Jones Industrials, 2006

Figure 8.1

Trend Test Chart 1.

136

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

2. S&P 500, 1998

Figure 8.2

Trend Test Chart 2.

3. S&P 500, 2000

Figure 8.3

Trend Test Chart 3.

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

4. S&P 500, 2006

Figure 8.4

Trend Test Chart 4.

5. Dow Jones Industrials, 2005

Figure 8.5

Trend Test Chart 5.

137

138

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

6. Nasdaq 100, 2006

Figure 8.6

Trend Test 6.

7. Dow Jones Industrials, 2000

Figure 8.7

Trend Test Chart 7.

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

8. Dow Jones Industrials, 2004

Figure 8.8

Trend Test Chart 8.

9. Nasdaq 100, 2004

Figure 8.9

Trend Chart 9.

139

140

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

10. S&P 500, 2005

Figure 8.10

Trend Test Chart 10.

11. Nasdaq 100, 2001

Figure 8.11

Trend Test 11.

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

12. Dow Jones Industrials, 2006

Figure 8.12

Trend Test Chart 12.

13. Nasdaq 100, 2006

Figure 8.13

Trend Test Chart 13.

141

142

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

14. Dow Jones Industrials, 2004

Figure 8.14

Trend Test Chart 14.

15. Nasdaq 100, 2004

Figure 8.15

Trend Test Chart 15.

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

16. Nasdaq 100, 2001

Figure 8.16

Trend Test Chart 16.

17. Dow Jones Industrials, 1999

Figure 8.17

Trend Test Chart 17.

143

144

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

18. Dow Jones Industrials, 2003

Figure 8.18

Trend Test Chart 18.

19. Nasdaq 100, 2005

Figure 8.19

Trend Test Chart 19.

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

145

20. Nasdaq 100, 1999

Figure 8.20

Trend Test Chart 20.

Remember, these answers and their supportive commentary are the products of my own subjective readings of
the charts based on many years of active trading experience. As mentioned, chart reading is not an exact science.
Subjectivity is involved no matter how many rules are
applied. Nevertheless, a conscientious application of the
rules we laid out should keep us more or less on track. In
trading we are not looking for exactitude. Precision is not
an available commodity on the trading ﬂoor. All that is
needed to be hugely proﬁtable in the trading game is to be
right more often than wrong.
Here are the answers as I see them (feel free to argue,
but you better have some good reasons for doing so!). Give
yourself points for every market type you get right:

146

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

1. This is clearly a bullish strong trending market, no
questions asked. [1 point]
2. This one is a bit harder to decipher. The left side of
the chart shows a straightfoward bullish strong trend.
Then things get fuzzier. The market goes into a
tight consolidation that could be called range-bound,
but because there is not much snake-ish action from
the 20 MA it is really more a period of transition.
From there we have two possibilities. Either the
market goes into a short-lived bullish strong trend,
followed quickly by a bearish strong trend, or the
market transitioned into the initial phase of a wide
range-bound condition. More time is needed to
conﬁrm which possibility is correct. Give yourself
credit if you gave either answer (in fact, the market
went into a wide trading range in late 1998).
[2 points]
3. Here we see a range-bound market. While the
general trend is modestly upward, we see enough
variation in the 50 MA to hesitate in calling it
trending. The 50 MA is the key to the trending
market: it should show no hesitation in moving up
or down (a bit of ﬂatness is okay, but it should never
move countertrend). Certainly the 20 MA is
“snakey” enough to allow us to get in some
trendline breakout and breakdown plays. [1 point]
4. Clearly a bullish strong trend. What a beauty of a
chart! [1 point]
5. Another range-bound market. Note the up and down
twists of the 20 MA. [1 point]

PUT YOUR MARKET-READING SKILLS TO THE TEST

147

6. Another clear bullish strong trend. It took a bit for
this one to get started, but when price pulled back
on September 11 to touch the 20 MA, then pushed
off again, we got the conﬁrmation that this was
indeed a market with the bulls in control. [1 point]
7. Again, a range-bound market, as shown by the 50
MA, which just refuses to conﬁrm an uptrend.
Things did get strongly bullish in late September
for a week or so, but once price pulled back and
closed below the 50 MA, that possibility was
negated. [1 point]
8. Range-bound, very clear. Look at that 20 MA: snakecity! [1 point]
