
160 PAGES HARD COVER $100.06

STREET SMARTS
High Probability Short-Term Trading Strategies

LAURENCE A. CONNORS AND LINDA BRADFORD RASCHKE

Published in 1996 and written by Larry Connors and New Market Wizard Linda Raschke, this
245-page manual is considered by many to be one of the best books written on trading futures.
Twenty-five years of combined trading experience is divulged as you will learn 20 of their bes!
strategies. Among the methods you will be taught are:

* Swing Trading—The backbone of Linda’s success. Not only will you learn exactly
how to swing trade, you will also learn specific advanced techniques never before
made public.

* News—Among the strategies revealed is an intraday news strategy they use to
exploit the herd when the 8:30 A.M. economic reports are released. This strategy will
be especially appreciated by bond traders and currency traders.

* Pattern Recognition—You will learn some of the best short-term setup patterns
available. Larry and Linda will also teach you how they combine these patterns with
other strategies to identify explosive moves.

¢ ADX—In our opinion, ADX is one of the most powerful and misunderstood
indicators available to traders. Now, for the first time, they reveal a handful of
short-term trading strategies they use in conjunction with this terrific indicator.

* Volatility—You will learn how to identify markets that are about to explode and how
to trade these exciting situations.

* Also, included are chapters on trading the smart money index, trading Crabel, trading
gap reversals, a special chapter on professional money management, and many other
trading strategies!

245 PAGES HARD COVER $175.00

HIT AND RUN TRADING I!
CAPTURING EXPLOSIVE SHORT-TERM MOVES IN STOCKS
JEFF COOPER

212 fact-filled pages of new trading strategies from Jeff Cooper. You will learn the best
momentum continuation and reversal strategies to trade. You will also be taught the best
day;trading strategies that have allowed Jeff. to make his living trading for the past decade.



Also included is a special five-chapter bonus section entitled, “Techniques of a Professional
Trader,” where Jeff teaches you the most important aspects of trading, including money man-
agement, stop placement, daily preparation, and profit-taking strategies.
If you aspire to become a full-time professional trader, this is the book for you.

212 PAGES HARD COVER $100.00

THE 5-DAY MOMENTUM METHOD

JEFF COOPER

Strongly trending stocks always pause before they resume their move. The 5-Day Momentum
Method identifies three- to seven-day explosive moves on strongly trending momentum
stocks. Highly recommended for traders who are looking for larger-than-normal short-term
gains and who do not want to sit in front of the screen during the day. The 5-Day Momentum
Method works as well shorting declining stocks as it does buying rising stocks. Also, there is a
special section written for option traders.

SPIRAL BOUND $50.00

CONNORS ON ADVANCED TRADING STRATEGIES
31 Chapters on Beating the Markets

LAURENCE A. CONNORS

Written by Larry Connors, this book is broken into seven sections; S&P and stock market tim-
ing, volatility, new patterns, equities, day-trading, options, and more advanced trading strate-
gies and concepts. Thirty-one chapters of in-depth knowledge to bring you up to the same
level of trading as the professionals.

Among the strategies you will learn are:

* Connors VIX Reversals I, If and III (Chapter 2)—Three of the most powerful
strategies ever revealed. You will learn how the CBOE OEX Volatility Index (VIX)
pinpoints short-term highs and lows in the S&Ps and the stock market. The average
profit/trade for this method is among the highest Larry has ever released.

* The 15 Minute ADX Breakout Method (Chapter 20)—Especially for day-traders! This
dynamic method teaches you how to specifically trade the most explosive futures and
stocks every day! This strategy alone is worth the price of the book.

Options (Section 5)—Four chapters and numerous in-depth strategies for trading
options. You will learn the strategies used by the best Market Makers and a small
handful of professionals to consistently capture options gains!

Crash, Bum, and Profit (Chapter 11)—Huge profits occur when stocks implode.
During a recent 12-month period, the Crash, Burn and Profit strategy shorted
Centennial Technologies at 49 1/8; six weeks later it was at 2 1/2! It shorted Diana
Corp. at 67 3/8; a few months later it collapsed to 4 3/8! It recently shorted Fine Host



THERE’S ONLY ONE PLACE IN THE WORLD
WHERE YOU CAN FIND TRADING
INFORMATION LIKE THIS EVERY DAY!

nme Rees AOGROLEAE cao Mesa
ar
(oan ss ad yo nt st 9 tt sa Ste. un)
eau woomrrrs wane rea Tig Tce C8KK
aes
{erg ema ean the $79 ean
2a coors cummins sro Rane
a8 matey
Sane ea aera Rawr ce oer fr, — te
weemn on Te ware?
fa

By
‘Tears meting eube Sie an endety peed 42 ha nto te gin yoo
sdsed peat Wal ngs Ore as Gtanate at Yove Roedet Ca
Qe Len 6 Pun Aas Tom Meet LOOK,
enor

bone Doma, 6n he Peo OF Highs Lt ie pave ay ot ot « Mahe sd

Latest Trading Lessons

Sen tpsear
Recaro we pat, gens eee

Fy
7

i

ey
(
i
i

i
sf
{
i

i
!
HF

becoue a wemaen Tooari Bit ween Tmac]

?

i
i]
i

i
3]

© In-depth Trading Courses taught by top
professional traders

© Daily Access to Proprietary Indicators and Strategies
® Continuous Intra-day market updates, and instant

Market Price Analysis

“After one day’s trial, | simply
subscribed for one year. My $120
dollars was recovered in about
one minute.”

Girish Patel, M.D.

“,.. The idea, concept, roster,
presentation, and all the rest are,

| believe, absolute winners. Just
extraordinary! ... you destroy,
absolutely destroy, TheStreet.com,
MarketWatch, Individual Investor,
Clearstation, and a host of lesser
sites who have instantly become
wannabes...

Joel Reingold,
Former Washington correspondent,
TIME magazine

“One of the best (if not the best)
traders’ websites te date|
Thank you!” .

Tony Ostrowe

© Interactive Relative Strength searches on over

5,000 stocks

© Daily Commentary and Analysis from Professional
Traders and Top Hedge Fund Managers

© And Much, Much, More!
SIGN UP NOW FOR YOUR

FREE THREE DAY TRIAL

GO To WWW.TRADINGMARKETS.COM

@COmM

