
 Some extraordinary excesses have developed in the takeover field. As Dorothy says: “Toto, I have a feeling we’re not in Kansas any more.” 8 

 Buffett wrote that in February 1989, just as the RJR Nabisco deal was closing. He had made his profit; now he wanted nothing more of arbitrage. The deals were too unsafe. 

 Considering Berkshire’s good results in 1988, you might expect us to pile into arbitrage during 1989. Instead, we expect to be on the sidelines. 9 

 With the stock market soaring, Buffett (who was just buying his last Coca-Cola shares) was on the sidelines there, too. But he needed someplace to put his cash. And this had become a much tougher problem with Berkshire’s greater size. Ever since the early years of the Buffett Partnership, Buffett had been prophesying the day when the law of averages would finally catch him—prophesying it, yet somehow putting it off. But as he warned his stockholders, “A high growth rate eventually forges its own anchor.” 10 To have any chance of continuing his gravity-defying act he had to put his money to work. 
 Such a compulsion to invest can be dangerous. It has been wittily defined as rhinophobia , an investors’ disease meaning “the dread of ever having any cash.” * Buffett admitted to such feelings; having cash around was “an enormous temptation.” 

 There is an itch that comes about, and I get it, I confess. There is an itch to do things, particularly when you haven’t done anything in a while. 12 

 In the second half of 1989, Buffett did something. In a sudden spurt, he fashioned three big deals—with Gillette, USAir, and Champion International—totaling $1.3 billion. As a group, they were below his par. While Gillette, the world’s dominant razor blade seller, was a typical Buffett investment, USAir and paper producer Champion were capital-intensive cash absorbers and not at all the stuff of his past success. (Champion had something in common with his failures, though. Buffett thought it might be an inflation hedge.) 13 
 In each case, Berkshire bought a new convertible preferred stock, just as it had with Salomon Brothers. Save for Gillette, a consumer-brand company in the mold of Coca-Cola, Buffett did not have a strong opinion on the companies’ prospects. 14 That is why he structured them as convertibles (with fixed dividends). Indeed, he admitted, rather gloomily, “If I had four more Coca-Colas to buy, I wouldn’t be buying these.” 15 
 The threat of takeovers, once again, was behind these deals. Gillette had been stalked by Ronald Perelman; USAir had been put in play by Michael Steinhardt, a New York money manager; and Champion was thought to be a target. “When you’ve got an able management,” Buffett told the Washington Post , “they should have time to play out their hand.” 16 Now each of those companies would have Buffett as its protective “gorilla.” In return, Berkshire would get a fixed coupon, on average 9 percent, and an option to convert to common stock (a “lottery ticket”) if the shares should rise. 
 But Buffett’s latest moves were unpopular. At Cap Cities, Buffett had bought the common stock, as anyone could, but in the new deals, he had negotiated a special security, available only to him. Linda Sandler, writing in the Wall Street Journal , charged that Buffett was pocketing rich coupons for Berkshire in return for safekeeping the other CEOs’ jobs: 

 Many Wall Street investors say Mr. Buffett’s special deals amount to a kind of gentlemanly protection game. In the old days, these investors say, corporate raiders such as Saul Steinberg got paid “greenmail” to go away. But Mr. Buffett is getting “whitemail” to stick around and hold management’s hand. 17 

 Such sweetheart deals with the CEOs, so the argument ran, were depriving the stockholders of the freedom to sell out in takeovers. According to Forbes , 

 Buffett gets a special deal, but so does management.… Put differently, how much does Warren Buffett charge for takeover protection? 18 

 Buffett, of course, was not responsible to the shareholders of Gillette, USAir, and Champion. He was supposed to make good deals for Berkshire. But moralists get judged by tougher standards, and Buffett, suddenly on the defensive, seemed anxious to defend the high ground. In a letter to his holders after the “whitemail” deals, he argued: 

  … the other shareholders of each investee will profit over the years ahead from our preferred-stock purchase. The help will come from the fact that each company now has a major, stable, and interested shareholder.… 19 

 The trouble with this argument is that it assumes that every CEO—or every CEO that Buffett likes—will be deserving of protection, and will deal fairly with the inherent conflict of interest. But not every CEO is a Tom Murphy. Buffett himself, at the Columbia seminar, had argued that as imperfect as the takeover process may be, ultimately, the decision had to be up to the folks who owned the “little piece[s] of paper”—the stockholders. 
 Champion was a particularly dubious case. Andrew Sigler, its CEO, was a vocal critic of takeovers and an active member of Business Roundtable, a lobbying group for big business. At Champion, he had poured money into the company’s mills but failed to deliver for his shareholders. Over the previous decade, a great one for stocks in general, Champion’s had risen by an abysmal 3 percent a year. Even among other paper companies, its return ranked as one of the poorest. 20 
 The only person with much to show for Sigler’s poor record was Andrew Sigler. In 1989, a lackluster year, Sigler paid himself an $800,000 salary, plus “incentive compensation” of $425,000. In addition , he took advantage of Champion’s depressed stock price to award himself options on 31,000 shares. The next year, Champion’s earnings fell by half. Sigler upped his take to $1.2 million, plus $28,000 so he wouldn’t have to pay for his personal tax adviser, plus options on 47,000 more shares. 
 Buffett, of course, had been a fierce critic of options, 21 particularly when doled out to poorly performing CEOs. If anyone had been desirous of taking over Champion, it’s hard to see why Buffett would have wanted to stop them. 
 The managements of Gillette and USAir were a different story. USAir was building a national system with hubs in middle-market cities, but had yet to consolidate. It seemed to have the sort of strategy that warrants time and a little “protection.” Gillette, quite simply, was minting money. 
 Although Buffett’s terms were richer than what an ordinary Joe could have gotten on open-market issues, 22 the deals were not as sweet as his critics claimed. Berkshire was locked into each security for a decade, which on Wall Street is an eternity and then some. Indeed, most money managers would have rejected Buffett’s “sweetheart” arrangements. 
 Nonetheless, the deals had an unwholesome aspect. They had an odor of insidership—of Buffett’s standing too close to his pals in corporate boardrooms. It may be no coincidence that he bought a swankier corporate jet that year, for $6.7 million. In his annual letter, Buffett went to lengths to poke fun at himself for this singular perk (without alluding to his exceptionally modest $100,000-a-year salary). He noted that if the cost of replacing his plane continued to rise “at the now-established rate of 100% compounded annually, it will not be long before Berkshire’s entire net worth is consumed by its jet.” 23 But the jet, which he wittily dubbed the Indefensible , underscored the fact that he was spending more time out of town and in very elite company. 
 By the late eighties, down-home Warren Buffett seemed to know everyone. He would jet out of town to a board meeting, or the Super Bowl, or a party where he might run into Paul Newman or Senator Edward Kennedy. 24 He played bridge with the Corporate America team, a celebrity CEO group, including a match against members of Parliament at Old Battersea, the splendid seventeenth-century London home of Malcolm Forbes. When Buffett was asked, during a talk, what financial advice he might give to the President, he could respond that, as a matter of a fact, he had been to a dinner with President Bush the previous Saturday. 25 
 Warren’s wife insisted that it was time for him to get some “decent clothes,” as she told their daughter. When the elder Susie was in Omaha, the two women dragged Warren to a store and fitted him into a $1,500 Zegna suit. The Italian-made Zegnas became his uniform—a fetish like his Cherry Cokes and his jet. (But he refused a salesman’s entreaty to order them custom-made, preferring to drop into Zegna’s New York branch sans appointment and buy a bunch at a time off the rack.) 26 
 His new circle was astonishingly wide. In Boston, he would hobnob with the likes of John Kenneth Galbraith and Globe editor Thomas Winship. Winship said, “Warren’s a great collector of friends”—an interesting comment about a guy who collected and hung on to stocks. Buffett had a gang in Washington, and another in California. Susie and he would visit the Big Apple with a sort of “program,” as one friend put it, to squeeze everybody in. “They are not like other people,” she noted. 
 Buffett’s inner circle—a group that included Graham, Loomis, Murphy, Munger, and Ruane—was as before. But his friends in Omaha, such as Dick Holland, noticed that he wasn’t around as much. Verne McKenzie estimated that his boss was out of town one or two days a week. 
 So uncontemporary in other respects, Buffett jetted from coast to coast like one of the glitterati. He dined at the Oscars with Dolly Parton. 27 He flew into Martha’s Vineyard for a gathering at Kay Graham’s with the likes of Nancy Reagan and 60 Minutes correspondent Mike Wallace. 28 Another time, he picked up his wife and swooped into Walter Annenberg’s Palm Springs, California, estate, abloom in the desert with silver-leafed tamarisk trees and sculpted shrubs. Sam Walton came, too. 
 Buffett was popular in this crowd because he seemed to be unaffected by his money. He still spoke in homey expressions that vaguely recalled the 1930s (“I’m on the wire” instead of “I’m on the phone”). At the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary—where he was a guest of Murphy and of ABC—Buffett ducked an invitation for lunch by the pristine Lake Louise to hole up in town and work. At the Olympics, Agnes Nixon, a soap opera creator for ABC, met Buffett and decided he was “the reincarnation of Will Rogers.” She invited him to New York to do a cameo on Loving , a daytime soap opera. After the taping, Buffett, Nixon, and others from ABC went out to dinner at Bravo Gianni, an East Side northern Italian restaurant. As they were leaving, Nixon noticed that John Kluge, another billionaire, was exiting, too. Kluge ducked into a waiting limousine while Buffett stepped off the sidewalk and hailed a cab. 29 
 Buffett liked to portray himself as a sort of provisional traveler in high society. He was full of stories that accented his supposed innocence, such as one regarding a dinner party at which he found himself seated next to Carolyne Roehm, the socialite designer, then married to Henry Kravis. Roehm said, “Can you cut my meat for me?” Buffett didn’t know if this was a new form of upper-class affectation or—worse—a come-on. He ignored her the entire evening—until, to his horror, as her barely nibbled roast was carried away, he saw that she had a cast on her wrist. 30 
 He liked his homespun image and seemed uncomfortable with the reality that he now was something of a celebrity. After Buffett appeared in an episode of television’s Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous , he was so embarrassed that he told people that the producers had spliced it together without his having known about it. But that was untrue. In fact, Buffett had donned a microphone and been formally interviewed. 31 
 In 1989, Buffett also was in the news in Omaha. Mrs. B—the carpet woman—was stripped of her authority in carpets by her grandsons Ronald and Irvin, who by now were running the Furniture Mart. She quit the store in a rage, denounced Buffett for selling her out, and publicly called her grandsons “Hitlers.” 32 
 In Omaha, the spat got the sort of attention elsewhere reserved for Charles and Princess Di. Mrs. B accused her grandsons of being spoiled ingrates who wasted their time in “meetings” and lived like “millionaires.” Besides, she added poignantly, “It hurts when you’re a nobody.” 33 
 The ninety-five-year-old dynamo spent a few months at home. Then she opened a new store, “Mrs. B’s Warehouse,” adjacent to the Furniture Mart—now her blood rival. 
 “It breaks my heart,” Mrs. B remarked one Sunday, motoring past a sea of carpets in her new store. She added that she now was working “for spite.” 
 Buffett felt terrible about it. He took two dozen pink roses to Mrs. B on her birthday to try to patch it up. But as a business matter, he backed his management. Reporting on the unhappy affair to shareholders, he praised Louie, Mrs. B’s son, as well as Ron and Irv, as “outstanding merchants.” 

 Mrs. B probably has made more smart business decisions than any living American, but in this particular case I believe the other members of the family were entirely correct: Over the past three years, while the store’s other departments increased sales by 24%, carpet sales declined.… 34 

 Nonetheless, one has the sense that if Buffett had been in Mrs. B’s shoes, he would have wanted to go out the same way, kicking and screaming—and that at some level he admired her for it. Shortly after her break, he spoke about her with considerable empathy: 

 She hasn’t lost her marbles in any way, shape or form. She happens to be—improperly, in my view—very negative on a couple of the grandchildren that work in the store. Every now and then they want to take a day off with their families. Believe me, they are marvelous guys, but they can’t work as hard as Mrs. B did.… It’s a human tragedy in the sense that she couldn’t have a better family than she had. But they had it easier than she did—nothing you can do about it. 35 

 Mrs. B’s departure did not hurt Berkshire, which hit an all-time high in September 1989 of $8,750 a share. But it is a strange truism of Buffett’s career that he felt most apprehensive during bull markets. He was gloomy about the lack of opportunities, and gloomy even about Berkshire. 
 His response was nothing short of brilliant. In a mirror image of his deals with Gillette, USAir, et al., Buffett raised $400 million by selling bonds that were convertible into shares of Berkshire. The people who bought this paper got a fixed return and a “lottery ticket” on Berkshire’s stock. 
 This time, Buffett’s terms were sweeter than sugar. His interest rate was only 5.5 percent. The low rate was a measure of the investors’ faith that Berkshire’s share price would continue rising. (They were betting on the lottery ticket.) 
 What’s more, since these were “zero-coupon” bonds, Berkshire would owe interest, but not actually pay it, until the bonds matured, fifteen years later. But owing to a quirk in the tax laws, Berkshire could deduct the interest all along, as though it were paying. 
 And there was more. Berkshire could redeem the “zeros” in three years. Thus, the investors were betting not just that Berkshire’s stock would rise, but that it would do so in a hurry . Lost in the shuffle was the fact that Buffett was making exactly the opposite bet. 
 Two weeks later, in October, a proposed LBO of United Airlines collapsed. Arbitrageurs—Buffett had quit the game months before-suffered huge losses. The stock market plunged 191 points in a day. The junk-bond market crashed; the takeover game stopped in its tracks. Within months, Drexel Burnham was dead. Wall Street’s long love affair with debt was over. By early 1990, the Street was in the tank, and Berkshire was under $8,000. 
 In his annual letter, Buffett confirmed his gloominess, predicting that Berkshire’s net worth was “almost certain” to drop (for the first time in his tenure) in one of the next three years. He tied together Berkshire’s recent history and Wall Street’s current crisis with a seemingly innocent thread: many of the now-toppling LBOs, such as Federated, the corporate parent of Bloomingdale’s, had also been financed with zeros. Of course, Buffett had a larger theme in mind. On Wall Street, it was often the good ideas that got you into trouble, for what the wise did in the beginning, “fools do in the end.” 36 Thus it was with LBOs and zero-coupon bonds. 
 As was his style in such essays, Buffett started small and in the distant past. He invited readers to “travel back to Eden, to a time when the apple had not yet been bitten.” 37 

 If you’re my age you bought your first zero-coupon bonds during World War II, by purchasing the famous Series E U. S. Savings Bond, the most widely sold bond issue in history. 

 Nobody called it a zero-coupon, but that’s what the Series E was. The interest was paid in a lump sum, when the bond matured. The ordinary Americans who bought the Series E were no fools. Since the Treasury was the surest possible credit, they slept soundly, knowing that their money was safely compounding at 2.9 percent per annum. † 
 In the 1980s, investment banks invented a zero-coupon for large lenders. These—like Berkshire’s—were rated Triple-A. Then the bankers discovered that zeros and the equivalent pay-in-kind (PIK) bonds could be used to finance LBOs. The appeal was obvious: since no cash payments were required for years, bidders could be induced to borrow any sum at all. Buffett’s description rendered this shell game suddenly self-evident: 

 To these issuers, zero (or PIK) bonds offer one overwhelming advantage: It is impossible to default on a promise to pay nothing. Indeed, if LDC governments [Mexico, Brazil, etc.] had issued no debt in the 1970’s other than long-term zero-coupon obligations, they would now have a spotless record as debtors. 

 Buffett suggested that investors offer the bankers a taste of their own medicine, a signature Buffett stroke that made it intuitively clear, even to a person on Main Street, that Wall Street was dealing in extremely funny money. 

 Our advice … zip up your wallet. Turn the tables by suggesting that the promoter and his high-priced entourage accept zero-coupon fees, deferring their take until the zero-coupon bonds have been paid in full. See then how much enthusiasm for the deal endures. 

 Such essays, though, were guides to the broad strokes; of his strategy they revealed nothing. Indeed, Buffett was a master dissimulator. 
 At the very moment that his junk-bond critique was rolling off the press, Buffett was scooping up one of the largest bundles of junk bonds ever—$440 million of RJR Nabisco paper. RJR Nabisco’s bonds had collapsed with the general market, but in Buffett’s view, the market had overreacted. (After all, RJR Nabisco was still selling a high-margin product to “addicts.”) His purchase of junk bonds might seem hypocritical, but it was not. Buffett saw a moral hazard in selling a junk bond that would likely never be repaid. Buying a bond was different. To the investor, no financial instrument was “evil per se”; 38 it was a question of price. 
 After the purchase was disclosed, Dr. Benjamin Graham, the son of Buffett’s mentor and a Berkshire stockholder, wrote to protest Berkshire’s investment in tobacco. Buffett replied that while he wouldn’t manufacture cigarettes, he had no problem with owning traded tobacco securities—or, for that matter, a newspaper that advertised the product. “I’m not sure that this is strictly logical,” he admitted, but in a complex world, he deemed it a practical way to draw the line. 39 
 With Iraq’s seizure of Kuwait, in August 1990, the “credit crunch” snowballed into a full-blown recession. New decades do not necessarily portend new eras, but this one did. In the eighties, spirits had run high. Buffett, conversely, had hewed to caution. In the nineties, Wall Street rediscovered fear. People who had lent money wanted it back; companies that once could have borrowed millions found the window slammed shut. 
 Corporate bankruptcies and junk-bond defaults (the “big bang” that Buffett had predicted at Columbia in 1985) lit up the map. Fred Carr’s insurance company—stuffed with junk bonds—became the biggest insurance failure in history. Banks, just reborn from the foreign-debt crisis, found they were up to their ears in homegrown deadbeats, such as LBOs and commercial real estate. A contagion of bank failures moved like a storm front from Texas to Colorado, New England, and the mid-Atlantic states. Serious people gathered at investment seminars and discussed whether Citicorp or Chase Manhattan would fail. 
 From Buffett’s point of view—Buffett and Fred Carr were always out of synch—it was an ideal time to take a little risk. Berkshire’s stock, it was true, had collapsed with the rest (its low for the year was $5,500, down almost 40 percent from its peak). But it was at such times that Buffett was at his best. Rhinophobia might get hold of him when prices were high. But when the world turned gloomy, his instinct was deadly. 
 During 1990—the worst year for banking since the Great Depression—Buffett bought 10 percent of the stock of Wells Fargo, the San Francisco banking giant. California real estate was just beginning to turn down; the misery of its banks was expected to be deep and long-lived. And Wells Fargo had lent more money to California real estate than any bank in the country. 
 Buffett, of course, knew that. Generally, Buffett did not like banks. An outsider had no way of gauging the soundness of their loans until it was too late. But he had been pining for this bank for years. 40 Wells Fargo had a strong franchise in California and one of the highest profit margins of any big bank in the country. Its chairman, Carl Reichardt, was a cost-cutter in the Tom Murphy mold. During an earlier rough period, Reichardt had sold the company jet—a sacrifice Buffett could appreciate—and frozen the salaries of the top brass. And Reichardt had largely avoided the periodic fads, such as lending to Latin America, that had undone other banks. As Buffett knew, Reichardt and Paul Hazen, the bank’s number two, had cut their teeth on property loans in the 1970s and had escaped the real estate debacle of that decade with barely a scratch. 
 None of this meant that the outlook for Wells Fargo over the next year or so was rosy. But Buffett was thinking about a much longer period than the next year or so. The bank was well capitalized; it ought to survive the current trauma. Indeed, Buffett reported, a bad year “would not distress us.” 41 
 And because other people were distressed, Buffett was able to pick up $290 million worth of stock at the fire-sale average price of $58 a share, or five times earnings. That was down from a recent high of $84. 
 After Buffett invested, Wells Fargo’s portfolio began to take in water. Wall Street wrote it off; Barton Biggs, the chief strategist at Morgan Stanley, said he had no idea if Wells Fargo would survive and Warren Buffett didn’t either. 42 In the spring quarter of 1991, Wells Fargo took a massive reserve against the possibility that loans would not be repaid. Earnings plunged to twenty-one cents a share, compared with $4.40 in the corresponding quarter a year earlier. Buffett responded with aplomb; in fact, he asked for regulatory approval to double his investment. 
 Wells Fargo, by then, was the darling of short-sellers. It had almost $15 billion in commercial real estate loans—two and a half times as much, per dollar of equity, as its neighbor Bank of America. Half of Wells Fargo’s real estate loans were in the terra infirma of Southern California, the new fault line of American credit. In Los Angeles, where the boom economy had turned to bust, developers were quixotically racing to complete new skyscrapers that they now had no hope of renting. In Orange County, 22 percent of the office space was vacant. A bear on Wells Fargo, writing in Banon’s , sardonically observed that the “Sage of Omaha, Warren Buffett” would be stuck with all that. 43 
 Even many within Buffett’s crowd saw the bet on Wells Fargo as a breaking of the faith. Scott Black, a Graham-and-Dodd-style money manager, said, “It upset me. Warren made a mistake ,” as though the heavens should have forbidden it. People who had been appalled by the excessive leverage of the eighties had an emotional stake in seeing the guilty get their just deserts—and real estate lenders were “guilty.” 
 Buffett also disapproved of excessive leverage, but he stripped the emotion out of his calculations. At a certain price, he was happy to buy a bank, or even a junk bond. During the height of the gloom, a Manhattan friend called to “warn” him that the smart money was saying that Wells could go under. Buffett said calmly, “We’ll see who’s right.” 
 Unhappily for Buffett, the gloomy times were over all too soon. When the United States opened fire on Iraq, early in 1991, the stock market rallied. The fighting ended in six weeks, but the rally did not. By July, the Dow had broken 3,000. The combination of more cash at Buffett’s disposal and fewer places to put it could be counted on to induce a new spell of rhinophobia. When Buffett got a call from James D. Robinson III, chairman of American Express, he was all ears. 
 Robinson, the courtly son of an Atlanta banking family, was a fellow Coca-Cola director and a social chum of Buffett’s. An habitué of boardrooms who held thirteen directorships, Robinson projected a refined, statesmanlike air. His dark-wood, river-view office seemed to whisper “old money.” Personally, Buffett was fond of Robinson. What he thought of him as a CEO of American Express was not so clear. 
 The company’s charge cards and traveler’s checks had remained a very good business. During the most recent decade, their profits had galloped ahead at an 18-percent-a-year clip. But Robinson’s shareholders had never seen that 18 percent. 
 Robinson had frittered away the profits of this very good business on a series of bad ones—in insurance, banking, brokerage, even an art gallery specializing in nineteenth-century American paintings. Eager to follow the 1980s fad for “financial supermarkets,” Robinson had pumped a staggering $4 billion into Shearson. But supervision was lax (Shearson “invested” $26 million in a “conference center” at a Colorado ski resort), and the investment bank had repeatedly needed bailing out. To make matters worse, American Express had a habit of not coming clean with the bad news until after the fact. 44 
 Robinson had managed to elude the blame for such miscues, partly thanks to his busy public relations department and partly because he had stacked the board with captive directors. One such captive, Henry Kissinger, pocketed $350,000 a year in consulting fees from the management he was supposedly overseeing. 
 Despite Robinson’s good press, Buffett was hardly unaware of his record. In 1985, Buffett had attended an American Express board meeting, when the company was considering selling its Fireman’s Fund insurance unit to a group that included Buffett. Buffett gave the board some advice: it should sell Fireman’s to somebody and focus on American Express’s one truly splendid business. 45 A bit later, when insurer GEICO bought a chunk of American Express’s stock, Buffett had called GEICO to express his concern. Though Buffett didn’t put it in such terms, Robinson’s record was a compendium of the managerial sins that Buffett had bewailed in his letters. 
 But when Robinson called, all this was forgotten. Buffett hopped on the Indefensible for New York—seized, apparently, by one thought: the memory of his investment in American Express a quarter century earlier, which had been the first big gusher in his career. Now, as before, the company was in trouble. Just weeks earlier, its credit had been downgraded. When Robinson asked for a $300 million investment, Buffett quickly agreed. 
 As Buffett noted at the time, with the market at a high, he was finding few things he liked, and he did like American Express’s basic business. Still, it is hard to account for his saying “We’re buying to be in with Jim [Robinson].” 46 Buffett’s friends were stunned. He had even agreed—reluctantly, but nonetheless—to a term that capped Berkshire’s potential upside. Jack Byrne, who was an American Express director, told Business Week he would have thought that Buffett’s “genes” would have forbidden such an agreement. 47 
 When they spoke privately, Byrne realized that Buffett regarded his earlier American Express investment as a milestone in his career and was eager to play a part in restoring the company. Buffett told him, “This is coming home again.” Of course, he had also come home to GEICO and to the Washington Post He liked these old shoes, just as he liked investing in the soft drink that he had delivered as a boy. Replaying these ventures transported him to a comforting time, when he had been young, and had had the likely prospect of many more years ahead. It had also occurred to Munger that his partner’s career was full of “odd coincidences.” “Warren likes his past,” Munger admitted. 
 By August 1991, many of the recent additions to Buffett’s portfolio were troubled. Wells Fargo was on the verge of a disastrous quarter. There was major trouble brewing at American Express, which was facing a revolt by restaurants, a decline in the number of card holders, and slumping profits. 
 Among the much-criticized “whitemail” deals, Gillette had soared, enabling Berkshire to convert to common stock. Other Gillette holders were also better off, since the stock was twice as high as what Perelman had offered for it. Peter Lynch, the mutual-fund manager and a Gillette shareholder, said, “The deal with Buffett helped everyone.” 
 Few would have said the same of Buffett’s deal with Champion. Earnings had plunged by 85 percent, though Berkshire wasn’t suffering, since its dividend was fixed. Meanwhile, Sigler, the CEO, had awarded himself options on 250,000 more shares at a price well below the company’s book value. 
 USAir was doing worst of all. Almost on the day that Buffett had invested, a fare war had broken out. Then, in the wake of the Persian Gulf War, air travel had collapsed. USAir found itself with high employee costs at a time of intense cost pressure. It lost a staggering $454 million in the year after Buffett’s investment, and its bleeding was far from over. 
 At one point, Seth Schofield, the chief executive, called Buffett to apologize for the way his investment was turning out. 
 “Seth, I want you to remember one thing,” Buffett shot back. “I called you, you didn’t call me. So I have no one to blame but myself if it doesn’t work out, and let’s let it go at that.” 
 Buffett blamed himself in a deeper sense, too. He had understood the dynamics of airlines—lots of competition, high fixed costs—but invested anyway. In public, he was up-front about this mistake. With a touch of Will Rogers, he wrote to his shareholders, “No one pushed me; in tennis parlance, I committed an ‘unforced error.’ ” 48 It was easily his worst investment, and violated Buffett’s own guidelines. Ironically, the investment was probably a good thing for other USAir holders, as it injected the deeply troubled airline with much-needed capital. 
 These blemishes in Buffett’s portfolio were easily outweighed by the likes of Coca-Cola, Gillette, and the RJR Nabisco junk bonds—on which he turned a fast profit of roughly $200 million. 49 Berkshire’s net worth continued to rise, in defiance of Buffett’s prophecy. And the stock rebounded smartly; by August, it was at $8,800. What’s more, the problems at his companies did not require Buffett to get personally involved. He liked to say that he had “arranged” his life so that he needn’t do anything he didn’t like. In the summer of 1991, this was true. He said his biggest worry was Nebraska’s upcoming game with Colorado. 50 
