
A Word on Intraday and Intra-Hour Strategies

So far, we have not directly discussed trading binaries, intraday or even intrahour. Actually, there is no difference from a strategy point of view. These
short-term duration trades enable the same strategies to be played but in a
compressed time frame. An at-the-money bid/ask quote will still be essentially
near $50 for an intraday binary. The difference, however, lies in the timing
skills of the trader. Trading intraday requires very effective understanding of
momentum, volatility, and technical analysis. In contrast, the weekly binary
plays use fundamental analysis more effectively.
References
Cofnas, Abe. 2011. “Binary Update: More Reasons to Expect a Thursday Payoff,” Agora Financial (January 26). http://strategiccurrencytrader.agorafinancial.com/2011/01/26/binaryupdate-more-reasons-to-expect-a-thursday-payoff/.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011. “The Employment Situation—May 2011.” News release
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (June 3). www.bls.gov/.
D’Amuri, Francesco, and Juri Marcucci. 2010. “Forecasting the U.S. Unemployment Rate
with a Google Job Search Index.” 2nd International Conference in Memory of Carlo
Giannini Time Series Econometrics and Macroeconomic Forecasting in a Policy
Environment, Rome (January 19). http://static.googleusercontent.com/external_content/
untrusted_dlcp/research.google.com/en/us/archive/papers/initialclaimsUS.pdf
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 2011. “Second Quarter 2011 Survey of Professional Forecasters.”
www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professionalforecasters/2011/survq211.cfm.
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 2015. “Fourth Quarter 2015 Survey of Professional
Forecasters.” https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/surveyof-professional-forecasters/2015/survq415.
Kowalski, Alex, and Shobhana Chandra. 2011. “Jobless Claims in U.S. Unexpectedly Jump on
One-Time Events,” Bloomberg.com (May 5). www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-05-05/
jobless-claims-in-u-s-unexpectedly-jump-due-to-special-factors.html.
Willis, Bob. 2011. “Initial Jobless Claims in U.S. Increase to Three-Month High.” Bloomberg.com
(April 28). www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-04-28/jobless-claims-in-u-s-unexpectedlyrise-to-three-month-high.html.

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 9

Risk Management in
Theory and Practice

We all know that there is no free lunch. The high returns offered by binary
option trades are accompanied by risks. The goal of a good risk management
program for binary option trading is not to eliminate risks. That is impossible.
Each trader has to learn to balance the risks and the rewards. The task requires
a handle on one’s own personal risk curve as well as tactics that detect risk
exposures in the price action. Let’s first review some important aspects of
personal risk psychology and management.
Consider the following scenario: It is Wednesday and you have put on a
binary trade that can be closed at $70. What would you rather have: A sure
100-percent capture of the profit, or wait until Friday’s expiration and try for
a $100 payout, representing a return of 150 percent but possibly risk it all?
What would you do? This is not that simple a question and what your answer
would actually be is likely to change as you are navigating through your
monthly performance. Actually, you have to ask yourself another question:
What do you really care about in the trade? Are you only interested in the final
value of the trade, or the trade itself becomes an experience that is worthy of
the risk? Social scientists refer to the trader who cares only about the final
value as operating under expected utility theory (EUT). But research shows
that people trade for more than just a final value. Many traders trade for
entertainment value. Recent research published in an article titled “Why Do
People Trade?” concluded: “Like lottery players who buy tickets with negative
expected values, entertainment-driven investors trade even though trading

179

180

Trading Binary Options

diminishes the expected monetary payoff of their portfolio” (Dorn 2008). In
other words: trading is fun. This particularly applies to binary option trading.
Deal or No Deal?

Let’s play the game Deal or No Deal. To repeat the question: What would you
rather have: A sure 100-percent capture of the profit, or wait until Friday’s
expiration and try for a $100 payout, representing a return of 150 percent but
possibly risk it all? How you answer this question reveals a great deal about
your risk attitude, preference, or your level of loss aversion, as well as how you
should customize a risk management approach to your trading.
The first step in the binary options risk management plan is to identify
your risk personality. Are you an all-or-nothing trader, putting on the trades
and letting them go the distance with either a $100 or $0 payout? Or are
you a leg-out trader, willing to get out at a sure 100 percent return and leave
some lots on for the remaining duration? In the heat of the moment, in trading, very often what you planned goes out the window and what you do is
a departure. It’s important to realize that the reversal of risk preferences that
occur in the middle of a trade is not necessarily a failure of planning; rather,
it is the reality that trading decisions are not totally rational. Nor should they
be. Traders operate instead with what social scientists have termed bounded
rationality. Risk management becomes a process of satisfying behavior.
Trading binary options always involves emotional influences. They are not
wrong. But few traders examine their inventory of emotions that affect their trading. The basic set of emotions that all of us have are also likely to be encountered
during trading. These emotions include happiness, fear, disgust, and anger. While
trading, ask yourself which of these emotions are affecting your entry and exit
decisions. How many times will a trader get out of a position and leave profits on
the table because of anger over a previous losing streak? Or, how many times will a
trader be reticent about putting on a trade, because it is following a losing streak?
Is a deep-out-of-the-money trade justified by a technical analysis process, or is it
an outcome of a trader’s instincts? When is optimism on a binary option trade
excessive? We have to realize that risk control becomes more than the mathematics of profitability; it is also a process of managing emotions.
The Confidence Index

In an article in the Journal of Behavioral Finance, the authors discuss confidence:
“Confidence in one’s abilities is always helpful in one’s achievements in life. But
overconfidence in finance and investment may result in suboptimal decision

Risk Management in Theory and Practice

181

making and inferior investment performance.” Another leading work on behavioral finance by Max Bazerman (2008, 141) states: “Once people make an investment, they tend to be overly optimistic about its future profitability and later
maintain optimistic recollection of the investment’s past performance.”
Therefore, you can see there is a tenuous balance between confidence
and overconfidence. How can this balance be secured? There are many
approaches for handling emotions in trading. In fact, an entire new field
called neuroscience and finance has emerged to investigate how the human
brain reacts to risk and reward. But at this point, the trader needs some
practical guidance.
A good way to track your emotional decisions on your binary option
trades is to rank each trade when you put it on. This simple task goes a long
way to enabling you to evaluate the role of emotions in your trading results.
Are you extremely confident? Give it a score of 5. Are you very confident,
but not to the extreme? Give it a score of 4. Are you tentative but consider it
worth trying? Give it a 3. However, if the ranking is less than 3 you should
consider not trading it, because a rank of 2 and below is really being a contrarian to your own best judgment.
Ultimately, after a series of trades, you will be able to get a distribution of
your initial confidence ranking against the outcome. If your emotional intelligence is strong, your most confident trades would show significantly more
wins than losses. If you are a very intuitive trader, then your trades ranked 3
will show more than 50 percent wins.
Lot Size Management

A crucial trading decision rule is determining lot size or the size of the binary
bet. One of the most common and dangerous mistakes made by binary option
traders is putting on a big position because of overconfidence. Many traders
also endanger their prospects of profitability because they put on trades in
the absence of confirmations that the fundamental and technical conditions
justify greater weight to the trade. There are several solutions to the problem
of determining lot size.
First, let’s consider the rule of three. The rule applies here to the number
of lots that should be put on. This rule can be used for trading in many
markets. Basically, the trader looks at position size in multiples of three. This
means that there are several tactics for position size using this rule:
All In: This tactic is when the trader places three lots at one time on a
binary option contract.

182

Trading Binary Options

Partially In: This tactic is when the trader places a sequence of lots, one
at a time.
Another risk-control approach, which is particularly important to traders
of the offshore hi-low binaries, is not to risk more than 2 percent of equity
on any binary option trade. Using this rule will clearly convey to traders that
larger accounts are in fact safer. The reason larger accounts are safer is that a
trader with a small account tends to put on more lots to generate a cash goal.
She forgets the percentage risk she is taking on each trade. Getting out under
the rule of three provides the following choices:
All Out: Closing all the positions.
Legging Out: Closing one or two positions during the week.
A critical question is: When do you place more lots on? As indicated
earlier, it’s not that easy a question to answer. Certainly one answer is to place
more lots on when the trader has a high level of confidence with the position
working out. But that confidence ultimately has to be based on a record of
results. When starting out, there is no basis to be confident about your own
level of confidence! Be patient because it takes more time. Another approach
is based on the fear factor. Does the trader have a high risk tolerance and
no fear of entirely losing the position? For example, a deep-in-the-money
$85 option on Wednesday or Thursday may seem like a sure bet, but the risk
is losing it all. Are you prepared to do so? Many beginning traders are trading
with capital they really don’t want to risk. A scenario that justifies higher risk
is a situation in which the trader has built up some profits and at the end of
the week or month is really risking the profits generated and not the principal.
The time of the week provides a rubric for risk control, especially for
traders of binary ladders. An $80 binary option price on Monday is far riskier
than an $80 binary option trade on Thursday. There is more time on Monday
for things to go wrong. Conversely, a $25 binary option trade on Monday has
less risk than a $25 binary option play on a Thursday. There is more time for
things to go right! The high return pays off if new information surprises the
market. Ultimately, it is a balance between fear and greed.
Offsetting Trades: Failing Forward

What about risk control when the markets are going the other way and
the open positions are not working out? The scenario might be familiar to
many: a position you believed would work out great is just out of energy

Risk Management in Theory and Practice

183

and will not settle in-the-money. The result is a $0 payout and total loss of
the position. The way to reduce the impact of this loss is to view the loss as a
contra-directional signal. In other words, leave the position alone, and go the
other way by putting on a position that goes with the market expectations
either in the same underlying market or in a correlated one. This amounts to
switching horses in the middle of the rate. The problem with this approach
is more emotion than meets the eye. Traders tend to marry their positions
and get attached to the ego factor in being right. Switching, to these traders,
means admitting they are wrong. Yet, it’s important to realize that the market
doesn’t care if the trader is right or wrong!
Leverage and Margin

Risk control is helped because of the fact that in binary option trading there
is no margin. The amount traded cannot exceed the amount of cash in the
account. A $10,000 account cannot have more than $10,000 purchased. If
a trader is selling a $15 binary option with a bet that the strike price will not
go above a certain level, the account will require that $85 be set aside to hold
that position. Therefore, the most that can be risked, $85, is the amount of
the margin calculated. It doesn’t matter if there is a resting order. The tactical
implications are relevant when the trader is putting on a large position, such
as 50 lots. As soon as it is put on, the Nadex exchange or IG will consider the
total margin to be calculated as if the entire position is filled. A working position, therefore, has the same margin requirements as a filled position.
References
Bazerman, Max, and Don Moore. 2008. Judgment in Managerial Decision Making, Seventh
Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Cheng, Philip Y. K. 2010. “Improving Financial Decision Making With Unconscious Thought:
A Transcendent Model.” Journal of Behavioral Finance 11 (2): 92–102.
Dorn, Anne, Daniel Dorn, and Paul Sengmueller. 2008. “Why Do People Trade?” Journal
of Applied Finance (Fall/Winter): 49. www.washburn.edu/faculty/rweigand/page2/
HWFiles/Why-Do-People-Trade.pdf.

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 10

Metrics for Improving
Binary Trading
Performance

Evolving and improving your trading performance for binary options
requires an ongoing commitment to evaluate one’s own performance. Up to
this point, this book has navigated through many strategies and tactics for
trading binaries. The challenge is whether you have improved your skills. This
chapter reviews key performance metrics that can guide you as you evolve
your trading.
Key Performance Metrics

There are many variables involved in such evaluations. The following are
some useful categories to keep in mind.

Win/Loss Ratio
As discussed earlier, the ability to become profitable is really a two-part
equation. All levels of profitability ultimately relate to a win/loss ratio and an
average profit/average loss ratio. The result is a personalized profitability curve
that describes whether the trader is profitable and whether the trader is stable
in maintaining profitability. Ask yourself after conducting a series of trades
(10 or more): What does my profitability curve look like?
185

186

Trading Binary Options

Adjusted Win/Loss Ratio
Ask yourself, what would happen to your performance if you removed from
the calculation the best-winning and the worst-losing trade? This is called
the adjusted win/loss ratio and adjusted average gain/average loss. It suggests
a more realistic performance result than the original win/loss and average
gain/average loss ratios. Don’t be fooled by one great trade or one great loss.
It’s the adjusted win/loss ratio that is more indicative of your actual core
skill level.

Near-Miss Ratio
In binaries, if you win by just the smallest margin, you are a winner and the
same goes for losing by the smallest margin. This is why it is a good idea to
measure how big your wins and losses are. If you win by large margins, then
your confidence in the strategy you used can be reliable. If you lose by large
margins, you can consider it a clue to improve your strategy. Therefore, count
the near misses as a percentage of the win/loss ratio. The goal is to have as few
as possible near misses and bigger size wins.

Distance from Breakeven
When all is said and done, it’s about profitability. The goal, however, of getting
profitable first requires getting beyond the breakeven point. A breakeven score
is a very significant milestone. It means the trader is very close to profitability.
Perhaps, it may be only a few changes, and profitability becomes more common. What is the key to breaking the breakeven barrier? It is consistency. The
trader who is consistently wrong can at least identify one or two reasons for
the performance problems. A trader who is flipping from profits to losses has
a more difficult ability to diagnose the causes of their losses. Understanding
the stability of your trading record is a key piece of information. What is the
risk of ruin? What is the risk of losing your profits? Is it coming from one or
two bad trades, or is it related to a strategy?
A first approach in evaluating one’s performance and your risk exposure
to losses is to determine how many trades it takes to break even (Figure 10.1).
Another way to look at this is to understand that the path to profits must
first cross the breakeven barrier. The following table shows costs per trade,
maximum profit per trade, and maximum loss per trade (Table 10.1). For

Metrics for Improving Binary Trading Performance

187

Figure 10.1 Trades to Break Even
20

Trades to break even

15

If you buy a $95 binary option,
your max. profit is $5 ($100 – $95) and
your max. loss is $95 (purchase price).
At $5 per winner, it takes 19 winners
to offset one $95 loser.

Because you risk less

10

As max. profit per
trade increases

The number of trades
to break even decreases

5

0
Max. Profit

each combination of these three, there is a number of winning trades it takes
to reach a breakeven point. In other words, any number less means that the
trade is not profitable. For example, if a trader buys a $95 binary option, it
will take 19 winners to offset one $95 loser!
Table 10.1 Breakeven Points in Trading

Cost of Trade

Maximum Profit

Maximum Loss

Winning Trades to Break Even

90

10

90

9.00

85

15

85

5.67

80

20

80

4.00

75

25

75

3.00

70

30

70

2.33

65

35

65

1.86

60

40

60

1.50

55

45

55

1.22

50

50

50

1.00

45

55

45

0.82

40

60

40

0.67

35

65

35

0.54

188

Trading Binary Options

Win/Loss Duration
Over time, each trader develops a personalized pattern and style of trading.
There are patterns within the winning trades, as well as the losing trades, that
provide important clues on how to improve performance. The duration of the
trade is a key metric. How long is your average time in a winning trade? How
long is your average time in a losing trade? This will tell you a great deal about
your psychological profile as a trader. If you are a set-and-let trader, you will
have long duration trades. If you are on the other side of the trader-style continuum, you will have short trades, revealing a frenetic trading personality.
It’s important to note that there is no good or bad connotation with your
trading personality; it is a clue as to how to improve your trading. What is
also important is a change in your style. If the distribution of your trades
shows trade duration all over the place (multi-modal), it indicates you are
either a very diversified or a very confused trader!

Trading Sequence Patterns
Every trader has winning and losing streaks. It’s part of the game. However,
each trader has his or her own maximum winning and losing streaks in his or
her trading history. This tells you a great deal. If you are near your previous
maximum winning streak, it’s a good idea to be careful, because you’re at a
high probability of ending that streak. Winning streaks are more than just
being right about the market—they are also about your total mind-set and
emotional intelligence in trading. Near the end of a winning streak, traders
get overconfident, overzealous, and start making strategic and technical mistakes. Likewise, into a losing streak, each loss wears on the trader and affects
judgments as to the next trade.
Another aspect of trading-sequence patterns that is important to note and
review is the sequence of win, lose, win, lose. This sequence shows difficulty
in performance, and may become a precursor to the beginning of a losing
streak.
Strategy Scorecard

Binary option trading performance is not only a statistical outcome, it is a
result of using strategies. This means that any performance review can be
evaluated from a strategy point of view. The best way to do this is to distribute your trading results by the five main strategies used: at-the-money
(ATM), out-of-the-money (OTM), deep-out-of-the-money (DOOM),

Metrics for Improving Binary Trading Performance

189

in-the-money (ITM), and deep-in-the-money (DITM). Look at your
trading history and determine which are your best and worst trades from a
strategy point of view.

YOUR PERFORMANCE SCORECARD
To help you effectively evaluate your binary option trading performance, you can
use a binary option trader scorecard as a key tool. It reviews your trading history
and produces a report card on key parameters of your performance. Go to www
.binarydimensions.com for more details.

Performance Challenges

A static backward-looking review of your binary option trading performance
is useful but it’s really only a first step to moving ahead. The next part of the
process of evaluating your performance is by testing your results on a forwardlooking, real-time basis. This means planning and putting on trades with a
strategy in mind. Think of it as a training schedule for a binary option trading
marathon. It is a fast track to improved performance because binary option
trading is not a game of chance. The probability of improving performance is
related to your skills and not the market.
Each performance challenge tests a core binary option trading skill. Ultimately, the trader will discover his or her strengths and choose strategies that
play to that skill.
There is no single strategy that applies to everyone. Each trader applies
his or her own personality to the trading and only after many trades can a real
trading plan emerge. Until that happens, the trader needs to look at his or her
own trading as a self-improvement path to obtain trading fitness.
When completed, the results of these exercises will provide you the
equivalent of a blood test of your binary option trading skills. The size of the
account doesn’t matter. A trader can do one challenge over one week or take
more time. It is important to have a big enough account to place trades at a
frequency that gives the trader exposure to changing market conditions. One
trade a week won’t take the sample frequency to a level sufficient to evaluate
with any forecast accuracy. So it will take a balance of size and frequency. Consider the following list of performance challenges for laddered binary trading.
