
Trading on Candlesticks Alone
Reading candlesticks is like reading standard bars — endlessly fascinating,
even addictive. But be aware that all bar reading takes practice. Some specific bars and patterns of bars are well known — and thus likely to get the
expected response from market participants. But to do a good job interpreting candlesticks, you need to understand the dynamic and complex relationships of many patterns all at once, like juggling six oranges rather than three.
As with standard bar interpretation, the predictive power of a particular bar
or pattern of bars may be limited to the next day or next few days. If you’re
a swing trader, candlesticks are going to be of more interest to you than if
you’re a position trader with a very long holding period (weeks and months).
Like all technical indicators, candlesticks work only some of the time to
deliver the expected outcome. Evaluating candlesticks alone, without confirmation from other indicators, is a daunting task. First, you have to define,
carefully, what each candlestick looks like. As noted in the section “Harami”
in this chapter, a harami (for example) can be bullish or bearish, depending
on the other bars around it.

www.pdfdummies.com

151

152 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Tom Bulkowski took on the task of measuring the predictive value of candlesticks in his book Encyclopedia of Candlestick Charts (published by Wiley).
Carefully defining each candlestick and set of candlestick patterns for a total
of 103, Bulkowski ran them through a gigantic database of 500 U.S. equities
over ten years and found that 69 percent of the candles delivered the outcome
expected, such as continuing higher closes following “three white soldiers.”
Bulkowski tested 412 combinations of the 103 candlestick patterns and found
that only 100 candles or patterns got the expected outcome, or 24 percent.
Wait — it gets worse. In statistics, you need a bare minimum of 30 to 40
instances of a pattern occurring to see whether it delivers the expected outcome. But Bulkowski found that patterns meeting his definitions didn’t occur
all that often. In fact, only 10 percent were found a sufficient number of times
to “qualify” for workability testing. In short, you find only 10 percent of the candles in sufficient number, and these candles work as expected only 60 percent
of the time. Refining the criteria further to a 66 percent success rate, meaning
that the candle works as advertised in two out of three trades, only 6 percent
of candles (or 13 candles total) are what Bulkowski calls “investment grade.”
These candles include some that I describe in this chapter, including the bearish doji star, bearish engulfing candle, and rising and falling windows.
Bulkowski’s findings don’t mean that you cannot find a specific candlestick
that works (say) most of the time in your security. A higher incidence of
success in candle-reading may be due to other traders in the same security
seeing the same candlestick pattern and believing it will work — and so it
does. In foreign exchange trading, for example, the hammer, shooting star,
and engulfing bull or engulfing bear candles work nearly all the time.
A qualification of the Bulkowski study is that it was applied to U.S. equities,
not commodities or other securities, and over a specific ten-year period. Still,
the study confirms what you already knew — no technical indicator works all
the time. That doesn’t mean specific candlesticks won’t work for you, especially if you add confirming indicators like the MACD. This only emphasizes
once again that chart-reading is an art.

www.pdfdummies.com

Par t IV

Finding Patterns

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

S

In this part . . .

ecurities prices move in regular ways that most
professional traders (who dominate the market)
expect — and therefore create. The key concepts are support and resistance and breakout. Even a rough application
of these two concepts can save you a bundle or help you
make profits, because they’re among the top technical ruling concepts in the market, even among non-technical
traders.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 9

Seeing Chart Patterns Through
a Technical Lens
In This Chapter
▶ Discovering patterns
▶ Figuring out continuation patterns
▶ Going over reversal patterns
▶ Measuring the measured move

A

pattern is a type of indicator traditionally drawn on the chart by hand.
Technical traders have been developing patterns from the earliest
days of technical analysis. Until personal computers came along, Technical
Analysis of Stock Market Trends by Edwards and McGee was a Bible for chart
readers. Chart patterns are powerful indicators, and some rudimentary
knowledge of patterns is a good idea for the most sophisticated indicator
trader and the beginner alike.
I cover some classic patterns in other chapters, such as the inside day
(Chapter 7) and support and resistance lines (Chapter 10). Other bar patterns are also covered in Chapter 7 (island reversal), and all the candlestick formations are considered patterns, too (Chapter 8). In this chapter, I
describe a few more of the most common patterns.

Introducing Patterns
Chart patterns are indicators consisting of geometric shapes drawn on the
chart, such as a triangle. As with most indicators, a price forecast is embedded in the pattern identification. Here’s a quick pattern primer:

www.pdfdummies.com

156 Part IV: Finding Patterns
✓ Most patterns employ straight lines (such as triangles), although a few
use semicircles or semiellipses (such as head-and-shoulders).
✓ Pattern lines generally follow either the highs or the lows.
✓ You usually want to organize pattern types according to whether they
forecast a continuation or a reversal of the current price move, although
you can apply many patterns (like triangles) either way.
The lingo of pattern analysis — double bottom and dead-cat bounce, for
example — makes some people laugh. Some of the names do seem a little
silly but they describe the price action efficiently.
As with most aspects of technical analysis, a pattern is a work in progress.
You may think you see a pattern developing, only to have the price action
change course and fail to complete the expected formation. You may have to
erase your work and start over a number of times on any single set of bars.
In short, pattern identification can be frustrating and time consuming. Resign
yourself to making a lot of mistakes, and then, even valid patterns fail some
of the time, like all indicators. The reason to tolerate the pattern recognition
process is that when you get it right, you have a powerful forecasting tool
that can deliver high returns. In the sections that follow, I cite performance
data from Tom Bulkowski’s path-breaking Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns
(Wiley).

Got imagination?
Not everyone can see patterns right away. Pattern identification takes practice — and a lot of drawing and redrawing of lines and shapes until you get
the hang of it. For example, consider Figure 9-1. Do you see the pattern?

Figure 9-1:
Find the
pattern.

The pattern in Figure 9-1 is a symmetrical triangle, as you can see in Figure 9-2.
The triangle is characterized by a series of lower highs along which you can
draw one trendline, and a series of higher lows along which you can draw

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 9: Seeing Chart Patterns Through a Technical Lens
another trendline. The two lines eventually come together at an apex. Before
that point is reached, the price must pierce one of the trendlines simply in the
course of trading in its normal range. Which one? Because most of the bars are
trending downward, you imagine the odds favor a break to the downside.

Figure 9-2:
Pattern
revealed.

BREAKOUT

TRIANGLE

And you’re right. In the Bulkowski study of triangles, covering 500 stocks
from 1991 to 1996, the symmetrical triangle pattern appeared 146 times. On
83 occasions, or 57 percent of the time, it was a downside breakout. The average decline was 19 percent, and the average decline lasted 74 days. In these
cases, the triangle was a continuation pattern (see later section, “Cozying Up
to Continuation Patterns,” in this chapter).
But sometimes the breakout is to the upside. In the same study, the price
delivered an upside breakout 63 times out of 146, or 43 percent of the cases.
The average rise was 41 percent and lasted an average of 163 days. In this
instance, the pattern forecast a reversal, not a continuation. Most patterns
don’t deliver a gift-wrapped buy/sell signal until near the end of the formation. As the symmetrical triangle pattern develops, the forecast is only that a
breakout will occur, not the direction of the breakout.
You usually see a burst of higher volume when a pattern reaches completion. This observation makes sense — other chartists in the crowd are seeing
the same pattern. For triangles, low volume often precedes the breakout, and
serves as a bonus warning of an impending move.

Coloring inside the lines
Pattern identification doesn’t require that each single price in a series line up
perfectly. Not every price high hits an overhead resistance line, for example.
It suffices that several hit the line. All triangles — symmetrical, ascending, and
descending — incorporate support (top) and resistance (bottom) lines, as do
flags and pennants, and other patterns. Opinion differs on whether the top
and bottom lines must enclose every part of every price bar, or if it’s okay for
the bar to break the line by a tiny amount as a triangle pattern is developing.

www.pdfdummies.com

157

158 Part IV: Finding Patterns
Generally, when a pattern includes a form of support and resistance, “color
within the lines,” so to speak. Victor Sperandeo in Trader Vic: Methods of a
Wall Street Master (another must-have book in every technical analyst’s
library), says that ignoring a break of the trendline is always wrong.
Commodity price charts offer more usable patterns than equity price charts,
according to Curtis Arnold, author of Timing the Market and Curtis Arnold’s PPS
Trading System; “PPS” standing for “Pattern Profitability Strategy.” Arnold recommends using patterns (like triangles) together with confirming moving
averages (see Chapter 12 for more on moving averages).

Cozying Up to Continuation Patterns
A continuation pattern tells you that buying or selling pressure is pausing. If
a big-picture trend is well established, the pattern suggests it will accelerate
after the pause. A continuation pattern, therefore, is a good place to add more
to a position, because you expect an additional move in the same direction.
Continuation patterns tend to be fairly short term, sometimes only a few days,
and are often neglected as a consequence.
Continuation patterns serve as reassurance that you’ve identified the trend
correctly. They also often point you to the ideal level at which to place a stoploss order, such as the ascending line in the ascending triangle that I describe
in the following section. (See Chapter 5 for a discussion of stops.)

Ascending and descending triangles
To draw ascending and descending triangles, you draw a line along the highs
of a price series and another one along the lows (see Figure 9-3) — just like
you do with symmetrical triangles.
In the ascending triangle, the price isn’t making new highs, and the topmost
(resistance) line is horizontal. You may worry that the failure to make new
highs means that the up move is over. But the price isn’t making new lows,
either. You can often expect a breakout of the top line to the upside.
When you can draw a horizontal line along a series of highs, remember to look
for a rising line along the lows at the same time. Not only does the ascending line of lows confirm the trend continuation, but it also provides you with
a ready-made stop-loss level at this ascending support line. The ascending
triangle pattern delivers the expected rise about two-thirds of the time, but
according to Tom Bulkowski’s study, it fails about 32 percent of the time. If
you wait for prices to close above the top trendline, then the failure rate drops
to a mere 2 percent. The expected rise, by the way, is equal to the height of
the triangle pattern. See the section later in this chapter on “Evaluating the
Measured Move.”

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 9: Seeing Chart Patterns Through a Technical Lens

ASCENDING TRIANGLE

DESCENDING TRIANGLE
Figure 9-3:
Ascending
and
descending
triangles.

A descending triangle is the mirror image of the ascending triangle. The important point is that in this case, the price is failing to make new lows in the prevailing downtrend. You wonder if the trend is failing. But if you can still draw a
line along the series of lower highs, it would be a mistake to buy at this point —
the probability is high that the downtrend is going to continue.

Dead-cat bounce
A dead-cat bounce is a peculiar continuation pattern that looks like a reversal at the beginning, with a sizeable upward retracement of a down move,
but then fades back to the same downward direction. Note that a dead-cat
bounce occurs only in down moves and no equivalent named pattern exists
for a parallel sequence of events in an up move.
The dead-cat pattern starts off with a negative fundamental event that triggers
a massive down move. The average size of the down move is 25 percent —
but the price can shoot down by 70 percent or more in only a few days. The
bounce is an upward retracement that may make you think the drop is over.
The pattern includes a breakaway downside gap about 80 percent of the
time, and sometimes the bounce upward fills part of the gap. (See Chapter 7
for a discussion of gaps.) Many traders mistakenly think that if a gap is filled,
even partly, the preceding move has ended. The dead-cat bounce is one of
the patterns that disproves that idea — by the end of six months after the
gap, only 54 percent of price moves had fully closed the gap in the Bulkowski
study, which found 244 versions of the dead-cat bounce pattern in 500 stocks
between 1991 and 1996. See Figure 9-4.

www.pdfdummies.com

159

160 Part IV: Finding Patterns
BREAKAWAY GAP

BOUNCE

Figure 9-4:
Dead-cat
bounce.

Bulkowski’s statistics on the dead-cat bounce are extensive. A few of the
points that stand out include the following:
✓ The bounce upward averages 19 percent from the lowest low.
✓ The average decline from the top of the retracement bounce is 15 percent and lasts an average of three months.
✓ The pattern fails to deliver an additional decline only 10 percent of the
time, making the success rate 90 percent.

Recognizing Classic Reversal Patterns
Patterns come into their own when you use them to identify a trend reversal.
No matter how a trend comes to an end, chances are good that a pattern
exists to identify it. The reversal patterns I mention in the following sections
are definitely ones you want to be able to recognize.

Double bottom
A double bottom looks like a W. The double bottom is essentially a retest of a
low and predicts a price breakout to the upside, but only under certain conditions. See Figure 9-5.
The identification guide for a valid double bottom includes these factors:

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 9: Seeing Chart Patterns Through a Technical Lens
✓ A minimum of ten days between the two lows and sometimes as long as
two or three months.
✓ Variation between the two lows should not be more than 4 percent.
✓ A center up move of at least 10 percent from the lower of the two bottoms.
✓ The price must rise above the confirmation line to confirm that the pattern is indeed a double bottom and the forecast of a continued rise is
correct. The confirmation line is a horizontal line drawn from the highest
high in the middle of the W. The point where the price rises above the
line is called the confirmation point.
Reaching the confirmation line drawn horizontally from the confirmation
point, shown on Figure 9-5, is the most important identification key of the
double bottom. This is where you buy.

CONFIRMATION POINT

PULLBACK

Figure 9-5:
Double
bottom.

DOUBLE
BOTTOM

Notice that some of the price bars break the lines you draw to form the
double bottom pattern. Breaking some of the bars is allowed in a formation
where the line is not a support or resistance line. Note the pullback, too. A
pullback is a retracement to the downside right after the price breaks the
confirmation line. A pullback occurs 68 percent of the time in confirmed
double bottoms, making it hard to trust your pattern identification.
Bulkowski prefers the term throwback for the retracement after an upside
breakout, as in the double bottom, and pullback for the retracement after a
downward breakout, as in a double top, but these words aren’t engraved in
stone. You can use the words retracement, correction, throwback, and pullback
(more or less) interchangeably.

www.pdfdummies.com

161

162 Part IV: Finding Patterns
Not every twin bottom is a true double bottom. Only about one-third of all
the patterns that look like a double bottom end up meeting the confirmation
criterion. In short, the pattern fails about two-thirds of the time.
These odds sound terrible, but wait — on the occasions when you do get
confirmation, the double bottom is tremendously reliable. If you wait for the
price to break above the confirmation line, the pattern delivers a profit an
astonishing 97 percent of the time — and the average gain is 40 percent. The
average number of days to the ultimate high is 204 or seven months, in the
Bulkowski study.
The version of the double bottom that Figure 9-5 illustrates is clear and obvious, but not every pattern is so easy to detect. For example, one or both of
the two lows of the double bottom could be rounded rather than pointed.
When the first bottom is pointed and the second is rounded, Tom Bulkowski
names it the Adam and Eve double bottom. You can imagine the other combinations, including two pointy bottoms (Adam and Adam) and the first one
rounded with the second one pointed (Eve and Adam). This is, by the way, as
racy as technical analysis ever gets.
Often the two lows of a double bottom are separated by several months
or even a year, and you can easily miss the pattern altogether. Also, minor
retracements and even other patterns within the W can obscure the pattern.
Some analysts note that big patterns lasting months are easier to see on
weekly charts that skim off the aberrations in daily data.

Double tops
A double top is the mirror image of the double bottom — it looks like the
letter M. In a double top, the price makes a high, pulls back on profit-taking
(as usual), and then bullish traders try but fail to surpass the first high. The
failure to rally a second time through the first high means that the bulls were
beaten and the bears are now in charge. A true double top is usually accompanied by falling volume as the second top is being formed.
As with the double bottom (see the section “Double bottom” in this chapter),
you need to see the price surpass the confirmation level (the lowest point
in the center bar of the M) for the pattern to be valid. When that condition
is not met, twin tops fail to deliver a sustained down move 65 percent of the
time. When the condition is met, however, the pattern delivers a down move
83 percent of the time, which is less reliable than the double bottom (97 percent), but still impressive. In the Bulkoswski study, the average drop after
a confirmed double top is 20 percent and lasts two months to the eventual
lowest low.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 9: Seeing Chart Patterns Through a Technical Lens
Again, as with double bottoms, the price pulls back after the confirmation 69
percent of the time, causing you to doubt the pattern. Fortunately, the pullback period averages only ten days before the downtrend resumes.
Topping reversal patterns like the double top are usually more short term
than bottoming reversal patterns like double bottoms. Tops take less time to
form (57 days on average) than bottoms (70 days), because traders are more
fearful of taking losses after a big gain than they are trusting of early signs of a
bottom. Topping reversals are often more volatile, too, although they occur
with equal frequency. According to Bulkowski, nearly all bottom chart patterns — of any type — perform better than tops. Bottoming patterns have
average gains of 38 percent, but tops show losses of just 21 percent.
These statistics confirm market lore that bull markets are easier to trade
than bear markets. Bull markets are more orderly and may suggest that
greed is stronger than fear. Bull markets tend to have wider and deeper participation, too, because there are more traders who can go long than there
are traders who can go both long and short, at least in equities. In equities
(but not in securities like foreign exchange), buy-side gains are theoretically
unlimited while gains on the short side are always limited — a stock cannot
sell for less than zero.

The ultimate triple top:
Head-and-shoulders
A triple top or bottom is somewhat rarer than the double version, but the
meaning is the same — the price fails to surpass the previous low or high,
signaling a trend reversal.
The head-and-shoulders pattern is a triple top that’s easy to see: One bump
forms the left shoulder, a higher bump forms a head, and a third bump forms
the right shoulder. (See Figure 9-6 for two examples.) The head-and-shoulders
pattern is the most widely recognized of all the patterns, and deserves its
popularity because when the price surpasses the pattern’s confirmation line, it
delivers the expected down move a whopping 93 percent of the time.
The confirmation line connects the low point of each shoulder and is named
the neckline. The price breaking the neckline predicts a price decline,
whether the neckline is sloping upward or downward. Seldom do you see the
neckline perfectly horizontal. A downward-sloping neckline tends to deliver
the biggest price move.

www.pdfdummies.com

163

164 Part IV: Finding Patterns
NECKLINE
(CONFIRMATION)

Figure 9-6:
Head-andshoulders
patterns.

If you stop and think about it, a head-and-shoulders pattern is a logical development of crowd behavior. A head-and-shoulders usually forms after a long
uptrend. The dip from the first shoulder represents the normal retracement
after a new high. The head then represents the triumph of bullish sentiment
and sets a new higher high. The dip after the higher-high head represents
more profit-taking, whereupon the bulls buy again. When the bulls are making
their third try at a rally, their price target is the last highest high, which is the
top of the head. The failure of the second shoulder to surpass the head is the
end of the rally. Buying demand diminishes and selling pressure takes hold,
forcing prices down, completing the pattern.
According to the Bulkowski study, which examined 500 stocks over the
period 1991 to 1996, the head-and-shoulders pattern appeared 431 times and
resulted in 406 reversals. A confirmed head-and-shoulders delivers an average decline of 23 percent from the neckline, and the most often-seen decline
is 15 percent. The average length of the pattern is 62 days.
As with double tops and bottoms, however, some traders refuse to accept
the pattern, and they cause a pullback to the confirmation line 45 percent of
the time. Pullbacks average only 11 days before the stock resumes its decline.
This is your last chance to jump off before the price hits the wall. Do not listen
to that little voice that says, “See, it’s coming back.” That little voice is wishful
thinking. The pullback is the only free lunch in technical analysis.
