
Trends advance through major highs and lows after repeated attempts. When congested price tries
to break S/R and subsequent bars narrow, they often signal impending breakouts and breakdowns.
This tight congestion offers a very narrow execution window before price explodes through the
barrier. These interfaces also signal low-risk failure when price rolls and expands slowly in the
wrong direction. Focus sharp attention after a first test fades and retraces. The next attempt faces
fewer whipsaws because most participants took their shot on the last try.
Many swing traders freeze at breakout interfaces and fail to execute these profitable positions.
Because most opportunity relies on crowd participation, they wait too long for confirmation rather
than accepting the pattern signal that flags the impending move. The narrow-range setup depends
on execution ahead of the crowd and lets their fuel carry the position into a fast profit. Reprogram
trading rhythm and watch these unique formations to capture trends just before they appear.
FIGURE 4.4
Overbought conditions and a long doji that prints well outside the top band signal a central tendency reversal
trade. Stay out of these events in trending markets until extreme readings lower the risk. The shooting star that
prints about 20 bars later offers a much easier profit opportunity. Note the horizontal top band and double top test
that both raise the odds for a quick reversal. A few bars later, Vitesse finds a similar setup at the prior gap
breakout and horizontal lower band. Finally, the stock moves downward and a 100% collapse through the
trending lower band presents a final swing trade.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Setups work best when executions align with market conditions. Shorting rallies in hot markets or
chasing trends in dull ones both empty trading accounts. It takes considerable skill to recognize the
interface that separates a momentum market from a countertrend one. But this also allows a tactical
shift that beats the crowd to the new dynamics. Changing conditions may not offer good setups
right at the interface. A developing market trend may just shake up confidence and tell the swing
trader to stand aside until opportunity shows up.
Learn to read market cycles before the crowd. Cycle analysis uncovers trends ready to tighten into
congestion and offers another tool to locate impending breakouts into new trends. Apply a 14-day
slow Stochastic or RSI and measure the longer-term swing between buyers and sellers. Or plot a
five-bar slow Stochastic under a 5-minute chart and look for the 90-minute S&P alternation cycle.
At potential turning points, watch for reversals at trendlines, channels, and other natural break
levels. Align executions to these underlying cycles and place trades in tune with the market.
Study volatility through range bar expansion-contraction. Look for the range-bound NR7 and
trending wide bars that reflect shifting crowd conditions. Apply Bollinger Bands to bar range study.
Watch for constricting bands around price as volatility decreases and signals an imminent swing
back into bar expansion. Measure how quickly they turn out and twist as price momentum builds.
Or plot classic lower-pane volatility indicators that track the central tendency aspects of price
change.
Volatility routinely increases through the early phases of a trend, decreases in the middle, and peaks
as it climaxes into a sideways range. Friction and intense bull-bear battles characterize new
breakouts and lead to wide range bars. The conflict eases as price ejects and the dominant crowd
assumes control. Heavy crosscurrents return near climaxes and participation surges again. Volatility
decreases gradually through the congestion zone as volume dries up and price bar range narrows.
These peaks and valleys define points of swing trade opportunity. Frequent pullbacks after new
breakouts offer low-risk countertrend entry. The dynamic third-wave trend environment favors
momentum tactics as prices ramp bar after bar. Climax tops and bottoms invite central tendency
trades at the extremes of overbought-oversold readings. Sideways congestion presents fade setups
until the empty zone signals the start of a new trend.

MORE ON CROSS-VERIFICATION
Market participants have difficulty understanding the nature of opportunity. The pundits teach that a
few well-marked patterns have secret triggers that lead to profit. In their logic, participants must
find these quickly and take a seat before the blessed event. But effective strategy requires far more
careful planning. Price emits continuous data about future direction. Each new piece of chart
information can alter the likelihood that any specific outcome will occur. Execute the right bar and
mediocre patterns may yield profits. Execute the wrong one and no textbook will save the position.
Directional probability falls through negative feedback and rises through positive feedback. But
odds don’t matter until setups appear. When they do, the charting landscape will filter opportunities
with the highest odds for success. Predictive force peaks at certain crossroads on price charts. Odds
for a specific outcome increase when discontinuous forms of S/R converge at a single price level.
Apply this cross-verification (CV) mechanism to measure the setup’s potency.
FIGURE 4.5
A breakout beckons on Ciena’s 5-minute chart. Price forms a clear ascending triangle and looks ready to explode
upward. But overhead resistance can short circuit the most promising rally. Review all trade reward targets in
advance and examine any intermediate barriers that price must mount to get there. Note how CIEN’s 60-minute

bars show clear sailing all the way to 110 before a prior high and descending Bollinger Band top both intervene.
Right on schedule, the stock pops almost 5 points in 20 minutes but stops dead at the 110-resistance level.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Each position generates a probability for success or failure. Enter a trade only when highly
favorable odds support the setup. Measure probability by the actual number of converging S/R
points. This simple analysis dictates that the more CV, the higher the likelihood that the position
will produce a profit. When four or more levels intersect (CV4), entry into that setup at the low-risk
execution target (ET) has the highest odds for profit. Keep in mind that trade probability must also
align with favorable reward:risk. A move in the profitable direction does little when the potential
gain remains small.
Understand the nature of the ET and its relationship to cross-verification. This important swing
trade concept represents the price, time, and risk that trade entry must be considered. The best ET
naturally occurs right at the strongest S/R. But the most promising CV4 setup offers no trade if it
lacks an appropriate ET. The market’s cruel nature generates many promising price expansion
events with highly unfavorable entry points. Skilled participants must always manage execution as
aggressively as opportunity to stay in the game.
FIGURE 4.6
The 90-minute S&P alternation cycle rarely sets up perfectly in the real world. Atmel develops a rhythmic buy–
sell swing that persists for well over a day. But a closer examination suggests that the cycle phase is closer to 1

hour than 90 minutes. Stay flexible and use cross-market tools to realign trade setups as required. The last two
hours of the ATML chart also illustrate how intraday cycles shift timing when markets move from rangebound
into trending periods. Keep one eye on the evolving pattern at all times while looking at short-term cycles.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Discontinuous information requires that different features exist independently of each other. Many
types of S/R data actually derive from other calculations. For example, MACD Histograms arise
from moving average data. Therefore, a setup does not cross-verify when MACD and MAs say the
same thing. On the other hand, a hammer candle that strikes an old double top at the bottom of a
horizontal Bollinger Band constitutes three unrelated elements that converge at a single point and
suggest a major reversal. Take great care before accepting each CV point. Accidental combination
of derivative measurements may carry substantial risk. The trade will inaccurately cross-verify and
give false confidence to the position.
Cross-verification supports standard price convergence-divergence analysis. This method parallels
the momentum cycle and confirms new trends. Multiple convergence improves the odds that the
trend will continue. For example, when the Stochastics indicator moves sharply off a bottom, try to
verify that observation with trendlines and pattern breakouts. Or when MA ribbons spread out,
analyze the recent price bars to locate narrow range or wide range signals such as the NR7.
Fibonacci ratios offer excellent CV analysis. Stocks faithfully retrace certain percentages of prior
movement before finally reversing or continuing the prevailing trend. These stair step levels

identify significant setups when bottom pane indicators and landscape features converge to offer
support. Apply a Fib grid to trend extremes and look for activity at the 38%, 50%, and 62%
retracement levels. Price often bounces like a pool ball back and forth across this marvel of crowd
mathematics.
FIGURE 4.7
General Electric sets up a dramatic CV4 signal on the daily chart just before ejecting into a rally. Consider the high
odds against these unrelated elements converging at the same price level: 1. Price pulls back to test the downtrend line.
2. Price pulls back to the 62% retracement of the last rally. 3. Price pulls back to test the Big W center pivot. 4. Price
pulls back to the center Bollinger Band.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

TRADER vs. THE CROWD
Profits come from the other traders’ pockets. While most participants realize that a winner stands
next to every loser, few comprehend the true mechanics of this statement. The markets have never
been a team sport. Swing traders must be predators ready to pounce on ill-advised decisions, poor
judgment, and bad timing. Success depends on the misfortune of others.
Who exactly is the crowd? Swing trading tends to focus on short-term positions and the other
market players who execute trades in this time frame. This total congregation exhibits predictable
herd behavior in response to news events and S/R violations. The crowd reacts rather than acts

when given the opportunity. It feeds on itself as members notice bursts of activity and fall into line,
one after the other, until supply dissipates. Just as a stampeding herd suddenly reverses course upon
reaching a barrier, the crowd may show little loyalty to a single price direction.
The trading core that acts on emotion rather than reason changes through every circumstance and
defies accurate measurement. For obvious reasons, highly charged markets induce more herd
instinct than quiet ones. Seek active conditions when looking for profit opportunities. Read the
crowd’s excitement through total volume and the time and sales ticker. Watch the trade rhythm as
price strikes key S/R violation levels. Are the players tripping over themselves to get in or out of a
position? How willing are they to execute well above or below the inside market? Their intensity
tells the swing trader how long price breaks may last and the best strategy for that particular setup.
Trade ahead of, behind, or contrary to the crowd. Choose the strategy that aligns best with the
current Pattern Cycles phase. Pick the ETs in advance based upon detached observation of the
technical picture. Narrow-range executions work best to step in front of the crowd before a
breakout. Stand behind the action on popular patterns such as the head and shoulders or
symmetrical triangle and watch as insiders fade the masses that react to these well-known setups.
Then look closely for the market’s true intentions and execute after the crowd shakeout when the
underlying direction finally emerges.
Never hesitate to go against crowd sentiment when the market telegraphs a reversal. But use careful
timing and analysis before position entry. Crowds carry momentum that rarely allows instant
directional change. Move down to the price chart below the time frame of interest and watch for
small reversal patterns to print first. Then choose an ET that responds to that smaller pattern.
Contrary tactics are not difficult to learn. Realize that greed-fear often motivates the crowd to act
against its own best interests. Learn to recognize those profitable times and have a strategy ready to
catch other traders’ money as they let it go. Just mimic the insider’s actions. Market makers take the
other side of trades to ensure a liquid market. The swing trader should apply similar tactics when
the crowd lines up on the wrong side at key reversal zones.
Use the crowd’s excitement to exit trades on wide price bars before deep countertrends reduce
profits. Reversals occur at peaks of crowd agitation. Sharp pullbacks trap players when they get
greedy or wait too long for confirmation of a rollover. Safe exit requires that swing traders step in
front of the crowd and close a position into its waiting hands. Get out quickly on bar expansion into
major barriers such as prior highs or lows and Bollinger Band extremes.
Monitor personal stock board behavior closely. Don’t identify with individual stocks or their related
discussion groups. Board participants always have hidden agendas and will add a dangerous bias to
detached execution. However, these virtual boiler rooms do fill an important data function: they
assist in measurement of the crowd’s emotional intensity for that stock. They also represent the
pocket that the swing trader wants to pick.
Don’t be an investor and swing trader on the same position. Investment represents a belief in a
stock’s underlying value or technical state. This bias will inhibit the ability to apply contrary
strategies when the circumstances demand them. Investment relies upon wealth creation, while
supply and demand drives trading. Don’t confuse the two.

SHORT SALES
Price momentum builds strongly in both directions, but different crowd mechanics drive the
underlying trends. Greed fuels stock rallies, while fear and pain guide selloffs. Each trend direction
displays special chart characteristics that elicit different formation types. In other words, don’t try to

