
NOISE
Questionable positions invoke wish fulfillment instead of risk management. Effective strategy must
deal with expectations as well as results. Market participants love to see things that aren’t there, and
the daily grind gives them many opportunities. Because ranges persist most of the time, many
intermediate highs and lows capture inappropriate attention and lead to bad decisions. Tape reading
and Level II compound this problem with their emotional bursts of excitement and pain.
Technical noise increases in shorter time frames and decreases in longer ones. This underlying
mechanism explains why many day traders bleed capital when they take too many positions. They
misidentify each market wobble as an entry signal rather than waiting for cross-verification to line
up. Longer time frames reduce noise because primary market forces still carry weight and guide
trend development. When choosing shorter holding periods, always filter trades through broader
trends to locate the most favorable setups.
Avoid Fibonacci on short-term charts except in very dynamic trends and highly liquid markets.
Five-minute chart retracements work, but only after the swing trader adjusts to considerable noise
and whipsaw. Narrow intraday ranges often flatten retracement signals to the point that they
become useless. At the least, overlay longer-term trends on intraday charts and ignore retracement
levels on less persistent price movement.
First and last hours mark intense periods of price discovery. These volatile phases invoke many
imaginary trends, reversals, and shakeouts. Tighten up defensive strategies when executing
positions during these times. Consider broad market forces when trying to predict short-term market
direction. Step back and look at the longer-term view. Does the current action take place at a major
breakout level, or are smaller forces at work? Try to avoid the first and last 15 minutes completely.
The noise level spikes sharply during these intervals and most strategies become pure gambling.

CONCLUSION
THIRTY RULES FOR THE MASTER SWING TRADER
TRADE CRAFT
Each market day spawns excellent trading patterns. But many skilled participants still wash out
through bad selection and poor timing. Why doesn’t their experience save them from ultimate
failure? The answer holds great wisdom for every trading aspirant. Simply put, long-term survival
depends much more on personal discipline than on market knowledge. Sloppy execution wastes
months at the guru’s feet. Low self-esteem inflicts more damage than a sudden selloff. And a great
stock cannot overcome a bad attitude.
Marginal players view speculation through greedy eyes. Without rules or tactics, they chase hot
stocks and hope for the big score. Fate may reward these gamblers with an occasional windfall, but
easy profits only reinforce a reckless attitude and open the door to eventual demise. Market
professionals quickly find these lost souls and send them off to less challenging hobbies.
Opportunity waits for discovery. But modern markets demand careful planning and precise
execution at all times. The road to success begins with the master pattern. Use Pattern Cycles to
build powerful tactics that tap a market’s vast potential. Test their real-time performance in each

session and adapt a personal style that matches individual needs. Then exercise strict discipline
through every phase of position management.
Read the charting landscape with great skill and select only the best setups. Execute positions based
on numbers, time, and the smell of the crowd. Knowledge of the master pattern encourages
detached execution and solid risk management. This science of trend allows swing traders to build
systematic techniques that avoid reckless action. Take the time to explore this hidden world and
become a true master of the trade.

RULES FOR THE TRADING GAME
Trade management demands simple understanding of complex market forces. Use these battletested rules to internalize the classic mechanics that move price and create opportunity.

MARKET WISDOM
•

Forget the news, remember the numbers.

You’re not smart enough to know how news will affect price. The chart already knows and reflects
it in the numbers. Use the period before scheduled news to apply a convergence-divergence analysis
that compares price action to current expectations. The best information comes when the chart
diverges sharply from common wisdom.
•

If you have to look, it isn’t there.

Forget your college degree and trust your instincts. The best setups jump out from the market noise
and create a sense of urgency to trade. Take a deep breath and cross-verify your numbers. Then act
quickly before the opportunity disappears.
Price has memory.
What did price do the last time it hit a certain level? Chances are it will do it again. Trend mirrors
capture some of this movement, but actual experience does a better job. Watch when a favorite
stock returns to a price level that turned a profit or loss in the past. The prior tape action embeds
deeply in the trading subconscious and guides fresh tactics.
•

Profit and discomfort stand side by side.

Look for the setup that scares you the most. That’s the one you probably need to trade. Don’t expect
to feel comfortable until an active position finally closes out. If it feels too good, everyone else will
trade it the same way and become the crowd.
Stand apart from the crowd at all times
Trade ahead of, behind, or contrary to the crowd. Be the first in and out of the profit door. Take
their money before they take yours. Always be ready to pounce on the crowd’s ill-advised
decisions, poor judgment, and bad timing. Your success depends on the misfortune of others.

THE SWING
•

Buy the second low. Sell the second high.

Price extremes attract contrary tactics. The first test of a new high should fail. The first test of a new
low should succeed. Watch for a breakout or breakdown the next time around.
•

Buy the first pullback from a new high. Sell the first pullback from a new low.

Act quickly when the market gods offer a gift. Pullbacks let traders jump on board moving trains.
They also provide fuel to carry a market higher or lower.
•

Buy at support. Sell at resistance.

What do you do when you walk into a wall? Price has only two choices when it reaches a barrier:
continue forward or reverse. Pick the right one and start counting your profits.
Short rallies, not selloffs.
When markets drop, short sellers get ready to cover, making this a terrible time to execute new
short sales. Wait until they ignite a squeeze and get shaken out at higher prices. Then jump in
quietly while no one is watching.

TIME
•

Trends depend on their time frame.

Trend relativity errors end trading careers. Make sure your pattern works in the period that you
want to trade. Opportunity aligns to specific time segments. Profitable trades find the right ones,
while losing trades chase the wrong ones.
•

Manage time as efficiently as price.

Time is money in the markets. Don’t waste either. Profit relates directly to the amount of time set
aside for market analysis. Know your holding period for every trade. And watch the clock to
become a market survivor.
•

Avoid the open.

They see you coming. The best opening strategies exit old trades and wait patiently for new ones.
The trend is your friend.
Strong stocks get stronger and weak stocks get weaker. Always surf the wave in trending markets.
Save contrary thinking for pullbacks and ranges.

EXECUTION
•

Expect the market to reverse as soon as you get filled.

Locate the safety net before jumping into a trade. Stand aside when the exit door is out of reach.
Wait for a pullback or drop down and trade the next-lower time frame. Never toss a coin into the
fountain and hope your dreams will come true.
•

Match tactics to market conditions.

Shift gears quickly when trades stop working. Market inefficiency dries up as the crowd plays your
game. But a new door will open as soon as the old one closes. Find it and profit until the herd heads
your way.
Trade with the TICK, not against it.
Go with the money flow. Draw trendlines and channels around TICK to predict where the next big
move will occur. Then trade with the wind to your back.
•

Major convergence signals the best trades.

Watch for the bull’s eye. Look for the price and time that points repeatedly to a specific trade entry.
The market is trying to tell you something.
•

Don’t confuse execution with opportunity.

Save Donkey Kong for the weekend. Pretty colors and fast fingers don’t build successful careers.
Understanding price behavior and market mechanics does. Learn what a good trade looks like
before falling in love with the software.

OPPORTUNITY AND RISK
The perfect opportunity rarely exists.
Learn to trade in shades of gray. Profits depend on different levels of inefficiency. Get off the
sidelines and act when enough ducks sit in a row.
•

Know the price that violates the pattern.

Keep both risk and reward in sight at all times. Look for trades where price must move only a short
distance to show that it was a mistake. Then look the other way to find a profit target and apply this
math to every opportunity. Limit execution to positions with low risk and high profit potential.
Then update analysis with every new tick.
Control risk before seeking reward.
Wear your market chastity belt at all times. Attention to profit is a sign of trading immaturity, while
attention to loss is a sign of trading experience. The markets have no intention of giving money to
those who do not earn it.
Swing for percentage and distance.
Learn to hit both the single and home run. The best profits go to the swing trader with the highest
AvgWIN and %WIN. Concentrate on building both sides of the market equation.
•

Big losses rarely come without warning.

You have no one to blame but yourself. The chart told you leave and the news told you to leave.
Learn to visualize trouble and head for safety with only a few bars of uncomfortable information.

SECRETS OF THE PRICE CHART
•

Bulls live above the 200-day, bears live below.

Are you flying with the birds or swimming with the fishes? The 200-day moving average divides
the investing world in two. Bulls and greed live above the 200-day, while bears and fear live below.
Sellers eat up rallies below this line, while buyers to come to the rescue above it.
The big move hides just beyond price congestion.
Enter in mild times and exit in wild times. Don’t count on the agitated crowd for your trading
signals. It’s usually too late for an easy profit by the time they act. Execute new trades in narrow
bars at support or resistance whenever possible.
•

Big volume kills trends.

Blow-offs take buyers and sellers out of the market. When volume peaks too sharply or quickly, it
will short circuit movement in the prevailing direction. These climax events wash out the crowd as
efficiently as a flat market.
Current price is the best indicator of future price.
What does the latest number say about the market? The answer predicts the next number, up or
down. But go ahead and add a few indicators anyway just to stay out of trouble.
Perfect patterns carry the greatest risk for failure.
Demand warts and bruises on your trade setups. Market mechanics work to defeat the majority
when everyone sees the same thing at the same time. Look closely for failure when perfection
appears.
•

Trends rarely turn on a dime.

Reversals build slowly. Investors are as stubborn as mules and take a lot of pain before they admit
defeat. Short sellers are true disbelievers and won’t cover without a fight.
•

Some gaps never fill.

The old traders’ wisdom is a lie. Exhaustion gaps get filled. Breakaway and continuation gaps may
never fill. Trade in the direction of their support when price approaches for the first time.

THE MASTER SWING TRADER
Commit yourself to a lifetime of opportunity and conflict. Professional traders still face unexpected
drawdowns and missed profits, but they understand that longevity depends on shaking off their
short-term demons and moving on to the next trade. And they have the confidence to expect a
profit on the very next position.
Seek market knowledge but avoid the knowledge game. Books and seminars can undermine
successful trade execution after a few years of experience. Realize that secondary reinforcement
from sitting at the guru’s feet may not build either profits or skills. True market wisdom comes only
through personal trading experience.

Size doesn’t matter. Avoid the bias that position size and professional responsibility must grow with
trading experience. Some may find a home managing other people’s assets. Others should just stay
at home and watch the kids while the markets pay their lunch money. No single characteristic
describes the successful swing trader. This master technician may look like a local businessman,
soccer mom, or software geek.
Treat this noble profession with great respect. Combine the discipline of a saint with the tenacity of
a bulldog through every trading opportunity. The markets work to fool the majority at every turn.
Don’t be surprised when you suddenly become part of the crowd that you’re trying to avoid. Use
the opportunity to peek in the mirror and see what it looks like before extricating yourself from this
dangerous herd.
Enjoy the long road to market knowledge. Each twist offers a new gem to carry into the next active
position. Over time, many battle scars teach a profound understanding of the modern financial
markets. Neophytes become members of an exclusive club as they evolve into seasoned
professionals. As their power grows, they often wonder if they can fully tame the beast and have it
under their total control. Unfortunately, this popular fantasy will never come true.
Even the master swing trader must take what the market gives with humility, acceptance, and good
humor.

APPENDIX A

SUPPLIERS
Active Trader Magazine
555 West Madison St., Suite 1210
Chicago, IL 60661
800-341-9384
http:/ /www.activetradermag.com
Joe DiNapoli
Coast Investment Software, Inc.
6907 Midnight Pass
Sarasota, FL 34242
941-346-3801
http:/ /www.fibtrader.com
Hard Right Edge
Brooke Publishers, Inc
8055 South Garfield Way
Littleton, CO 80122
303-773-6233
http:/ /www.hardrightedge.com
Intelligent Speculator
P.O. Box 2953
Sumas, WA 98295
604-671-5456
http:/ /www.intelligentspeculator.com

International Online Trading Expo
23456 Madero, Suite 240
Mission Viejo, CA 92691
888-411-EXPO
http:/ /www.onlinetradingexpo.com
Investor Links
IL Data Corporation, Inc.
2350 Saddle Hollow Rd, Suite 1
Crozet, VA 22932
877-823-8182
http:/ /www.investorlinks.com
MB Trading
214 Main Street, PMB 241
El Segundo, CA 90245
888-790-4800
http:/ /www.mbtrading.com
Omega Research
8700 West Flagler St, Suite 250
Miami, Florida 33174
305-485-7000
http:/ /www.omegaresearch.com
Mark Seleznov
Trend Trader
15030 N. Hayden Rd, Suite 120
Scottsdale, AZ 85260
888-328-7363
http:/ /www.trendtrader.com
Silicon Investor
Go2Net, Inc.
999 Third Ave.
Seattle, WA 98104
206-447-1595
http:/ /www.siliconinvestor.com
Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities Magazine
4757 California Ave. SW
Seattle, WA 98116
800-832-4642
http:/ /www.traders.com
Tony Oz Enterprises
Stock Junkie
P.O. Box 3043
Laguna Hills, CA 92654
http:/ /www.stockjunkie.com

Townsend Analytics
100 South Wacker Dr., Suite 2040
Chicago, IL 60606
800-827-0141
http:/ /www.taltrade.com
Worden Brothers
Five Oaks Office Park
4905 Pine Cone Dr.
Durham, NC 27707
800-776-4940
http:/ /www.tc2000.com

APPENDIX B

GLOSSARY
Abandoned baby A three-bar candlestick reversal pattern. A single bar gaps up or down but then
immediately gaps back in the opposite direction on the next bar. The shadow of the lone candle
never crosses the shadow of the bar before the first gap or after the second gap.
Accumulation-distribution (acc-dis) The underlying buying or selling pressure within a particular
stock.
Adam and Eve (A&E) Top or bottom reversal pattern noted by its sharp, volatile first high (low)
and slower, rounded second high (low).
Ascending triangle A common continuation pattern that forms from a rising lower trendline and a
horizontal top resistance line.
AvgLOSS A performance measurement that shows the total losses divided by the number of losing
trades.
AvgWIN A performance measurement that shows the total profits divided by the number of
winning trades.
Axe The market maker who exerts the most influence in a particular stock.
Bear hug A trading strategy that finds short sale opportunities in weak markets that rally into
resistance or narrow range bars on the verge of breakdown.
Bollinger Bands (BB) Elastic support and resistance channels above and below price bars that
respond to the tendency of price to draw back to center after strong movement in either direction.
The Bollinger Band center band sets up at the moving average chosen for the indicator.
Breakaway gap A classic gap, popularized in Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, that signals the
start of a new trend after a prolonged basing period.
Bucket shops Early 20th century stock gambling parlors that catered to short-term speculation.
Fictional trader Jesse Livermore discusses his experiences in them in the classic Reminiscences of a
Stock Operator.

Charting landscape A 3D view that evaluates complex price action through multiple layers of
information on a single price chart.
Coiled spring A trading strategy that executes a position at the interface between a rangebound
market and a trending market.
Continuation gap A classic gap, popularized in Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, that signals the
dynamic midpoint of an ongoing trend.
Convergence-divergence (C-D) The tendency of two or more charting landscape features to confirm
or refute an expected price outcome.
Clear air (CA) Pockets of thin participation and ownership that often lead to wide range price bars.
Climbing the ladder Bollinger Band pattern that indicates a strong and sustained rally.
Cross-verification (CV) The convergence of unrelated directional information at a single price
level.
Cross-verification × 4 (CV × 4) A high-probability trade in which a single price and time emerges
from analysis through at least four unrelated methods.
Cup and handle (C&H) A popular pattern that triggers a breakout through a triple top. The
formation draws a long and deep base after an intermediate high. The market rallies into a double
top failure that creates the ‘‘cup.” It pulls back in a small rounded correction that forms the
“handle” and then surges to a new high.
Cup and two handles (C&2H) A cup and handle variation that draws two congestion zones on the
right side of the pattern before price ejects into a strong breakout.
Dark cloud cover A two-bar candlestick reversal pattern. The first bar draws a tall rally candle. The
next candle gaps up but closes well within the range of the prior bar.
Descending triangle A common reversal pattern that forms from a descending upper trendline and a
horizontal bottom support line.
Dip trip A trading strategy that buys pullbacks in an active bull market.
Doji A one-bar candlestick reversal pattern in which the open and close are the same (or almost the
same) price and the high-low range is above average for that market.
Double bottom (DB) A common reversal pattern in which price prints a new low, reverses into a
rally, and returns once to test the low before moving higher.
Double top (DT) A common reversal pattern in which price prints a new high, reverses into a
selloff, and returns once to test the high before moving lower.
Dow Theory Observations on the nature of trend by Charles Dow in the early 20th century. It also
notes that broad market trends verify when the three major market averages all move to a new high
or low.

Electronic communications networks (ECNs) Computer stock exchanges that rapidly match, fill,
and report customer limit orders.
Elliott Wave Theory (EWT) A pattern-recognition technique published by Ralph Nelson Elliott in
1939 that believes all markets move in five distinct waves when traveling in the direction of a
primary trend and three distinct waves when traveling in a correction against a primary trend.
Empty zone (EZ) The interface between the end of a quiet rangebound market and the start of a new
dynamic trending market.
Execution target (ET) The predetermined point in price, time, and risk that a trade entry should be
considered.
Execution zone (EZ) The time and price surrounding an execution target that requires undivided
attention in order to decide if an trade entry is appropriate.
Exhaustion gap A classic gap, popularized in Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, that signals the
end of an active trend with one last burst of enthusiasm or fear.
Fade A swing strategy that sells at resistance and buys at support.
Failure target The projected price that a losing trade will be terminated. The price at which a trade
will be proven wrong.
Farley’s Accumulation-Distribution Accelerator (ADA) A technical indicator that measures the
trend of accumulation-distribution.
Fibonacci (Fibs) The mathematical tendency of trends to find support at the 38%, 50%, or 62%
retracement of the last dynamic move.
Finger finder A trading strategy that initiates a variety of tactics based upon one-bar candlestick
reversals.
First rise/first failure (FR/FF) The first 100% retracement of the last dynamic price move after an
extended trending market.
5-8-13 Intraday Bollinger Bands and moving average settings that align with short-term Fibonacci
cycles. Set the Bollinger Bands to 13-bar and two standard deviations. Set the moving averages to
5-bar and 8-bar SMAs.
Five-wave decline A classic selloff pattern that exhibits three sharp downtrends and two weak bear
rallies.
Flags Small continuation pattern that prints against the direction of the primary trend.
Foot in floor Bollinger Band pattern that indicates short-term support and reversal.
Fractals Small-scale predictive patterns that repeat themselves at larger and larger intervals on the
price chart.
Gap echo A gap that breaks through the same level as a recent one in the opposite direction.

Hammer A one-bar candlestick reversal pattern in which the open-close range is much smaller than
the high–low range that prints well above average for that market. The real body must sit at one
extreme of the high–low range.
Harami A one-bar candlestick reversal pattern in which the open-close range is much smaller than
the high–low range and sits within the real body of a tall prior bar.
Hard right edge The location where the next bar will print on the price chart. This also points to the
spot where the swing trader must predict the future.
Head and shoulders This classic reversal pattern forms from an extended high that sits between two
lower highs. Three relative lows beneath the three highs connect at a trendline known as the
neckline. Popular opinion expects a major selloff when the neckline breaks.
Head in ceiling Bollinger Band pattern that indicates short-term resistance and reversal.
Historical volatility The range of price movement over an extended period of time as compared to
current activity.
Hole-in-the-wall A sharp down gap that immediately follows a major rally.
Inside day A price bar that prints a lower high and higher low than the bar that precedes it.
Inverse head and shoulders This classic reversal pattern forms from an extended low that sits
between two higher lows. Three relative highs above the three lows connect at a trendline known as
the neckline. Popular opinion expects a major rally when the neckline breaks.
January Effect The tendency of stocks to recover in January after end-of-year, tax-related selling
has completed.
Mesa top A double top reversal pattern that declines at the same angle as the initial rally.
Moving Average Convergence-Divergence (MACD) A trend-following indicator that tracks two
exponentially smoothed moving averages above and below a zero line.
Moving average crossover The point where a moving average intersects with another moving
average or with price.
Moving average ribbons (MARs) Wide bands of mathematically related and color-coded moving
averages.
Narrow-range bar (NR) A price bar with a smaller high-low range as compared to the prior bar’s
high-low range.
Narrowest range of the last seven bars (NR7) A low-volatility time–price convergence that often
precedes a major price expansion. A price bar with a smaller high-low range as compared to the
prior six bars’ high–low ranges.
NR7-2 The second NR7 in a row. A low-volatility time-price convergence that often precedes a
major price expansion.
