
Brake Lights
When brake lights come on there is a conditioned response based on
past experience. When asked what brake lights mean, most people
say someone is stopping. This statement illustrates the danger in
assumptions. The fact is there are several reasonable answers.
In general, brake lights do mean stop; however, if brake lights are

䊏 412

Chapter Ten

observed at 75 m.p.h. on the freeway, it most likely means the driver is
simply adjusting the speed to the surrounding vehicles, not stopping.
Could the brake lights on the freeway mean stopping? Of course, but
that would be rare considering their location and circumstances.
Brake lights at 35 m.p.h. approaching an intersection most likely
mean stop, but here again there are actually several things that could
happen (see Figure 10-15). The driver may slow and then accelerate
on through. He may stop and sit there for a while trying to decide
what to do next. He may turn right or he may reverse and head the
other way. Approaching the intersection, the implication that the car
will stop is very strong, but what happens next is still a mystery.
A fundamental law of physics states that an object in motion tends
to stay in motion, but it is also a fact that in order to reverse direction
an object must come to a stop. Whether a stock will stay in motion or
stop depends a lot on whether it is on the freeway or approaching an
Figure 10-15

413 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

intersection. Whether it will sit there, reverse, or continue will be
revealed soon enough, but being at the intersection indicates a major
decision will be made, which is also the most basic and important
message of candlesticks. Does the message match the location?
A familiar caution goes “A little knowledge is a dangerous thing.”
Many traders experience frustration when an expected behavior from
a candle pattern does not happen. A common mistake is neglecting
qualifiers, like which direction the stock must be moving to properly
identify the pattern. A perfect-looking Bullish Engulfing pattern may
be in a location that nullifies the signal (see Figure 10-16). It may be

Figure 10-16

䊏 414

Chapter Ten

an Outside Day pattern, but if it is in an uptrend it will not be giving
a bullish reversal signal.
Greg Morris puts it this way, “You can’t have a bullish reversal in
an uptrend.” An uptrend, for the purpose of candlestick interpretation, is defined by a 10-day exponential moving average. A bullish
reversal must start from below the 10-day moving average, and in
an upswing it will be above the average, so a bullish reversal is not
possible.
In an uptrend or downtrend with cycles, bullish and bearish reversals may occur at retracements that seem to contradict the statement
above (see Figure 10-17). This is a technical exception, and other
important concepts for understanding how to use candlesticks when
playing trends are discussed later in this chapter. The message is what
is important; if it is not technically a bullish reversal signal, the location frames the context to interpret the message, and it is still bullish.
Many one-day candles are misnamed and misunderstood, but
what really counts is the message and location. A Hammer and a
Hanging Man pattern are often mistaken for each other. Other than

Figure 10-17

415 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

location, they have identical rules; even the acceptable variations are
the same. The basic message is indecision and the only difference is
location (see Figure 10-18). The Hammer and Hanging Man patterns
say the directional pressure and momentum have come to a stop and
the long tail indicates it was not a consensus. The Hammer indicates
an attempt to keep the momentum going, but a change in sentiment
abruptly reversed the momentum by the end of the day. The Hanging
Man suggests a mugging. No further trend movement; rather a solid
reversal that was rebuffed, but it took the whole day’s effort just to
get back near the start of the day. Both suggest a reversal because the
opposition made a very significant show of force at a known pivot
point, but the net result is that momentum came to a stop.
Hammer and Hanging Man patterns often happen away from support and resistance levels without accompanying reversals. A hesitation or retracement is normal in a bullish or bearish move, and away
from support or resistance, the Hammer and or Hanging Man still
mean hesitation and indecision, but it is more like the brake lights on
the freeway, slowing not stopping.
While getting the name right is less important than getting the message right, getting the message right in the right location trumps
everything. Misreading brake lights can be confusing, frustrating, and
downright dangerous. Misreading candles can be confusing, frustrating, and downright expensive.

Figure 10-18

䊏 416

Chapter Ten

From a purely statistical perspective the majority of candles fall
between 40–60% in accuracy, a rather ambiguous range. But this
range includes all the occurrences, whether on the freeway or at
an intersection. Taken in context (i.e., location) the interpretation
changes and whatever the signal, it takes on greater significance if it
is happening at an obvious support and or resistance level.
Reversal or Retracement
A retracement is a pause or rest in a directional move, while a reversal spells the end of the directional move. The interpretation of candlesticks will vary depending on whether a trader is trying to follow a
trend or play the cycles of the trend. Playing the trend means ignoring
the retracements, while playing the cycles of the trend means changing positions at the swing points of the pattern (see Figure 10-19).
Reversal signals must accompany the cyclical swings of a trend, so
correctly using candles to confirm the end of a trend is especially
important to the trend-following trader. In an uptrend (and this
applies reciprocally for downtrends), the bearish reversal signals will
come at the top of a cycle when the trend looks very healthy, but

Figure 10-19

417 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-20

what does the signal mean? Is it the end of the trend or the start of a
retracement? The end of the trend is actually signaled when the bottom of a cycle fails to rally up, so the reversal patterns at the top of a
cycle must be seen as retracements or setbacks, not reversals. The
trend is still intact until the support level is broken (see Figure 10-20).
Bullish Trends Depend on Bullish Reversals
The uptrend will continue only if it survives challenges to the support
levels, which will be signaled by bullish reversal patterns. The irony
to the trend-playing trader is that the signals that say the bullish
uptrend is over will not be bearish reversal signals at resistance. The
end of a bullish uptrend will most likely be a continuation signal (a
failed bullish rally) that pushes down through support. (See Figure
10-21.)
It is mandatory then to know where a signal is happening because
its relevance depends greatly on its location. Following an uptrend
requires knowing where to read bearish continuation signals and
bullish reversals. Will the buyers support another run to the upside or
is the bullish sentiment weak enough to warrant pushing the price
down to test for buyers? This is the pivotal part of following a trend

䊏 418

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-21

and the irony is that at support, reversal signals preserve the uptrend
and continuation signals end it.
Playing the Cycles of a Trend
Playing the cycles of a trend with candlesticks requires knowing the
pattern of support and resistance and the reversal and continuation
patterns that may happen there. At resistance, bearish reversal signals
will close bullish trades and open bearish positions for the retracement. When at resistance, continuation patterns can signal breakouts.
At support, reversal patterns signal a resumption of the trend and
continuation signals may spell the trend break (see Figure 10-22).
Unlike a technical indicator that can be scaled to fit different time
frames, candle signals are one to five days long and they predict only
a few days ahead. As a result, width of the pattern cycle is important.
Some candlestick patterns require that the stock be in an uptrend and
while it has been correctly stated that “You can’t have a bullish reversal pattern in an uptrend,” this is a technical exception. A bullish
uptrend that takes many days to cycle from support to resistance is
essentially made up of mini uptrends and retracements that preserve
a bullish pattern. Each leg of the trend may be long enough for legitimate bullish and bearish reversals (see Figure 10-23).

419 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-22

Summary for Location, Location, Location
• Candlesticks have the most studied and practiced interpretive skills of any charting methodology. Two hundred plus
years of study and use trumps Western bar charts in a big
way, but the candle patterns are shortsighted.
• Western pattern charting gives relevance to the location of
candlestick patterns. Brake lights on the freeway do not
mean the same thing as brake lights at an intersection.
• Accuracy percentages are aggregate for all occurrences,
but location can reduce or enhance accuracy.

䊏 420

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-23

• Trends are made up of retracements. At support, reversal
patterns keep a trend going while continuation patterns
can end it.
• Playing a trend is different than playing the cycles of a
trend. Playing the trend follows the trend direction by
watching for a retracement to continue down through support. Playing the cycles of a trend will require looking for
reversals at support and resistance to keep the trend going.
• The length of the cycle determines whether it is appropriate to use reversal patterns.
• The Western Pattern Charts do a great job of showing the
potential homebuyers arriving at the Open House, the
Japanese Candlesticks can signal how anxious they are
to buy.

421 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

THE MESSAGE
What’s in a Name?
There are five different species of skunk in North America: the
Striped Skunk, Eastern Spotted Skunk, Western Spotted Skunk, Hognose Skunk, and the Hooded Skunk. They all do the same thing when
they are surprised or feel threatened. So if a hiker happens upon a
small, white-striped black mammal that spins its business end around
it is not the time to pause and wonder if it is a Western or Eastern
Spotted. It does not matter which species, the message is same for all
of the skunks: run!
Likewise, there are a lot of candlestick patterns and many are variations on common messages. Hesitation signals have many names,
but it is more important to recognize the message than remember the
name. When it gets right down to it there is far too much emphasis
placed on the proper name recognition and not enough on really
knowing the implications of the candlestick message.
Daunting tasks tend to discourage folks, and memorizing the
names, variations, and rules for 80+ candlestick patterns and signals
is a daunting task. Fortunately that level of memorizing is not
required to gain functional skills in the use of candlesticks. This
chapter will give some rules and tools to help simplify and speed the
quest for proficiency. This foundation will also expand candlestick
knowledge and skills over time.

What’s a Good One?
Read a book, visit a Web site, pop into a chat room about candlesticks and someone will ask the question “What’s a really good reversal pattern?” A good one? Consider the ambiguity of the question.
What does good mean? They may be justified in wanting someone to

䊏 422

Chapter Ten

save them a lot of time by listing the best three or four patterns, but
it is a bad question. What do they want to know, the best reversal or
continuation patterns, and what do they mean by good, and how
good is good enough?
A so called “good one” may be significantly enhanced or diminished depending on its location because reversal signals predict better
at support or resistance levels. Every pattern or signal has a message
because it describes varied behavior.
“Good ones” can also be underappreciated if taken out of context;
redefining what a “good one” is will enhance the ability to read and
place the message in perspective, and having sound accuracy data
may change many traditional views on which patterns are “good
ones.”
The first step is recognizing the candlestick message and then weighing its relevance and significance by the location.
Short Days
A small, tiny, or no body day, like a Hammer or a Doji, has a very
specific message. In tests using millions of days of data, the Doji as
well as small and tiny body patterns showed accuracy rates of 50%
(+/−). 50% is not very impressive, but those small days are 100%
accurate at predicting indecision. A lack of momentum or news can
cause consolidation and confusion, and small bodies show either a
volatile or apathetic lack of momentum (see Figure 10-24). Because
every reversal has to lose traction and stop before it changes direction, turns are either decisive or deliberated. The deliberation is often
punctuated by an indecisive day or two.
If the stock loses traction at a pivot point, whether the stock moves
up or down is less important than the fact that the trade has lost traction at a significant price. The traders know where they are and are
trying to determine the sentiment of the market. The ubiquitous

423 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-24
10-May-2005 4:00pm
Cree 23.96 (Daily)

26.0

Hesitation

25.5
25.0
24.5
24.0
23.5
23.0
22.5

Consolidation

22.0
21.5
21.0

21

28

Apr

11

18

25

May

9

50/50 indecision signal is doing exactly what it is supposed to do,
and at support or resistance, it can be a million-watt beacon (see Figure 10-25).
If the indecision at a pivot point is followed by a continuation
breakout, the small body would have failed to predict a reversal but
succeeded with honors at predicting where to set up for a trade (see
Figure 10-26). The indecisive message was clear and relevant. Whichever direction is taken after the hesitation is significant and underscores the need for a trader to be neutral and flexible.
Long Days
Long Days are one-day patterns with large bodies as opposed to a
long tails or shadows. Many hopes for a good trade have been

䊏 424

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-25
8-Apr-2005 4:00pm
Cyberonics 45.01 (Daily)

47
46
45
44
43
42
41
40
39
38
37
36

7

14

22

Mar

7

14

21

28

Apr

Figure 10-26
22-Mar-2005 4:00pm
DJIA 10470.51 (Daily)

11000
10950
10900
10850
10800
10750
10700
10650
10600
10550
10500

7

14

22

Mar

7

14

21

425 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

dashed by misunderstanding the message of these Long Days. It may
seem obvious that a Long Day should give a very bullish or very bearish signal but what follows often catches traders off guard.
The message is strong, but Long Days invite challenges like a new
kid on the playground. It is very common to see two to four days of
testing and challenge after a Long Day. The Rising and Falling Three
Method continuation patterns are formed when the direction resumes after an unsuccessful challenge to a Long Day (see Figures
10-27 and 10-28). A Long Day in the direction of a trend is a good
signal, but the message includes a warning about getting too close
with stops.
Trading Tip

If the trader is to follow the trend, it may be necessary to leave the
gains of the Long Day exposed until the trend resumes. New traders
often move in to protect profits, and get bounced, only to see the
trend continue. Most traders do not have the experience or courage
to jump back in and often watch on the sidelines, feeling betrayed,
as the trend moves on without them. The message did not betray
them; in fact the message was clear and correct, but a lack of candlestick knowledge and natural market behavior drew them too
close to the flame.
Figure 10-27

䊏 426

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-28
24-May-2005 4:00pm
eBay 36.89 (Daily)

37.5
37.0
36.5

Rising Three method C +

36.0
35.5
35.0
34.5
34.0
33.5
33.0
32.5
32.0
Hold stop at open of Day
One until the trend resumes 31.5

28 29 May 3

4

5

6

9 10 11 12 13 16 17 18 19 20 23 24

Note that the Rising and Falling Three method patterns are 50%
accurate, which means that location may play a large part in strategy.
If day one moves to a pivot point or price target, the trader may do
well to jamb the stop in tight because waiting for a few days with just
a 50% chance it will continue is a threat to a target already reached.
If a long body candle moves in favor of the trade, but is not near the
target, it makes sense to hang back at the open of day one to see if the
momentum continues.
More Complex Patterns
Often it takes more than one day to form a consensus among the
traders and the market. A four- to six-day pattern indicates it took
the traders a while to reach a consensus of market sentiment. Each

427 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-29

day is a separate message, and by the time the pattern is completed
the reversal may be well underway. The trader trying to read each
day while waiting for the pattern to confirm may find the ideal entry
happened several days before (see Figure 10-29). The correct entry is
signaled as the stock moves away from support or resistance level.
When the complex pattern completes, it gives good confirmation to
a trade that should have already been entered. Confirmation is great,
but it is not necessary to wait for a complex pattern to complete
before entering a trade.
Trading Tip

An entry point that is clear but not confirmed can be entered by taking a small position and adding when and if confirmation occurs. If
the move is a “Head Fake” it has little consequence and the correct
trade can then be made.
Accuracy versus Frequency (Surprises)
The more complex patterns have generally been thought to be more
accurate, and some research supports that premise when they are

䊏 428

Chapter Ten

observed at specific support and resistance areas, but the data runs
by Greg Morris, elsewhere in this book, have yielded some profound
revelations. Some of the simpler patterns have some of the highest
accuracy ratings. Some of the complex patterns may be more accurate but they are also much less frequent, so most reversals will be
associated with the simpler one- to three-day patterns. Therefore the
simpler, more frequent candle patterns will be the dominant reversal
signals in most trades (see Figure 10-30).
Figure 10-30
#
Days
Most Frequent
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
1

Harami −
Harami +
Engulfing −
Engulfing +
Hanging Man −
Hammer +
Har. Cross −
1 Wht Soldier +
Har. Cross +
Doji Star -

#
Days
R−
R+
R−
R+
R−
R+
R−
R+
R+
R-

3
1
2
2
1
3
3
3
2
3

Most Accurate
Gap 2 Rabbits +
Hanging Man −
Match. High −
Match. Low +
Inv. Hammer +
Stick Sand. +
Gap 3 Meth. +
3 Line Strike +
Hom. Pigeon +
Deliberation -

R+
R−
R−
R+
R+
R+
C+
C+
R+
R-

Finding a stock at a pivot point and correctly reading the candlestick message is what really counts. The accuracy rating and characteristics of the pattern are valuable, but the crux of the matter is
established by the location. Some may be disappointed, but accuracy
is not quite as important as it may have once seemed, which lessens
the urgency to find the “Good Ones.”
Direction of the Tails
One very fascinating correlation that has emerged from the new data
runs in this book involves four very familiar and similar candles. The

429 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Hammer, Hanging Man, Shooting Star, Inverted Hammer, and their
cousins (Umbrellas and Long Legged Doji) have traditionally shared
roughly equal value in predicting reversals. The Hammer and Hanging Man are particularly popular and many books and Web sites
treat them as “good ones.” However, like many stereotypes, assumptions about these candles wither under recent scrutiny, and when
they are properly analyzed and compared, an intriguing relationship
shows up.
Long-tailed patterns either point in the direction of, or the reverse
of, a trend, and the millions of days that were scanned for this database reveal that the direction of the tails has a strong correlation to
the accuracy of the reversal signals they predict (see Figure 10-31).

Figure 10-31

䊏 430

Chapter Ten

The Hanging Man and the Inverted Hammer have substantially
higher (63% and 62%) accuracy percentages than the Hammer and
Shooting Star (44% and 48%). Far from the assumption that smallbodied, long-tailed candles were very comparable, the Hanging
Man and Inverted Hammer had a 19- and 14-point advantage respectively. It is a fair conclusion that in small body patterns, the
body size has much less to do with accuracy of the reversal than the
tail. Small bodies, tiny bodies, and Dojis should yield similar results to Figure 10-32 if they have long tails and are in similar positions.
Note that the percentages used are the average of each pattern’s
accuracy over one through seven days of follow-through, therefore
the percentages for comparing patterns is not supposed to add up
to 100%.
The message is profound. Of these “good ones,” the venerable
Hammer pattern rests just four places off the bottom of 90 patterns
tested, while the Hanging Man stands at number two in the accuracy
ratings. The direction of the long tail substantially influences the
probability of a reversal.
The frequency ratio also provides an interesting side note. The
bearish reversal Hanging Man (accuracy winner), occurred 30 times
more often than it’s companion bearish reversal the Shooting Star.
The bullish reversal Hammer (accuracy loser) occurred five times
more often than the bullish reversal Inverted Hammer. Thus, there
will likely be more Hammers at support, and more Hanging Man
patterns at resistance, but equal weighting can no longer be a given
(see Figure 10-32). So at resistance, the more frequent Hanging Man
is much more accurate than the Shooting Star and at support, the
more frequent Hammer is far less accurate than the Inverted Hammer. All that said, remember the influence of location. There are a lot
of Hammers, and cursory observations suggest a much higher accuracy at pivot points.

431 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-32

Reciprocals
A reciprocal has the opposite construction and message, and the vast
majority of candle patterns have reciprocal patterns with opposite
messages (see Figure 10-33). Most reciprocal patterns have very similar accuracy percentages, but there are several exceptions that
traders need to be aware of.
In the prior discussion, the bearish reversal Hanging Man showed
a substantial 19-point (63% to 44%) advantage over the bullish
reversal Hammer, but the reciprocal of the Hanging Man is the
Inverted Hammer, not the Hammer. The Hanging Man and Hammer
were compared because they are so widely associated with reversals
and happen at both support and resistance. They are clones, not
reciprocals, and the big discrepancy in accuracy is surprising, but the
