
TRADING

201

that zone. Write an option with a strike price the market is unlikely to
reach before the expiration. Suppose a stock is at 80, having risen from
50 in the past year and is now rising half a point per week, with 8
weeks left to option expiration. The trend is up, and selling a 70 put
under those circumstances means selling an option that is likely to
expire worthless.
The temptation to sell naked options close to the money and get
fatter premiums is dangerous, because a slight countertrend move can
push your position underwater. Look at the number of weeks remaining to the expiration, calculate the distance the market is likely to travel
based on its recent behavior, and write an option outside that range.
Write options with no more than two months to the expiration. The
shorter the time, the fewer surprises. The erosion of time value accelerates in the last few weeks of option life. When you write options
close to the expiration, you benefit from faster time decay. You can get
more money for options with longer life, but do not get greedy. The
goal of a writer is not to make a killing on any single trade but to grind
out a steady income.
LIMITING RISK A trader can keep writing naked calls or puts, but do it

long enough, and some day he will get caught on the wrong side of a
powerful move. Profits of several years can be wiped out in a single day.
For example, whenever there is a great bull market, the pros look
at selling puts like a license to print money. The contrarians, the
alarmists, and “the end is nigh” crowd keep buying puts for years and
losing money, but suddenly there is a crash and buyers have their day
in the sun. The pros who have been feeding off them for years face
their day of reckoning—the quick ones survive, while the slow ones
are carried out feet first.
A trader can grow fat and greedy writing naked options, selling
useless contracts created out of thin air and pocketing profits. A
smug feeling of self-satisfaction blinds people to reality. Naked positions in options need to be protected by stops and money management rules.
Use a mental stop-loss on the underlying security. Set a stop on the
underlying stock, future, or index and not on the price of your option.
Buy back that option if the underlying security reaches your stop level.
For example, if you sell a naked 80 call on a stock trading at 70, place
your stop at 77. Get out of your naked option position before it gets
into the money by crossing its exercise price.

202

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Your stop is like an ejection seat on an aircraft. If you write an outof-the-money option and the market starts moving into the money,
there is no point in sticking around, waiting to see what happens next.
You are wrong, and you’re losing—push the eject button before the
damage turns deadly. If you sold an option for 1.50, by the time it hits
your at-the-money stop level it may double in price to 3. If you use
stops, you’ll be nowhere near the “unlimited loss” that makes people
afraid to write options.
Set your profit-taking zone—consider buying back your naked
option. When you write a call or a put, you sell a wasting asset. When
the underlying security moves far from the exercise price but there is
still time left to the expiration, the price of that option may reach its
rock bottom. It loses value only in tiny dribs and drabs. The loser who
bought that option still has a bit of a chance that the market may
reverse in his favor. He continues to hold that call or put like a lottery
ticket, and once in a rare while his ticket may win.
Why hold an open position in an option that has already given you
most of its value? You have little to gain, while remaining exposed to
the risk of an adverse move. Consider buying back that option to close
out your profitable trade.
Open an insurance account. A naked seller needs insurance against
a catastrophic reversal. You may write a put and the market crashes
the next day, or you write a call and suddenly there is a takeover. You
hope this never happens, but trade long enough and eventually everything will happen! That’s why you need insurance. Nobody will write
it for you, so you’ll have to self-insure.
Open a money market account, and every time you close out a
naked writing position, throw a percentage of your profit, 10 percent
or more, into that account. Do not use it for trading. Have it sit there,
in a money market fund, for as long as you write options. Your insurance account grows with each new profit, ready to cover a catastrophic
loss or to be taken out in cash when you stop writing options!
Option writers get hurt in one of three ways. Beginners overtrade and
write too many options, breaking money management rules. Intermediatelevel traders get hurt when they fail to run fast enough when their
options move against them. Experienced traders can get blown out if
they do not have a reserve against a major adverse move. The longer
you trade, the greater your risk of a catastrophic event. Having an insurance account confirms your position as a professional option writer.

TRADING

203

WHERE DO I GO FROM HERE?

Every options trader should own Lawrence
McMillan’s Options as a Strategic Investment and use it as a handbook.
Most professional traders read Sheldon Natenberg’s Option Volatility
and Pricing Strategies. Harvey Friedentag’s Options: Investing without
Fear has a nice angle on covered writing.

Futures
Futures used to have such a bad reputation that several states tried to
outlaw them a century ago. They used to have Sunday sermons against
futures in parts of the agricultural belt. None of that prevented futures
from evolving into a potent economic force.
Futures markets have prospered because they serve two groups that
have a great deal of money. On the one hand, futures permit major
commercial producers and consumers to hedge price risks, giving them
a fantastic competitive advantage. On the other hand, futures offer speculators a gambling palace with more choices than all the casinos in
Nevada. Between the hedgers and the speculators, on a ground richly
soaked with blood and money, are professional futures traders. They
help move the wheels of commerce and take a fee for their services. A sign
of their profitability is the fact that many of those public servants pass
their craft to their sons and now occasionally even to their daughters.
Hedging means opening a futures position that is the opposite of
one’s position in the actual commodity. It removes the price risk from
holding a cash commodity or planning to buy such a commodity in the
future. Hedgers transfer price risks to commodity speculators. This
allows them to concentrate on their core businesses, offer better consumer pricing, and obtain a long-term competitive advantage over their
unhedged competitors.
For example, I have two friends, brokers in Moscow, who teach
sugar importers how to hedge (Russia has become the world’s biggest
importer of sugar since the breakup of the Soviet Union). Their clients
are big players in the food industry, who know up to a year in advance
how much sugar they’re going to need. Now they can buy sugar futures
in London or New York when prices are low enough. They are going
to need their trainloads of sugar many months from now, but meanwhile they hold sugar futures, which they plan to sell when they buy
their cash position. In effect, they are short cash, long futures. If sugar
prices go up and they have to pay more than expected, they will offset

204

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

that loss by making roughly the same profit on their futures positions.
Their unhedged competitors are in effect flipping a coin. If sugar prices
fall, they’ll buy on the cheap and reap a windfall, but if they rise, they’ll
be hung out to dry. The importers who are hedged can concentrate on
running their core business instead of watching the price ticker.
Producers of commodities also benefit from hedging. An agribusiness can presell its wheat, coffee, or cotton when prices are high
enough to guarantee profits. They sell short as many futures contracts
as it takes to cover their prospective crop. From that point on, they
have no price risk. If prices go down, they’ll make up their losses on
cash commodities by profits on futures. If prices go up, they’ll lose
money on their short positions in futures but make it back selling
the actual commodities. Producers give up a chance of a windfall but
insulate themselves from the risk of lower prices. Survivors thrive on
stability. That why the Exxons, the Coca-Colas, and the Nabiscos are
among the major players in the commodity markets. Hedgers are the
ultimate insiders, and a good hedging department not only buys price
insurance, but serves as a profit center.
Speculators step in to assume market risks, lured by the glitter of
profits. Hedgers, with their inside information, are not fully confident
about future prices, while crowds of cheerful outsiders plunk down
money to bet on price direction. It reminds me how, years ago, I
walked into a liquor store with a scientist friend to buy some wine for
dinner. This was soon after the state of New Jersey introduced a lottery to pay for education. There was a huge line at the counter, as lottery tickets in those days were sold only in liquor stores. When my
friend, who owned a house in New Jersey, saw what was happening,
he doubled up laughing, “You mean these people are lining up to
keep my taxes down?!” That’s pretty much what most speculators do
in futures.
The two largest groups of speculators are farmers and engineers.
Farmers produce commodities, while engineers love to apply scientific
methods to the market game. Many small farmers enter futures markets
as hedgers but catch the bug and start speculating. There’s nothing
wrong with that, as long as they know what they are doing. It never
ceases to amaze me how many farmers end up trading stock index
futures. As long as they trade corn, cattle, or soybeans, their feel for
the fundamentals gives them an edge over city slickers. But what’s their
edge in the S&P 500? Faster reflexes than the rest of us? Gimme a break!

TRADING

205

There is one profound difference between futures and stocks, making the futures game extremely fast, furious, exciting, and deadly. The
futures markets are turbocharged by a simple but potent device of low
margin requirements.
United States securities law demands that in the stock market you pay
at least half the cash value of your position. Your broker can give you
a margin loan for the other half. If you have $30,000 in your account,
you may buy $60,000 worth of stocks, and no more. The law was
passed after the Crash of 1929 when people realized that low margins
led to excessive speculation, which contributed to the viciousness of
declines. Prior to 1929, speculators could buy stocks on a 10% margin,
which worked great in bull markets but wiped them out in bear markets.
Margins of only three to five percent are common in the futures markets. Here you can bet big with little money. If you have $30,000, you
can control $1,000,000 worth of merchandise, be it pork bellies or gold.
If you catch a 1% move in your market, you’ll make $10,000, or over
30% profit on your account. A few trades like that, and you’ve made
it. A small trader looks at these numbers and thinks he’s found the
secret to getting rich quick. There is only one problem. Before that
market rises 1% it may dip 2%. It may be a meaningless blip, but at the
bottom the amateur’s equity will be nearly wiped out, and his broker will
sell him out on a margin call. He’ll go bust even though his price forecast was correct.
The mortality rate among futures traders is over 90 percent, even
though brokerage houses try to hide statistics. Easy margins attract
gamblers and adrenaline addicts who quickly go up in smoke. There
is nothing wrong with trading futures that money management won’t
cure. Futures are very tradable, as long as you observe money management rules and do not go crazy with an easy margin. You have to
be more than disciplined—to trade commodities you must be colder
than a freezer. If you cannot follow money management rules, better go
to Las Vegas. The entertainment value is just as high and the outcome
is the same, but the drinks are free and the floor show more glitzy.
Precisely because they require a high degree of discipline and excellent money management skills, futures markets are hard for beginners.
A new trader is better off learning to trade slower-moving stocks, but
later on, futures definitely deserve a look.
If you know how to trade and want to make a quick fortune, futures
are the place to be. You may put on small initial positions, fenced in

206

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

by strict money management rules, but then you can pyramid them to
the hilt as a trade moves in your favor and you keep moving stops
beyond breakeven and adding new contracts.
There are only a few dozen futures, making the choice of which to
trade much easier than among the thousands of stocks. Be sure to
focus on markets in your own time zone. It is shocking how many
beginners, especially outside the United States, want to trade currencies. Few of them stop to think that this is a 24-hour market, operating
around the clock, in which an individual trader has many disadvantages. You may brilliantly analyze a currency and forecast a move, but
that move is just as likely to take place in another time zone while you
are sleeping. Try to select markets that trade in your time zone that are
open when you are awake and closed when you’re asleep.
It is a good idea to make your first steps in those markets where you
know something about the fundamentals. If you are a cattle rancher, a
house builder, or a loan officer, then cattle, lumber, or interest rate
futures are logical starting points, if you can afford to trade them. If you
have no particular interests, your choice is limited only by your
account size. It is important to make your first steps in relatively inexpensive markets. All markets have a certain amount of random noise,
or quick countertrend moves. The high dollar value of random moves
in expensive markets can be deadly.
Take yourself through a simple exercise. Create a spreadsheet on
your computer and write down the names of several futures markets
that interest you in column A. Write the value of their price units in column B. Corn trades in cents, and the value of a cent is $50; S&P trades
in points, and the value of a point is $250, so those values go into column B. Write the latest closing price in column C. Now complete the
exercise by creating column D which multiplies B by C and shows how
much each contract is worth. How much more expensive is the richest
contract compared to the cheapest contract? Five times? Ten? Twenty?
Thirty? Do the exercise and find out.
Beginners are drawn to the S&P 500 futures, but few have accounts
large enough for proper money management in this expensive market. In North America, corn, sugar, and, in a slow year, copper are
good markets for beginners, allowing you to learn in your own time
zone. They are liquid, reasonably volatile, and not too expensive.
Some very good books, listed on page 213, have been written about
futures. Most technical analysis tools were originally developed for

TRADING

207

futures and only later migrated to the stock market. Let us review a few
aspects of futures that make them different from stocks.
CONTANGO AND INVERSION All futures markets offer contracts for several

delivery months at the same time. For example, you can buy or sell
wheat for delivery in September or December of this year, March of
next year, and so on. Normally, the nearby months are less expensive
than the faraway months, and that relationship is called a contango
market.
Higher prices for longer-term contracts reflect the so-called cost of
carry, that is, the cost of financing, storing, and insuring a commodity.
A futures buyer plunks down his 3% margin and controls a contract
without having to bring the rest of the money until the settlement date.
Meanwhile the seller has to store, finance, and insure the merchandise.
The differences between delivery months are called premiums.
Hedgers and floor traders closely watch premiums because they reflect
the degree of tightness in the market. When the supply shrinks or the
demand rises, people start paying up for the nearby months. The premium for the faraway months begins to shrink. As the demand grows,
the front months become pricier than faraway months—the market
becomes inverted! This is one of the strongest fundamental signs of a
bull market. There is a real shortage out there, and people are paying
extra to get their stuff sooner rather than later.
Whenever you look at the commodity page of a financial newspaper, move your finger down the column of closing prices and look for
inversions. They signal bull markets, and that’s when you want to use
technical analysis to look for buying opportunities.
Serious hedgers do not wait for inversions. They monitor premiums
and get their signals from their narrowing or widening. A good speculator can rattle off the latest prices, but a good hedger will quote you
the latest premiums of faraway contracts over the nearby ones.
As you scan futures markets for inversions, keep in mind that there
is one area in which inversion is the norm. Interest rate futures are
always inverted because those who hold cash positions keep collecting interest instead of paying finance and storage charges.
SPREADS Hedgers tend to dominate the short side of the markets and
most speculators are perpetual bulls, but floor traders love to trade
spreads. Spreading means buying one delivery month and selling

208

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

another in the same market, or going long one market and short a
related one.
Futures are the basic building blocks of the economy, essential for
society’s daily functioning. Economic necessities tightly link commodity
markets and delivery months. If the price of corn, a major animal feed,
starts to rise faster than the price of wheat, at some point ranchers will
start using wheat rather than corn. They’ll reduce their purchases of
corn while buying more wheat, pushing their spread back towards the
norm. A savvy commodity trader knows his normal spreads by heart.
Spread traders bet against deviations and for a return to normalcy. In
this situation, a spreader will short corn and buy wheat, instead of taking a directional trade in either market.
Spread trades are much safer than directional trades, with even
lower margin requirements. Amateurs do not understand spreads and
have little interest in these reliable but slow-moving trades. There are
several books on spreads but not a single good one at the time of this
writing, a sign of how well professionals have sewn up this area of
knowledge and kept the amateurs out. There is a handful of niches in
the markets where professionals are making fortunes without the benefit of a single good how-to book. It looks almost as if the insiders have
posted a sign for the outsiders to keep out.
COMMITMENTS OF TRADERS The Commodity Futures Trading Commission

collects reports from brokers on the positions of traders and releases
their summaries to the public. Those COT (commitments of traders)
reports are among the best sources of information on what the smart
money is doing in the futures markets. COT reports reveal positions of
three groups: hedgers, big traders, and small traders. How do they
know who is who? Hedgers identify themselves to brokers because
that entitles them to several advantages, such as lower margin rates.
Big traders are identified by holding the number of contracts above
“reporting requirements,” set by the government. Whoever is not a
hedger or a big trader is a small trader.
In the old days, big traders used to be the smart money. Today, the
markets are bigger, the reporting requirements much higher, and big
traders are likely to be commodity funds, most of them not much
smarter than the run-of-the-mill trader. Hedgers are today’s smart
money but understanding their positions isn’t as easy as it seems.
For example, a COT report may show that in a certain market,
hedgers hold 70% of shorts. A beginner who thinks this is bearish may

TRADING

209

be completely off the mark without knowing that normally hedgers
hold 90% of shorts in that market, making the 70% stance wildly bullish. Savvy COT analysts compare current positions to historical norms
and look for situations where hedgers, or the smart money, and small
traders, many of whom are gamblers and losers, are dead set against
each other. If one group is heavily short while the other is just as heavily long, which one would you like to join? If you find that in a certain
market the smart money is overwhelmingly on one side, while the
small specs are mobbing the other, it is time to use technical analysis
to look for entries on the side of hedgers.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND MARKETS In futures, there are two types of bull

and bear markets: supply-driven and demand-driven. Supply-driven
markets tend to be fast and furious, whereas demand-driven markets
tend to be quiet and slow. Why? Think of any commodity, say coffee,
which grows in Africa and South America.
Changes in demand come slowly, thanks to the conservatism of
human nature. The demand for coffee can go up only if drinking
becomes more popular, with a second espresso machine in every little
bar. The demand can fall only if coffee drinking becomes less popular,
which may happen in a deteriorating economy or in response to a
health fad. Demand-driven markets move at a leisurely pace.
Now imagine that a major coffee growing area is hit by a hurricane
or a freeze. Suddenly the world supply of coffee is rumored to be
reduced by 10% and prices shoot through the roof, cutting off marginal
consumers and rising to the point where supply and demand are in
balance. Supply-driven markets are very volatile. Imagine torrential
rains in the cocoa-producing areas of Africa, or a new OPEC policy
sharply curtailing oil supply, or a general strike in a leading coppermining country. When the supply of a commodity is reduced and
rumors of further damage swirl, the trend shoots up, reallocating tight
supplies to those best able to afford them.
Every futures trader must be aware of key supply factors in his market and keep an eye on them, such as the weather during the critical
growing and harvesting months in agricultural commodities. Trend
traders in the futures markets tend to look for supply-driven markets,
while swing traders do better in demand-driven markets.
The United States grain markets often have price spikes during the
spring and summer planting and growing seasons as dry spells, floods,
and pests threaten supplies. Traders say that a farmer loses his crop three
