
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

to happen. In other words, by crossing $1.20 the line of
least resistance of wheat prices was established. It was a
different story then.
I remember that one day was a holiday with us and all
our markets were closed. Well, in Winnipeg wheat opened
up six cents a bushel. When our market opened on the
following day, it also was up six cents a bushel. The price
just went along the line of least resistance.
What I have told you gives you the essence of my
trading system as based on studying the tape. I merely
learn the way prices are most probably going to move. I
check up my own trading by additional tests, to determine
the psychological moment. I do that by watching the way
the price acts after I begin.
It is surprising how many experienced traders there are
who look incredulous when I tell them that when I buy
stocks for a rise I like to pay top prices and when I sell I
must sell low or not at all. It would not be so difficult to
make money if a trader always stuck to his speculative
guns—that is, waited for the line of least resistance to
define itself and began buying only when the tape said up
or selling only when it said down. He should accumulate
his line on the way up. Let him buy one-fifth of his full
line. If that does not show him a profit he must not
increase his holdings because he has obviously begun
wrong; he is wrong temporarily and there is no profit in
being wrong at any time. The same tape that said UP did
not necessarily lie merely because it is now saying NOT
YET.
In cotton I was very successful in my trading for a long
time. I had my theory about it and I absolutely lived up to
it. Suppose I had decided that my line would be forty to
fifty thousand bales. Well, I would study the tape as I told
you, watching for an opportunity either to buy or to sell.
Suppose the line of least resistance indicated a bull
movement. Well, I would buy ten thousand bales. After I
got through buying that, if the market went up ten points
142

X

over my initial purchase price, I would take on another ten
thousand bales. Same thing. Then, if I could get twenty
points' profit, or one dollar a bale, I would buy twenty
thousand more. That would give me my line—my basis for
my trading. But if after buying the first ten or twenty
thousand bales, it showed me a loss, out I'd go. I was
wrong. It might be I was only temporarily wrong. But as I
have said before it doesn't pay to start wrong in anything.
What I accomplished by sticking to my system was that
I always had a line of cotton in every real movement. In
the course of accumulating my full line I might chip out
fifty or sixty thousand dollars in these feeling-out plays of
mine. This looks like a very expensive testing, but it
wasn't. After the real movement started, how long would it
take me to make up the fifty thousand dollars I had
dropped in order to make sure that I began to load up at
exactly the right time? No time at all! It always pays a man
to be right at the right time.
As I think I also said before, this describes what I may
call my system for placing my bets. It is simple arithmetic
to prove that it is a wise thing to have the big bet down
only when you win, and when you lose to lose only a small
exploratory bet, as it were. If a man trades in the way I
have described, he will always be in the profitable position
of being able to cash in on the big bet.
Professional traders have always had some system or
other based upon their experience and governed either by
their attitude toward speculation or by their desires. I
remember I met an old gentleman in Palm Beach whose
name I did not catch or did not at once identify. I knew he
had been in the Street for years, way back in Civil War
times, and somebody told me that he was a very wise old
codger who had gone through so many booms and panics
that he was always saying there was nothing new under
the sun and least of all in the stock market.

143

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

The old fellow asked me a lot of questions. When I got
through telling him about my usual practice in trading he
nodded and said, "Yes! Yes! You're right. The way you're
built, the way your mind runs, makes your system a good
system for you. It comes easy for you to practice what you
preach, because the money you bet is the least of your
cares. I recollect Pat Hearne. Ever hear of him? Well, he
was a very well-known sporting man and he had an
account with us. Clever chap and nervy. He made money
in stocks, and that made people ask him for advice. He
would never give any. If they asked him point-blank for his
opinion about the wisdom of their commitments he used a
favourite race-track maxim of his: "You can't tell till you
bet." He traded in our office. He would buy one hundred
shares of some active stock and when, or if, it went up I
per cent he would buy another hundred. On another
point's advance, another hundred shares; and so on. He
used to say he wasn't playing the game to make money for
others and therefore he would put in a stop-loss order one
point below the price of his last purchase. When the price
kept going tip he simply moved up his stop with it. On a I
per cent reaction he was stopped out. He declared he did
not see any sense in losing more than one point, whether it
came out of his original margin or out of his paper profits.
"You know, a professional gambler is not looking for
long shots, but for sure money. Of course long shots are
fine when they come in. In the stock market Pat wasn't
after tips or playing to catch twenty-points-a-week
advances, but sure money in sufficient quantity to provide
him with a good living. Of all the thousands of outsiders
that I have run across in Wall Street, Pat Hearne was the
only one who saw in stock speculation merely a game of
chance like faro or roulette, but, nevertheless, had the
sense to stick to a relatively sound betting method.
"After Hearne's death one of our customers who had
always traded with Pat and used his system made over one
hundred thousand dollars in Lackawanna. Then he
144

X

switched over to some other stock and because he had
made a big stake he thought he need not stick to Pat's way.
When a reaction came, instead of cutting short his losses
he let them run as though they were profits. Of course
every cent went. When he finally quit he owed us several
thousand dollars.
"He hung around for two or three years. He kept the
fever long after the cash had gone; but we did not object as
long as he behaved himself. I remember that he used to
admit freely that he had been ten thousand kinds of an ass
not to stick to Pat Hearne's style of play. Well, one day he
came to me greatly excited and asked me to let him sell
some stock short in our office. He was a nice enough chap
who had been a good customer in his day and I told him I
personally would guarantee his account for one hundred
shares.
"He sold short one hundred shares of Lake Shore. That
was the time Bill Travers hammered the market, in 1875.
My friend Roberts put out that Lake Shore at exactly the
right time and kept selling it on the way down as he had
been wont to do in the old successful days before he
forsook Pat Hearne's system and instead listened to hope's
whispers.
"Well, sir, in four days of successful pyramiding,
Roberts' account showed him a profit of fifteen thousand
dollars. Observing that he had not put in a stop-loss order
I spoke to him about it and he told me that the break
hadn't fairly begun and he wasn't going to be shaken out
by any one-point reaction. This was in August. Before the
middle of September he borrowed ten dollars from me for
a baby carriage—his fourth, He did not stick to his own
proved system. That's the trouble with most of them," and
the old fellow shook his head at me.
And he was right. I sometimes think that speculation
must be an unnatural sort of business, because I find that
the average speculator has arrayed against him his own
nature. The weaknesses that all men are prone to are fatal
145

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

to success in speculation—usually those very weaknesses
that make him likable to his fellows or that he himself
particularly guards against in those other ventures of his
where they are not nearly so dangerous as when he is
trading in stocks or commodities.
The speculator's chief enemies are always boring from
within. It is inseparable from human nature to hope and to
fear. In speculation when the market goes against you—
you hope that every day will be the last day and you lose
more than you should had you not listened to hope—to the
same ally that is so potent a success-bringer to empire
builders and pioneers, big and little. And when the market
goes your way you become fearful that the next day will
take away your profit, and you get out too soon. Fear keeps
you from making as much money as you ought to. The
successful trader has to fight these two deep-seated
instincts. He has to reverse what you might call his natural
impulses. Instead of hoping he must fear; instead of
fearing he must hope. He must fear that his loss may
develop into a much bigger loss, and hope that his profit
may become a big profit. It is absolutely wrong to gamble
in stocks the way the average man does.
I have been in the speculative game ever since I was
fourteen. It is all I have ever done. I think I know what I
am talking about. And the conclusion that I have reached
after nearly thirty years of constant trading, both on a
shoestring and with millions of dollars back of me, is this:
A man may beat a stock or a group at a certain time, but no
man living can beat the stock market! A man may make
money out of individual deals in cotton or grain, but no
man can beat the cotton market or the grain market. It's
like the track. A man may beat a horse race, but he cannot
beat horse racing.
If I knew how to make these statements stronger or
more emphatic I certainly would. It does not make any
difference what anybody says to the contrary. I know I am
right in saying these are incontrovertible statements.
146

XI
And now I'll get back to October, 1907. I bought a yacht
and made all preparations to leave New York for a cruise
in Southern waters. I am really daffy about fishing and this
was the time when I was going to fish to my heart's content
from my own yacht, going wherever I wished whenever I
felt like it. Everything was ready. I had made a killing in
stocks, but at the last moment corn held me back.
I must explain that before the money panic which gave
me ray first million I had been trading in grain at Chicago.
I was short ten million bushels of wheat and ten million
bushels of corn. I had studied the grain markets for a long
time and was as bearish on corn and wheat as I had been
on stocks.
Well, they both started down, but while wheat kept on
dedining the biggest of all the Chicago operators—I'll call
him Stratton—took it into his head to run a corner in corn.
After I cleaned up in stocks and was ready to go South on
147

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

my yacht I found that wheat showed me a handsome
profit, but in corn Stratton had run up the price and I had
quite a loss.
I knew there was much more corn in the country than
the price indicated. The law of demand and supply worked
as always. But the demand came chiefly from Stratton and
the supply was not coming at all, because there was an
acute congestion in the movement of corn. I remember
that I used to pray for a cold spell that would freeze the
impassable roads and enable the farmers to bring their
corn into the market. But no such luck.
There I was, waiting to go on my joyously planned
fishing trip and that loss in corn holding me back. I
couldn't go away with the market as it was. Of course
Stratton kept pretty close tabs on the short interest. He
knew he had me, and I knew it quite as well as he did. But,
as I said, I was hoping I might convince the weather that it
ought to get busy and help me. Perceiving that neither the
weather nor any other kindly wonder-worker was paying
any attention to my needs I studied how I might work out
of my difficulty by my own efforts.
I closed out my line of wheat at a good profit. But the
problem in corn was infinitely more difficult. If I could
have covered my ten million bushels at the prevailing
prices I instantly and gladly would have done so, large
though the loss would have been. But, of course, the
moment I started to buy in my corn Stratton would be on
the job as squeezer in chief, and I no more relished
running up the price on myself by reason of my own
purchases than cutting my own throat with my own knife.
Strong though corn was, my desire to go fishing was
even stronger, so it was up to me to find a way out at once.
I must conduct a strategic retreat. I must buy back the ten
million bushels I was short of and in so doing keep down
my loss as much as I possibly could.

148

XI

It so happened that Stratton at that time was also
running a deal in oats and had the market pretty well
sewed up. I had kept track of all the grain markets in the
way of crop news and pit gossip, and I heard that the
powerful Armour interests were not friendly, market wise,
to Stratton. Of course I knew that Stratton would not let
me have the corn I needed except at his own price, but the
moment I heard the rumors about Armour being against
Stratton it occurred to me that I might look to the Chicago
traders for aid. The only way in which they could possibly
help me was for them to sell me the corn that Stratton
wouldn't. The rest was easy.
First, I put in orders to buy five hundred thousand
bushels of corn every eighth of a cent down. After these
orders were in I gave to each of four houses an order to sell
simultaneously fifty thousand bushels of oats at the
market. That, I figured, ought to make a quick break in
oats. Knowing how the traders' minds worked, it was a
cinch that they would instantly think that Armour was
gunning for Stratton. Seeing the attack opened in oats they
would logically conclude that the next break would be in
corn and they would start to sell it. If that corner in corn
was busted, the pickings would be fabulous.
My dope on the psychology of the Chicago traders was
absolutely correct. When they saw oats breaking on the
scattered selling they promptly jumped on corn and sold it
with great enthusiasm. I was able to buy six million
bushels of corn in the next ten minutes.
The moment I found that their selling of corn ceased I
simply bought in the other four million bushels at the
market. Of course that made the price go up again, but the
net result of my maneuver was that I covered the entire
line of ten million bushels within one-half cent of the price
prevailing at the time I started to cover on the traders'
selling. The two hundred thousand bushels of oats that I
sold short to start the traders' selling of corn I covered at a
loss of only three thousand dollars. That was pretty cheap
149

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

bear bait. The profits I had made in wheat offset so much
of my deficit in corn that my total loss on all my grain
trades that time was only twenty-five thousand dollars.
Afterwards corn went up twenty-five cents a bushed.
Stratton undoubtedly had me at his mercy. If I had set
about buying my ten million bushels of corn without
bothering to think of the price there is no telling what I
would have had to pay.
A man can't spend years at one thing and not acquire a
habitual attitude towards it quite unlike that of the average
beginner. The difference distinguishes the professional
from the amateur. It is the way a man looks at things that
makes or loses money for him in the speculative markets.
The public has the dilettante's point of view toward his
own effort. The ego obtrudes itself unduly and the thinking
therefore is not deep or exhaustive. The professional
concerns himself with doing the right thing rather than
with making money, knowing that the profit takes care of
itself if the other things are attended to. A trader gets to
play the game as the professional billiard player does—that
is, he looks far ahead instead of considering the particular
shot before him. It gets to be an instinct to play for
position.
I remember hearing a story about Addison Cammack
that illustrates very nicely what I wish to point out. From
all I have heard, I am inclined to think that Cammack was
one of the ablest stock traders the Street ever saw. He was
not a chronic bear as many believe, but he felt the greater
appeal of trading on the bear side, of utilising in his behalf
the two great human factors of hope and fear. He is
credited with coining the warning: "Don't sell stocks when
the sap is running up the trees!" and the old-timers tell me
that his biggest winnings were made on the bull side, so
that it is plain he did not play prejudices but conditions. At
all events, he was a consummate trader. It seems that once
this was way back at the tag end of a bull market—
Cammack was bearish, and J. Arthur Joseph, the financial
150

XI

writer and raconteur, knew it. The market, however, was
not only strong but still rising, in response to prodding by
the bull leaders and optimistic reports by the newspapers.
Knowing what use a trader like Cammack could make of
bearish information, Joseph rushed to Cammack's office
one day with glad tidings.
"Mr. Cammack, I have a very good friend who is a
transfer clerk in the St. Paul office and he has just told me
something which I think you ought to know."
"What is it?" asked Cammack listlessly.
"You've turned, haven't you? You are bearish now?"
asked Joseph, to make sure. If Cammack wasn't interested
he wasn't going to waste precious ammunition.
"Yes. What's the wonderful information?"
"I went around to the St. Paul office to-day, as I do in
my news-gathering rounds two or three times a week, and
my friend there said to me: "The Old Man is selling stock."
He meant William Rockefeller. "Is he really, Jimmy?" I
said to him, and he answered, "Yes; he is selling fifteen
hundred shares every three-eighths of a point up. I've been
transferring the stock for two or three days now. I didn't
lose any time, but came right over to tell you."
Cammack was not easily excited, and, moreover, was so
accustomed to having all manner of people rush madly
into his office with all manner of news, gossip, rumors, tips
and lies that he had grown distrustful of them all. He
merely said now, "Are you sure you heard right, Joseph?"
"Am I sure? Certainly I am sure! Do you think" I am
deaf?" said Joseph. "Are you sure of your man?"
"Absolutely!" declared Joseph. "I've known him for
years. He has never lied to me. He wouldn't! No object! I
know he is absolutely reliable and I'd stake my life on what
he tells me. I know him as well as I know anybody in this
world a great deal better than you seem to know me, after
all these years."

151

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"Sure of him, eh?" And Cammack again looked at
Joseph. Then he said, "Well, you ought to know." He called
his broker, W. B. Wheeler. Joseph expected to hear him
give an order to sell at least fifty thousand shares of St.
Paul. William Rockefeller was disposing of his holdings in
St. Paul, taking advantage of the strength of the market.
Whether it was investment stock or speculative holdings
was irrelevant. The one important fact was that the best
stock trader of the Standard Oil crowd was getting out of
St. Paul. What would the average man have done if he had
received the news from a trustworthy source? No need to
ask.
But Cammack, the ablest bear operator of his day, who
was bearish on the market just then, said to his broker,
"Billy, go over to the board and buy fifteen hundred St.
Paul every three-eighths up." The stock was then in the
nineties.
"Don't you mean sell?" interjected Joseph hastily. He
was no novice in Wall Street, but he was thinking of the
market from the point of view of the newspaper man and,
incidentally, of the general public. The price certainly
ought to go down on the news of inside selling. And there
was no better inside selling than Mr. William Rockefeller's.
The Standard Oil getting out and Cammack buying! It
couldn't be!
"No," said Cammack; "I mean buy!"
"Don't you believe me?"
"Yes!"
"Don't you believe my information?"
"Yes."
"Aren't you bearish?"
"Yes."
"Well, then?"
"That's why I'm buying. Listen to me now: You keep in
touch with that reliable friend of yours and the moment
the scaled selling stops, let me know. Instantly! Do you
understand?"
152

XI

"Yes," said Joseph, and went away, not quite sure he
could fathom Cammack's motives in buying William
Rockefeller's stock. It was the knowledge that Cammack
was bearish on the entire market that made his manoeuvre
so difficult to explain. However, Joseph saw his friend the
transfer clerk and told him he wanted to be tipped off
when the Old Man got through selling. Regularly twice a
day Joseph called on his friend to inquire.
One day the transfer clerk told him, "There isn't any
more stock coming from the Old Man." Joseph thanked
him and ran to Cammack's office with the information.
Cammack listened attentively, turned to Wheeler and
asked, "Billy, how much St. Paul have we got in the office?"
Wheeler looked it up and reported that they had
accumulated about sixty thousand shares.
Cammack, being bearish, had been putting out short
lines in the other Grangers as well as in various other
stocks, even before he began to buy St. Paul. He was now
heavily short of the market. He promptly ordered Wheeler
to sell the sixty thousand shares of St. Paul that they were
long of, and more besides. He used his long holdings of St.
Paul as a lever to depress the general list and greatly
benefit his operations for a decline.
St. Paul didn't stop on that move until it reached fortyfour and Cammack made a killing in it. He played his
cards with consummate skill and profited accordingly. The
point I would make is his habitual attitude toward trading.
He didn't have to reflect. He saw instantly what was far
more important to him than his profit on that one stock.
He saw that he had providentially been offered an
opportunity to begin his big bear operations not only at the
proper time but with a proper initial push. The St. Paul tip
made him buy instead of sell because he saw at once that it
gave him a vast supply of the best ammunition for his bear
campaign.

153

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

To get back to myself. After I closed my trade in wheat
and corn I went South in my yacht. I cruised about in
Florida waters, having a grand old time. The fishing was
great. Everything was lovely. I didn't have a care in the
world and I wasn't looking for any.
One day I went ashore at Palm Beach. I met a lot of Wall
Street friends and others. They were all talking about the
most picturesque cotton speculator of the day. A report
from New York had it that Percy Thomas had lost every
cent. It wasn't a commercial bankruptcy; merely the rumor
of the world-famous operator's second Waterloo in the
cotton market.
I had always felt a great admiration for him. The first I
ever heard of him was through the newspapers at the time
of the failure of the Stock Exchange house of Sheldon &
Thomas, when Thomas tried to corner cotton. Sheldon,
who did not have the vision or the courage of his partner,
got cold feet on the very verge of success. At least, so the
Street said at the time. At all events, instead of making a
killing they made one of the most sensational failures in
years. I forget how many millions. The firm was wound up
and Thomas went to work alone. He devoted himself
exclusively to cotton and it was not long before he was on
his feet again. He paid off his creditors in full with interest
—debts he was not legally obliged to discharge and withal
had a million dollars left for himself. His comeback in the
cotton market was in its way as remarkable as Deacon S.
V. White's famous stock-market exploit of paying off one
million dollars in one year. Thomas' pluck and brains
made me admire him immensely.
Everybody in Palm Beach was talking about the collapse
of Thomas' deal in March cotton. You know how the talk
goes and grows; the amount of misinformation and
exaggeration and improvements that you hear. Why, I've
seen a rumor about myself grow so that the fellow who
