
price returned yet again to the $115.00 level and planned to exit on a retest of the $125.00 level, just the same as for
identical setups recently. On the morning of March 15, the trader couldn't believe it! The profit was there, and so a rush to
hit the sell button to lock in gains. This was the seventh winning trade in a row! With price now opening up above $125.00,
the trader immediately entered a short sale and wrote down in the trading journal a plan to sell if price rallied to $127.00 or
$130.00. It wouldn't matter, because there was no way price could get that high—not after the last six instances where
sellers pushed price lower at the $125.00 level.
A few hours into the trading day, Sears Holdings rallied to $127.00, then to $130.00. Nervous, our trader was uncertain
what to do. Buying back to cover here would lock in a painful $5.00 loss. So the trader decided to continue holding short,
assuming this was another typical bull trap. At the close of March 15, the price was above where the plan called for exit, at
$132.00.
As the next day's trading session began, the price rose to $133.00, $135.00, and higher. This could not be happening! This
was now a $10.00-per-share loss, which translated into $10,000.00 per every 1,000 shares the trader was short. Still unsure
of what to do, and certain that price had to come back down, the trader held on though Sears Holdings closed that day just
shy of $140.00 per share.
Over the next few weeks, the trader felt justified as the losing position decreased as price fell back toward the entry at the
$125.00-per-share level. Another bullet dodged! Price traded back down to $130.00, but all of a sudden, Sears Holdings
gapped higher again on April 5. Why didn't our trader cover then? A $15.00 loss had been endured, which now was only a
$5.00 loss and back within the risk-controlled parameters.
We'll leave the story there, because our trader was not alone. There were hundreds of other traders who took the same
position short and endured the same psychological and financial pain. For some, the threshold of pain was lower than others,
and they covered as price began to rise back to $140.00 in early April. Others, either with a higher threshold of pain or a
greater sense of stubbornness, held short as price rose back to $145.00, $150.00, all the way to $160.00.
This story helps explain why positive feedback loops exist and how emotions can blind you to what's happening within the
price structure. One of the reasons that technical analysis successfully helps assess future potential moves for price is
because charts show repeating patterns, and traders—whether bulls or bears—recreate these patterns over time because
we react to similar situations in similar ways. An understanding of psychology can help you realize why these patterns form
and how you can position yourself to profit from these patterns. Always remember that people—traders and investors—
create the chart patterns you see and these patterns reveal insights into the psychology—fear and greed—of the market
participants. Your ability to realize these patterns, and your ability to overcome the psychological traps as described in this
example, will carry you far on your lifelong journey as a trader.

CHOOSING THE RIGHT INDICATORS
Have you ever wondered why a certain indicator will generate a series of great trades and then all of
a sudden begin to trigger a series of failed trades in a row? Have you ever trusted an indicator and
then been betrayed by it suddenly? That's likely because certain popular trading indicators that work
well in a range consolidation environment will fail miserably when price breaks out in a range
expansion environment. This is particularly true with popular overbought and oversold oscillators
such as the RSI and Stochastic oscillators. Let's take a quick look at what indicators work best with
the two different phases, and how the Price Alternation Principle reveals which indicators to use and
which to avoid.

Range Contraction Indicators
Price has a tendency to remain within a consolidation phase longer than it does range breakout
expansion phases, and because of that, you may become accustomed to signals from an indicator that
is optimized for a range contraction phase in price. This is especially the case when traders purchase
black-box trading systems optimized with past-price performance data. When price breaks out of the
range and embarks on a range expansion phase, those same indicators on which you became

dependent will then fail as price changes character in a breakout mode. This specifically refers to the
class of indicators that are overbought/oversold oscillators such as the Stochastic or Relative
Strength Index (RSI). Let's now compare these two indicators in a range compression and range
expansion phase.

Stochastic and Relative Strength Index: Overbought and Oversold
Oscillators
The stochastic index and relative strength index (RSI) are two of the most popular oscillators that
traders use on their charts. The buy and sell signals are clear to new traders, and deceptively simple.
These indicators calculate the current price and measure the past to show price in terms of a
percentage of the recent trading period. Traders identify overbought zones if the oscillator registers in
the upper range and identify oversold zones if the oscillator registers in the lower range. Traders look
to buy positions when the oscillator reveals an oversold signal and then sell shares—or perhaps sell
short—when the oscillator registers an overbought reading. For the stochastic, traders consider an
indicator value above 80 to be overbought and for the RSI, traders identify an indicator value above
70 to be overbought. For oversold levels, traders look to 20 on the stochastic and 30 on the RSI as the
threshold to deem price oversold, and thus look to put on a buy position or cover-short position. A
mechanical trading system might look to buy shares when both oscillators register oversold and then
sell (or consider selling short) those shares when both oscillators register overbought. Traders can
increase or decrease the sensitivity of the indicators by raising or lowering the look-back periods the
indicator uses in its calculation. Though the default look-back period for both oscillators is 14 bars, a
trader can increase the sensitivity, generating more signals, by shortening the period less than 14, or
decrease the sensitivity, generating fewer entry/exit signals, by increasing the period greater than 14.
Keep in mind that on a daily chart, 14 bars refers to 14 days while on a weekly chart, 14 bars refers
to 14 weeks.
In Figure 3.8, arrows on the RSI and Stochastic with a shortened look-back of five bars (days)
indicate when the oscillator enters the overbought or oversold territory. Arrows on the Sears
Holdings price chart, which represent trade entries and exits, indicate only when both the RSI and
Stochastic are showing the same overbought or oversold reading simultaneously.
FIGURE 3.8 Signals from the RSI and Stochastic Oscillators in Sears Holdings during the 2005
Trading Range

Figure 3.8 revisits the same Sears Holdings daily price chart during its range consolidation period
throughout the end of 2005. As price enters the trading range officially, both the RSI and stochastic
oscillators generate two buy signals that fail to rise to the overbought level to generate a sell signal in
early October. However, after these two buy signals, the RSI and stochastic enter their zone of
maximum effectiveness as price begins to trade within the confines of the established trading range
between $125.00 and $115.00.
From November forward, the oscillators generate very accurate and profitable trading signals, as
shown. The main idea is that overbought and oversold oscillators perform best within the confines of
an established trading range during a negative feedback, range contraction phase. These can lure
traders into a false sense of security or cause them to over-trust the oscillators as magical indicators
that point the way to the future. They do not. The indicators are designed to highlight overbought and
oversold regions in price, and thus generate suggested positions for you to take. If price remained
forever within the confines of a trading range, we would never need any indicator beyond these two
oscillators to give us trading signals.
However, price does not remain in a state of range consolidation forever. Let us now pull back the
perspective and focus on the numerous failed signals that these oscillators generate while price is in a
range expansion phase.
Simultaneous signals in the five-period RSI and stochastic oscillators during the context of the 2005
range expansion sell-off in price and the 2006 range expansion rally are indicated in Figure 3.9. An
arrow on the price chart, which represents a corresponding buy or sell signal, appears only when both

the stochastic and RSI signal an overbought or oversold position at the same time.
FIGURE 3.9 Signals from the RSI and Stochastic Oscillators in Sears Holdings during the 2005-2006 Price Expansion Phase

As you can see, during the 2005 sell-off range expansion phase, both indicators generated four
disastrous buy (get long) trades in a row. The oscillators signaled that price was in an oversold
condition, but in a range expansion phase, price in an oversold condition continues its decline into an
even larger oversold condition. This is because of the difference in positive and negative feedback
loops and how the oscillators are designed. These overbought or oversold oscillators perform best in
a negative feedback environment where price moves between a defined trading range boundary in a
range consolidation phase. In a range expansion phase where lower prices lead to lower prices, what
is oversold leads to an even deeper oversold condition.
You may have heard the statements “in a bear market, there is no support” and “in a bull market,
there is no resistance.” You can now rephrase that in terms of positive feedback loops: “in a positive
feedback loop to the downside, there is no oversold” and “in a positive feedback loop to the upside,
there is no overbought.”
The four signals from the RSI and stochastic in Figure 3.9 would have you buying price at $140.00,
then $135.00, then $130.00, and finally $115.00. Notice that these oscillators never gave you an exit
signal, and never registered overbought to give you an exit signal. That's because of the way the
indicators work. I'll spare you the detailed mathematical explanation of why this is so, but just

understand that these oscillators seek to tell you where price is within the most recent look-back
period, and if price never rises within the context of a downward trending move, then the indicator
can never rise to the overbought condition to give you an exit signal.
The failure of overbought/oversold indicators is also seen during positive feedback loops as price
is in a rally phase, as seen by the range expansion period in 2006 in Sears Holdings. Although as seen
i n Figure 3.8, oscillators perform exceptionally well in a trading range environment, they fail
spectacularly in a range expansion environment. Immediately after the breakout, both the RSI and
stochastic gave immediate “take profits” or “sell short” signals at the $135.00/$140.00 level but only
gave a quick, one-day oversold signal on May 15, 2006 after giving two additional overbought
signals as labeled.
During the range expansion phase in Sears Holdings, the stochastic and RSI gave four failed sellshort signals and one overbought buy signal (May 15, 2006). If you study this and similar charts, you
may even cynically come to the conclusion that during a range expansion phase, it's best to take the
opposite signal than the oscillator generates, meaning sell-short oversold indications in a range
expansion phase to the downside or buy overbought indications in a range expansion rally.
Instead of doing that, it's better to eliminate oscillators from your charts during a range expansion
phase. You often obtain better entry and exit signals from pure price trendlines than you do from
overbought or oversold oscillators during trading ranges. Still, traders who enjoy using indicators
must be aware of the conditions when a specific indicator works best or when the indicator is likely
to generate false signals. It helps to think of indicators as tools. A hammer works well when striking a
nail into a wall, but would not work for turning a screw into an object. You'll obtain more effective
trading signals from oscillators during trading ranges instead of breakout range expansion phases.

Bollinger Bands: Volatility and Standard Deviation Indicator
Many traders also include the popular indicator Bollinger Bands on their price charts. Despite their
popularity and effectiveness, Bollinger Bands find their maximum usefulness in a trading range
contraction environment and subsequently fail to generate effective signals in a price breakout
environment. John Bollinger created the popular indicator and published a book on the topic entitled
Bollinger on Bollinger Bands. For those interested in learning more about this indicator, visit his
official web site at http://www.bollingerbands.com.
The Bollinger Band indicator takes into account the last 20 periods (or other input setting you
choose) and plots the average price, which is the same as the 20-period simple moving average. From
there, the indicator calculates the standard deviation of price during the period and then displays two
standard deviations above the average price and two standard deviations below the average price. If
you brush off your college statistics textbooks, you may remember that in a normal distribution, 95
percent of the observances—in this case prices—will be located within two standard deviations from
the mean.
Traders often mistakenly assume that if price is now trading outside of the upper or lower Bollinger
Band, then there must be a 95 percent chance that price will return back into the Bands and most
likely back to the average price. This is a fallacy because price does not lend itself to the constraints
of a normal distribution. Nassim Taleb's book The Black Swan explains why price has a tendency to
move many times beyond the typical two standard deviations, also called sigma, from the mean. For
reference, you may also hear Bollinger Bands called Sigma Bands if a chart shows more than one

standard deviation from the mean.
Statistics aside, the Price Alternation Principle has its own explanation of why price does not lend
itself to the parameters of two standard deviations from the mean at all points in time. During range
contraction or negative feedback periods in the market, Bollinger Bands, like oscillators, generate
highly accurate and profitable trading signals as price moves up into the upper band, reverses, and
then moves down toward the lower band. Price then touches the lower band and then reverses to
travel back to the upper band, giving traders who position themselves accordingly stable profits.
However, once price ejects from the stability of the trading range in a negative feedback loop, price
then begins to remain above the upper Bollinger Band or beneath the lower Bollinger Band for the
duration of the move as a positive feedback loop develops, never moving to the opposite side of the
indicator as expected. It is during these times that traders who use Bollinger Bands identically in all
market environments will suffer potentially devastating losses.
Though there are other ways to use the indicator, the most common method most traders use is to
determine that if price is at or outside the upper Bollinger Band, then they should take profits by
selling shares, or consider putting on a new short-sale position. If price is at or trading beneath the
lower Bollinger Band, a trader might look to cover a short-sale position or buy shares to establish a
new long position.
Let us see an example of a trading range where Bollinger Bands are very effective in generating
profitable trading signals. Figure 3.10 shows us the same example of Sears Holdings in 2005 as price
remains in a negative feedback, range compression environment.
FIGURE 3.10 Signals from Bollinger Bands in Sears Holdings Work during Range Contraction

Arrows at each of the classic trade entry and exit signals show the positions most traders take when
using Bollinger Bands. Traders take buy signals when the price touches or extends briefly outside of
the lower Bollinger Band and then take sell signals as price touches or extends briefly outside of the

upper Bollinger Band. Bollinger Bands reveal two standard deviations above and beneath the mean,
or 20-period moving average.
Like the stochastic and RSI oscillators, the Bollinger Bands generate two buy signals in September
and October without a corresponding exit signal. However, once price officially establishes a trading
range and negative feedback loop, the Bollinger Band indicator accurately positions us for profitable
trades both long and short. Arrows highlight these positions.
As you might already suspect, in the range breakout or price expansion phases of positive feedback
between buyers and sellers, the Bollinger Bands, like the overbought/oversold oscillators, generate a
string of losses for traders who use these indicators in the classic method.
In Figure 3.11, I have highlighted only the signals that the Bollinger Bands indicate during the two
periods of range expansion or positive feedback loops in SHLD's daily price chart. From August to
September 2005, price touches or trades beneath the lower Bollinger Band at least five times as price
falls from $150.00 to $115.00. A trader who depends exclusively on the Bollinger Band indicator
would buy Sears Holdings five times and suffer debilitating losses as a positive feedback loop drove
prices lower and lower in a range expansion move.
FIGURE 3.11 Signals from Bollinger Bands in Sears Holdings Fail during Range Expansion

The same scenario occurs in the opposite direction as price ejects into a range breakout, positive
feedback rally loop from March to June 2006. Like the prior decline phase, the Bollinger Bands
generate five sell-short (or take profits) signals as price rallies from $130.00 to $165.00 in four
months. The Bollinger Bands do give one sudden buy signal in mid-March just as the stochastic and
RSI indicators did. You may also notice that on each breakout of the upper Bollinger Band, price did
retrace back to the rising 20-period moving average, which would result in profitable trades.
However, if you waited for price to move all the way back to the lower Bollinger Band, as would be

the trading signal during a range contraction phase, you would not have a chance to exit your shortsale position and would similarly endure large losses as price continued higher in a positive feedback
loop to the upside.
Indicators are useful for highlighting potential trading signals, but the RSI, stochastic, and Bollinger
Band indicators work best during a range contraction phase and then mislead the trader into large
losses during a range breakout trend phase.

Range Expansion Indicators
If there are indicators that do well in range consolidation phases but fail in range breakout expansion
phases, there must be indicators that perform well in range expansion phases but then fail in range
contraction phases. One such indicator that performs exceptionally well in range expansion moves,
also called trend continuity moves, are moving averages as discussed in Chapter 1 on the trend
continuity principle. Recall that the Moving Average Method helps define trends, as moving averages
are very useful for trend definition and position management.
In a range breakout price expansion, traders often look to establish positions on pullbacks or
retracements to key moving averages. These averages also serve as reference points for traders to
assess the health of a trend and potential for trend reversal. Let us see how moving averages can
guide our trading decisions in the context of a range breakout phase, but lead us woefully astray
during a range contraction phase.

Moving Averages
From Chapter 1, we noted how traders use moving averages to define trends in the market. Traders
often use a short-term, intermediate-term, and a long-term moving average for reference within a
trending environment. If the short-term average is greater than the intermediate-term average and both
averages are greater than the long-term average, then we would declare that market to be in the most
bullish orientation possible. In the opposite structure, if the short-term average is lower than the
intermediate-term average and both averages are beneath the long-term average, we would declare
that market to be in the most bearish orientation possible.
While you can use any combination of moving averages to satisfy the short-, intermediate-, and
long-term averages, I prefer using the 20-exponential, 50-exponential and 200-simple moving
averages for my charts. Traders would then look to buy shares on pullbacks to the rising 20- or 50period moving averages in the context of a range breakout expansion trend phase to the upside, or
short pullbacks to the declining 20- or 50-period moving averages in the context of a declining range
breakout trend phase.
If price breaks under the intermediate-term average, or the 20-and 50-period averages cross
bearishly (the 20 crosses under the 50-period average), then we would interpret this as an early
warning of a potential trend reversal yet to come. The same interpretation holds if we see price in a
downtrend break above its 50-period average, or the 20-period average cross bullishly above the 50period exponential moving average (EMA)—we would look at this as an early sign of a potential
trend reversal.
Alternatively, if we start to see price consolidate and the short-term and intermediate-term averages
converge, then this would signal to us that we are likely entering a range consolidation phase in price
and to decrease our reliance on moving averages for trade entries and exits. During a trading range,

price will chop above and beyond flat moving averages as if they did not exist. Just as the stochastic
and RSI fail in range breakout modes, moving averages will fail in range consolidation modes.
Let us see an example in Figure 3.12, again using Sears Holding for a unified reference of
comparison, of how moving averages give great signals during a range expansion phase but then fail
to do so during a range contraction phase.
FIGURE 3.12 Buy and Sell Signals using the 20- and 50-day Exponential Moving Averages during
Range Expansion Phases SHLD Daily
