
173

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

CRUDE OIL NEAREST FUTURES—Daily Chart

22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13

12
1 15 29 12 26 10 24 7 21 5 19 2 16 30 13 27 11 25 8 22 6 20 3 17 31 14 28
FEB-93 MAR
JUL
AUG
SEP
DEC JAN-94 FEB MAR
APR
MAY JUN
OCT
NOV

CHART 4.40: Crude Oil Futures February 1993–February 1994 Source:
Barchart.com

There is always someone on each side of a trade. The difficulty
lies in determining who is on the opposite side of a position if only
one side is publicly known. The fact that MG lost was known, but
who won and how? In the aftermath of the MG losses, a variety of
explanations developed. The financial world was treated to
academic mumbo jumbo from MBA students analyzing why MG lost
money, as well as numerous articles condemning energy futures.
The actual explanation is simply: MG had a bad plan and lost big.
Clearly, trend followers played a major role in MG’s defeat. The
job of explaining this is made easy by their performance data (see
Chart 4.41):

But in the course of the
next 12 months, it
became more and more
obvious that other traders
were formulating trading
strategies that exploited
MG’s need to liquidate its
expiring long position. At
the end of each trading
month, as MG tried to
liquidate its long
positions by buying the
offsetting shorts, other
traders would add their
short positions to MG’s,
creating the paper market
equivalent of a glut in
supply that initially
exceeded the number of
longs, driving prices
down until the market
reached equilibrium. The
combined force of MG’s
selling its long position in
the prompt contract and
other traders increasing
their short positions was
severe downward
pressure on crude prices
as the prompt month
contract neared
expiration.66

174

One of the few things the
post-mortems seem to
have glossed over is the
trap that MG had gotten
itself into by becoming the
dominant participant in
the futures markets. By
the fall of 1993, some
traders had come to
anticipate the rollovers of
MG’s positions. As long as
its huge position was in
the market, MG hung
there like a big piñata
inviting others to hit it
each month. The selfentrapping nature of its
positions is what is
missing from Edwards
and Canter’s, and even
Culp and Miller’s,
defenses of MG.67

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

CHART 4.41: Trend Followers’ Performances June 1993–January 1994

6-93

7-93

8-93

9-93

10-93 11-93 12-93

1-94

–1.2

6.6

–5.3

1.2

–6.6

3.5

12.5

–1.45

Chesapeake 1.0

9.5

5.8 –2.7

–0.1

1.1

5.8

–3.33

JPD

–6.9

10.2

–2.1 –4.1

–2.0

2.7

8.6

–3.9

Rabar

–1.3

14.8

–3.9 –4.1

–6.0

5.6

10.1

–10.5

Saxon

–2.7

20.5

–14.3 –2.1

–1.1

6.6

17.1

–10.8

Abraham

The key to explaining Chart 4.41 lies in the months of July
1993, December 1993, and January 1994. Those months do not
require much more than a glance at the correlation data to confirm
the similarity in strategies used by trend followers. Trend followers
all made money in July and December, and they all lost money in
January.
The academics, the media, and everyone, it seems, figured out
that professional traders were shorting the energy market and
putting extensive pressure on MG. What the academics never found
out or never seemed to be interested in finding out was who those
professional traders were. The performance data was out there for
everybody to look at. It wasn’t a secret.
Every day, trend followers knew how many contracts or shares
to trade based on total capital at that time. For example, after they
initiated positions and were rewarded with strong profits in July,
they were willing to risk those profits again, which is what they did.
In August, with nice profits in hand, they were willing to risk those
profits and still lose a fixed percentage based on their original stops.
They were willing to let profits on the table turn into losses. They
let the market tell them when the trend was over (January 1994).
In the fall of 1993, trend followers continued to hold their
established short positions in crude oil futures. MG was long crude
oil futures and desperately trying to stay afloat while trend followers
waited like predators. However, trend followers were not just short;
they were aggressively short, reinvesting their profits back into
additional short crude oil positions as the market decreased more
and more.
On the losing side of this zero-sum game, MG had no apparent
strategy. They refused to take a loss early on. In fact, the whole MG
affair would have been a footnote in trading history if they had

175

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

simply exited after the July price decline. However, instead, MG
stayed in the game in hopes of an upward trend to make up for
losses. But MG had no inkling of the steely discipline of their
opponents. Not one of the trend followers was going to exit anytime
soon. The price told them the trend was down. An exit would have
violated one of their most fundamental rules: let winners run.
Crude oil began its final descent in late November into
December. At this time, MG management liquidated all positions
and further fueled the November and December crude price drop.
Ultimately, all good trends must end. Trend followers would
eventually begin their crude oil futures exit in January 1994. If you
look at the performance of trend followers in January 1994 (see
Chart 4.41), you can see what they lost for the month as they
extricated themselves from their history-making profits of 1993
(see Chart 4.42).

According to the NYMEX,
MGRM held the futures
position equivalent of 55
million barrels of gasoline
and heating oil.68

CHART 4.42: 1993 Trend Following Returns

Name

% Return

Abraham Trading

+34.29%

Chesapeake Capital

+61.82%

Man Investments

+24.49%

Rabar Market Research

+49.55%

Dunn WMA

+60.25%

John W. Henry Financials and Metals

+46.85%

Mark J. Walsh

+74.93%

Eckhardt Trading

+57.95%

Final Thoughts
There is no shortage of big events in the past three decades to
demonstrate how trend followers won big. However, there are still
skeptics who think they have found the Achilles heel of trend
following.

“Can you do addition?”
the White Queen asked.
“What’s one and one and
one and one and one and
one and one and one and
one and one?” “I don’t
know,” said Alice. “I lost
count.”
Lewis Carroll69

176

The S&P lost 29.6 percent
of its value during the
1987 crash and took until
May 1989 to recover.
EAFE Index, Jaguar, and
Quantum performances
were highly correlated to
that of the broad market.
Over the full period,
Financial and Metals
Portfolio earned nearly
260 percent on a
composite basis.
John W. Henry70

Success demands
singleness of purpose.
Vince Lombardi

A speculative mania is a
wonderful thing for our
program. We do as much
of that as possible.
Unfortunately, in saying
that, I sound a little bit
anti-common man, man
on the street. What’s bad
for the general public is
very good for our
program.
Toby Crabel, Crabel Capital,
The Greenwich Roundtable,
November 20, 2003

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

The 1987 Stock Crash
One of my favorite questions from skeptics is: “How did the
trend followers do during the 1987 stock crash?” Their tone always
gives away what they think the answer will be (or what they hope it
will be). The fall of 1987, as the data proves (see Chart 4.43 and
Chart 4.44), produced historic gains for trend followers:
CHART 4.43: October–November 1987 Stock Market Crash

Name
S&P 500

% Return
–28%

John W. Henry Original Investment Program

+58.2%

John W. Henry Financials and Metals Portfolio

+69.7%

CHART 4.44: Trend Following Performance 1987

Name

% Return

Chesapeake Capital

+38.78%

JPD

+96.80%

Rabar

+78.20%

John W. Henry Financials and Metals

+251.00%

Campbell and Company Financials and Metals

+64.38%

Millburn Ridgefield

+32.68%

Dunn Capital Management WMA

+72.15%

Mark J. Walsh

+143%

Man Investments

+42.54%

The First Gulf War
Skeptics also assume that the first Gulf War was probably a time
period in which trend followers incurred losses. The data from John
W. Henry shows otherwise.
During the 1990 market decline and subsequent recovery,
Henry’s Financials and Metals Portfolio generated returns of 38.1

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

177

percent against the S&P 500’s 4.4 percent. While Jaguar [Julian
Robertson] and Quantum [George Soros] performed better than the
broad market, they did not perform as well as Financial and Metals
Portfolio.71
Trend follower Jerry Parker outlined a clear and coherent view
of why fundamental analysis played no role in the trading of trend
followers:
“Fundamental analysis that excluded the possibility of an
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in the summer of 1990 would have
been incomplete and possibly unprofitable, or worse. This
was the only ‘fundamental’ that was worth knowing, yet was
the very one that almost no one could have known.
Technical analysis relies upon the idea that smart money
will move into a market and give advance warning that a
position should be taken. This often occurs when the true
major fundamentals are unknown.”72
The events presented in this chapter should leave everyone
with one inescapable conclusion: One of the main reasons that
trend following trading does well is because it has no quarterly
performance constraints. It is opportunistic. What do I mean? Both
Wall Street and Main Street measure success on the artificial
constraints of the calendar. For example, looking back at the end of
2000, you can see that without November and December offering
such huge home runs, trend followers would have had a terrible
year. For those people who judge trading success by “quarters,”
trend followers were dead the better part of 2000.

When you have
eliminated the impossible,
what ever remains,
however improbable must
be the truth.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle73

The whole idea of quarterly performance reporting implies you
can predict the market or successfully shoot for profit targets.
Quarters as a measurement might not be real, but they provide a
comfortable structure for investors who mistakenly believe they
can demand nice, consistent profits. This demand for consistency
has led to a constant search for the Holy Grail or “hot hand” to the
detriment of ever winning consistently. It’s a catch-22.
Imagine playing football where there are four quarters, and you
have to score in each quarter to win. Imagine placing more
importance on scoring in each quarter than winning the game. Now
a great trend trader says, “I might score 28 points in any of the four
quarters. I might score at any point in the game, but the object, at
the end of the game is to win.” So if a trend following trader scores

Blaming derivatives for
financial losses is akin to
blaming cars for drunk
driving fatalities.
Christopher L. Culp74

178

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

28 points in the first quarter and no points in the next three quarters,
and wins, who cares when he scored? Wall Street’s misguided
emphasis on quarterly performance puts more importance on
scoring each quarter than it does on winning the game.
The alternative is to become a home run hitter and take what
the market gives no matter when it arrives. Absolute return traders,
trend followers, have no profit targets. They view their world as a
“rolling return.” I asked Bill Dunn how they address the quarterly
performance measures so popular on Wall Street. I wanted to know
how they educate clients to appreciate “big event hunting.” The
response was clear: “Clients must already have an appreciation for
the pitfalls of relying on short-term performance data before they
can appreciate us.”
Blunt talk for a serious game. On the other hand, after he
retired from trading, Julian Robertson publicly lamented his
constraints, comparing them to a necessary but incompetent
baseball umpire: “One of the great investors likened it to a batter
not having an umpire. If you don’t have an umpire, you can wait for
the fat pitch. The trouble with investing for other people,
particularly in a hedge fund, is that you do have an umpire—called
quarterly performance.”
If everyone knows the umpire of quarterly performance is
ridiculous, why do we stick with it? The behavioral and psychological biases to examine to answer such a simple question would
far exceed the few hundred pages of Trend Following!

The Always “New” Coming Storm
I added the following excerpt to my second edition of this book
in the fall of 2005. It was from commentary from a February 2004
edition of The Economist:
“The size of banks’ bets is rising rapidly the world over.
This is because potential returns have fallen as fast as
markets have risen, so banks have had to bet more in order
to continue generating huge profits. The present situation
“is not dissimilar” to the one that preceded the collapse of
LTCM…banks are ‘walking themselves to the edge of the
cliff.’ This is because—as all past financial crises have
shown—the risk-management models they use woefully
underestimate the savage effects of big shocks, when

Chapter 4 • Big Events, Crashes, and Panics

everybody is trying to wriggle out of their positions at the
same time…By regulatory fiat, when banks’ positions sour,
they must either stump up more capital or reduce their
exposures. Invariably, when markets are panicking, they do
the latter. Because everyone else is heading for the exits at
the same time, these become more than a little crowded,
moving prices against those trying to get out, and requiring
still more unwinding of positions. It has happened many
times before with more or less calamitous consequences…
There are any number of potential flashpoints: a rout in the
dollar, say, or a huge spike in the oil price, or a big emerging
market getting into trouble again. If it does happen, the
chain reaction could be particularly devastating this
time.”75
I am no prophet, but I do feel satisfaction that I included that
excerpt in this book more than three years ago, long before we ever
got to the chaos that was October 2008. That excerpt unfolded just
like a movie script with trend traders again winning big. My next
prediction is that the excerpt will probably unfold again in the years
to come just as it did in 2008. Will you be ready? Will you have a
plan?
Or will you be sitting there, like so many, as Hunter S.
Thompson once so sadly noted about the condition of human herds:
“In a nation ruled by swine, all pigs are upwardly mobile and the
rest of us are [screwed] until we can put our acts together: not
necessarily to win, but mainly to keep from losing completely. We
owe that to ourselves and our crippled self-image as something
better than a nation of panicked sheep.”

Key Points
• Seykota: “Trends become more apparent as you step further
away from the chart.”
• Trend followers are generally on the right side of big moves.
• The most interesting aspect of the Barings Bank blowout was
who won. Everyone knew the Queen’s bank lost, but the
winners were trend followers in the zero-sum game.

179

The success of options
valuation is the story of a
simple, asymptotically
correct idea, taken more
seriously than it
deserved, and then used
extravagantly, with
hubris, as a crutch to
human thinking.
Emanuel Derman76

It seems LTCM could
have survived one Nobel
prize-winner, but with
two, they were doomed.
Frederic Townsend77

180

Corporations make good
and bad decisions every
day offers one dealer.
P&G made a bad
decision. But if they came
in with a Pampers line
that flopped, you
wouldn’t have hearings
in Congress, would
you?78

When the mind is in a
state of uncertainty the
smallest impulse directs
it to either side. [Lat.,
Dum in dubio est animus,
paulo momento huc illuc
impellitur.]
Terence (Publius Terentius Afer),
Source: Andria (I, 5, 32)

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

• People place too much emphasis on the short-term
performance of trend followers. They draw conclusions about
one month’s performance and forget to look at the long term.
Just like a batting average, which can have short-term streaks
over the course of a season, trend followers have streaks. Trend
following performance does deviate from averages, but over
time there is remarkable consistency.
• Value-at-risk (VAR) models measure volatility, not risk. If you
rely on VAR as a risk measure you are in trouble.
• Hunt Taylor, Director of Investments, Stern Investment
Holdings, states: “I’m wondering when statisticians are going to
figure out that the statistical probability of improbable losses
are absolutely the worst predictors of the regularity with which
they’ll occur. I mean, the single worst descriptor of negative
events is the hundred-year flood. Am I wrong? How many
hundred-year floods have we lived through in this room?
Statistically maybe we should have lived through one and we
lived through seven now at this point.”

Baseball: Thinking
Outside the
Batter’s Box

5

“How to hit home runs: I swing as hard as I can, and I try to swing
right through the ball… The harder you grip the bat, the more you can
swing it through the ball, and the farther the ball will go.
I swing big, with everything I’ve got. I hit big or I miss big.
I like to live as big as I can.”
—Babe Ruth
“What is striking is that the leading thinkers across varied fields—
including horse betting, casino gambling, and investing—all emphasize
the same point. We call it the Babe Ruth effect: even though Ruth struck
out a lot, he was one of baseball’s greatest hitters.”
—Michael J. Mauboussin and Kristen Bartholdson1

The concepts that make up trend following need to be
experienced to be understood completely, which is a tough
prerequisite. I find it helpful to compare trend following to baseball,
a sport we have probably experienced either passively or actively to
one degree or another. Baseball has always been a passion of mine.
My playing career went from Little League through college, and I’ve
watched more baseball than I care to admit. I’ve always known that
baseball and trend following have much in common, but it wasn’t
until the past few years that sportswriters and financial writers
started acknowledging the similarities. Not surprisingly, this was

181

The point about Dykstra,
at least to Billy, was clear:
Dykstra didn’t let his mind
mess him up. Only a
psychological freak could
approach a 100-m.p.h.
fastball aimed not all that
far from his head with
total confidence. “Lenny
was so perfectly designed,
emotionally, to play the
game of baseball,” Beane
said. “He was able to
instantly forget any failure
and draw strength from
every success. He had no
concept of failure. I was
the opposite.”
Moneyball 2

182

The general complacency
of baseball people—even
those of undoubted
intelligence—toward
mathematical
examination of what they
regard properly and
strictly as their own dish
of tea is not too
astonishing. I would be
willing to go as far as
pretending to understand
why none of four
competent and successful
executives of seconddivision ball clubs were
most reluctant to employ
probabilistic methods of
any description…but they
did not even want to hear
about them!
Earnshaw Cook6

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

about the time that John W. Henry bought the Boston Red Sox.
Henry makes the connection in the classic book Moneyball:
“People in both fields [stock market and baseball] operate
with beliefs and biases. To the extent that you can eliminate
both and replace them with data, you gain a clear
advantage. Many people think they are smarter than others
in the stock market and that the market itself has no
intrinsic intelligence as if it’s inert. Many people think they
are smarter than others in baseball and that the game on
the field is simply what they think through their set of
images/beliefs. Actual data from the market means more
than individual perception/belief. The same is true in
baseball.”3
If you could find data that would prove otherwise, but still
enable you to win, would you be able to set aside your ego and play
the game by a set of rules? If so, you might be on the same path as
John W. Henry.

The Home Run
Clearly, David Harding, Bill Dunn, Salem Abraham, and John W.
Henry to name a few trend followers swing for the fence. They hit
home runs in their trading performance. They are the Babe Ruths
of trend following. If any of them coached a baseball team, they
would approach it like the former manager of the Baltimore Orioles:
“Earl Weaver designed his offenses to maximize the chance
of a three-run homer. He didn’t bunt, and he had a special
taste for guys who got on base and guys who hit home
runs.”4
Ed Seykota uses a clever baseball analogy to explain his view of
absolute returns (and home runs):
“When you’re up to bat, it doesn’t pay to hedge your
swing…True for stocks and true for [Barry] Bonds.”5
If you are going to play, you might as well play hard. Swing hard
and if you miss, so be it.

Chapter 5 • Baseball: Thinking Outside the Batter’s Box

183

Babe Ruth, hero of New York, hero of baseball, and arguably one
of the greatest sports legends of all time, will always be known for
his home runs. However, he had another habit that isn’t talked
about much: striking out. In fact, with a lifetime batting average of
.342, the Babe spent almost two-thirds of his time trudging back to
the dugout. From a pure numbers perspective, he saw more failure
at the plate than success.

Life is too dynamic to
remain static.
John W. Henry7

There’s a reason why “Ruthian” is still a well-known adjective
in sports writing that conveys the awe and power of a mighty blast
that sails far over the fence. Ruth understood that the big hits help
more than the strikeouts hurt. He summarized his philosophy in a
nutshell: “Every strike brings me closer to the next home run.”

Even before he trained
with commodities legend
Richard Dennis, Jim
DiMaria had learned an
important trading
principle in the less
lucrative arena of
baseball statistics: The
players who score the
most runs are home run
hitters, not those with
consistent batting
records. “It’s the same
with trading,” the 28year-old DiMaria says.
“Consistency is something
to strive for, but it’s not
always optimal. Trading
is a waiting game. You sit
and wait and make a lot
of money all at once. The
profits tend to come in
bunches. The secret is to
go sideways between the
home runs, not lose too
much between them.”10

Richard Driehaus, a hugely successful trader who has made
millions trading trends, while physically no Babe Ruth, sure sounds
like Ruth:
“A third paradigm [pushed in the financial press] is don’t
try to hit home runs—you make the most money by hitting
a lot of singles. I couldn’t disagree more. I believe you can
make the most money hitting home runs. But, you also
need a discipline to avoid striking out. That is my sell
discipline. I try to cut my losses and let my winners run.”8
But swinging for the fence is often characterized as reckless by
the uninitiated:
“One competitor said Henry is our industry’s Dave
Kingman, referring to the ex-ballplayer famous for either
hitting home runs or striking out. Henry says such talk is
unfair. ‘I’ve been doing this for 20 years, and every time
there’s a change in the market, they say I should change my
ways. But every time there’s a period when we don’t do well,
it’s followed by one in which we do extraordinarily well.’”9
A competitor thinks Henry is Dave Kingman? Henry’s
performance is much closer to Babe Ruth’s than Kingman’s.
Consider the actual hitting statistics of Ruth and Kingman (see
Chart 5.1).
