
161

162

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

The seller of a time spread wants the underlying price to move away
from the strike in any direction, which generally causes the value of the
spread to contract. So, technically, a short time spread also can be bullish
or bearish. Keeping in mind that the seller of a time spread wants the underlying price to move as far away from the strike as possible, a short time
spread with a strike above the current underlying price is bearish; the seller
would like the underlying price to continue to move down, away from the
strike. A short time spread with a strike below the current underlying price
is bullish; the seller would like the underlying price to continue to move
up, away from the strike.

THE GREEKS OF THE TIME SPREAD
Now would be a great time to refer back to Chapter 1 to review the
Greeks, and especially the way the delta, gamma, vega, and theta of an option
change over time. Time spreads, being composed of long and short option
positions in different expiration months, have unique sensitivities that basically amount to the differences in option sensitivity to changes in market
conditions over time. These differences can be exploited to capture certain
market scenarios; however, they can be difficult to visualize, even with the
help of graphics. Getting familiar with how the Greeks of an option “age”
over time will help in understanding the workings of the time spread.

Long Time Spreads
• Delta
The delta of a long time spread is the difference between the deltas of
the long-dated option and the short-dated option. For example, the delta of
the long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 call time spread would be calculated as follows:
(t)  closest month
(t  n)  farther-out month
long XYZ (t  n) 100 call delta  0.55
short XYZ t 100 call delta  0.50
long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 call time spread delta  0.55  0.50 or 0.05
Remember that puts have a negative delta, so the delta of the long XYZ
(t  n, t) 100 put time spread would be calculated as follows:
long XYZ (t  n) 100 put delta  0.45
short XYZ t 100 put delta  0.50
long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 put time spread delta   0.45  (0.50) or 0.05
Recall that the point of maximum profitability of a long time spread is
when the underlying price is at the strike, at expiration. Therefore, it makes
sense that the delta of a long time spread is positive when the underlying

The Greeks of the Time Spread

price is below the strike price and negative when the underlying price is
above the strike price. This is evident in Figures 6.7 and 6.8.
What also can be seen in Figures 6.7 and 6.8 is that the delta of the long
call time spread becomes increasingly sensitive as expiration approaches.
Recall that the delta of a short-dated option is much more sensitive to

Figure 6.7 Call Time Spread Delta vs. Time to Expiration—Long XYZ
June/May 500 Call Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

Figure 6.8 Put Time Spread Delta vs. Time to Expiration—Long XYZ
June/May 500 Put Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

163

164

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

“moneyness” (the location of the underlying price relative to the strike
price) than that of a long-dated option. In other words, short-dated at-themoney options have a greater gamma than longer-dated at-the-money options. Therefore, the long time spread will have negative gamma when the
underlying price is near the strike price. This means that as the underlying
price moves away from the strike price, the delta of the short-dated option will change faster than the delta of the long-dated option, generating
a long delta when the underlying price drops below the strike price and a
short delta when the underlying price rises above the strike price. In the
May 10, 2008, series shown in Figures 6.7 and 6.8, the rate of change of the
delta near the strike price is much greater than that of the other series.

Long Call Time Spread vs. Long Put Time Spread
You may have noticed a remarkable similarity between Figure 6.7, the
delta of a long call time spread, and Figure 6.8, the delta of a long put time
spread. In fact, they are identical. The long call time spread of a particular
strike and set of expirations is synthetically equivalent to the long put time
spread of the same strike and set of expirations. Much like call and put vertical spreads, call and put time spreads are linked by a neutral interest-ratedriven structure called the jelly roll. We will discuss this later in the chapter,
but it suffices to say that the delta, gamma, theta, and vega of call and put
time spreads (which have the same underlyings, same strikes, same set of
expirations) are identical. Going forward, we will be exploring the Greeks
of the generic “long time spread.”
• Gamma
The gamma (the rate of change of the delta) of a long time spread is the
sum of the position-adjusted gammas of its component options. Recall from
Chapter 1 that a long option position will have a positive gamma while a
short option position will have a negative gamma. So, in the case of the long
time spread, the long-dated option will generate positive gamma while the
short-dated option will generate negative gamma. For example, the gamma
of the long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 time spread would be calculated as follows:
long XYZ (t  n) 100 gamma  0.05
short XYZ t 100 gamma  0.10
long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 time spread gamma  0.05  0.10 or 0.05
The gamma of a long time spread is negative when the underlying
price is at or around the strike price because the short-dated option has a
larger gamma than the long-dated option. However, the gamma curve of
the short-dated option has greater convexity than that of the long-dated
option, so if the underlying price moves far enough away from the strike
price, the gamma of the long time spread will flip back to positive as illustrated in Figure 6.9.
As can be seen in the May 10, 2008, data series in the following figure,
the gamma of the long time spread is negative when the underlying price

The Greeks of the Time Spread

Figure 6.9 Long Time Spread Gamma vs. Time to Expiration—Long XYZ
June/May 500 Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC
is near the strike price. When the expiration of the short-dated option is
near and the gamma of the short-dated option is very high (the May 500
time spread in this case), the gamma of the time spread can be very negative. As always, this is less pronounced when there is greater time until the
expiration of the first option, as can be seen with the April 20, 2008, and the
April 25, 2008, data series in Figure 6.9.
• Vega
The vega (the sensitivity to changes in implied volatility) of a long time
spread is the sum of the position-adjusted vegas of its component options.
Recall from Chapter 1 that a long option position will have a positive vega while
a short option position will have a negative vega, and that a long-dated option
will have a larger vega than a shorter-dated option of the same strike. The vega
of the long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 time spread would be calculated as follows:
long XYZ (t  n) 100 vega  0.15
short XYZ t 100 vega  0.08
long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 time spread vega  0.15  0.08 or 0.07
As can be seen in Figure 6.10, the vega of the long time spread is positive, with the magnitude dependent on the time differential between the
expiration of the two component options and the time until expiration of
the short-dated option. The vega of an option diminishes as the expiration
approaches, so the vega of the long time spread generally will rise as the
expiration of the short-dated option approaches.

165

166

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

Figure 6.10 Long Time Spread Vega vs. Time to Expiration—Long XYZ
June/May 500 Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC
• Theta
The theta (the sensitivity to the passage of time) of a long time spread
is the sum of the position-adjusted thetas of its component options. Recall
from Chapter 1 that a long option position will have a negative theta while
a short option position will have a positive theta and that a short-dated
at-the-money option will have a larger theta than a longer-dated at-themoney option of the same strike. The theta of the long XYZ (t  n, t) 100
time spread would be calculated as follows:
long XYZ (t  n) 100 theta  0.06
short XYZ t 100 theta  0.13
long XYZ (t  n, t) 100 time spread theta  0.06  (0.13) or 0.07
This means that the value of the time spread would theoretically expand
by approximately 0.07 per day, all else being equal. Of course, the theta of
the long time spread also is dependent on the location of the underlying
relative to strike prices, time left until expiration, implied volatility levels,
and other factors. Figure 6.11 illustrates the theta of the long time spread.
As can be seen in the following figures, and like the other Greeks, the theta
of the long time spread is greatly dependent on the location of the underlying
and the time until expiration. Notice that the theta of the position is positive
when the underlying price is near the strike price, but if the underlying price
moves far enough away from the strike price in either direction, the theta of
the long time spread can become negative. Like the gamma, the theta of an
at-the-money option increases rapidly as expiration approaches and the theta
of a long time spread will generally increase as expiration approaches.

The Greeks of the Time Spread

Figure 6.11 Long Time Spread Theta vs. Time to Expiration—Long XYZ
June/May 500 Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

Short Time Spreads
Given that the Greeks of the short time spread are the exact opposite of
those of the long time spread, the following examples may seem repetitive,
but the Greeks of time spreads can be difficult, so more review is better
than less review in this case.
• Delta
The delta of a short time spread is the difference between the deltas of the
short-dated option and the long-dated option. For example, the delta of the
short XYZ (t, t  n) 100 call time spread would be calculated as follows:
long XYZ t 100 call delta  0.50
short XYZ (t  n) 100 call delta  0.55
short XYZ (t, t  n) 100 call time spread delta  0.50  0.55 or 0.05
Puts have a negative delta, so the calculation of the delta of the short XYZ
(t, t  n) 100 put time spread would be calculated as follows:
long XYZ t 100 put delta  0.50
short XYZ (t  n) 100 put delta  0.45
short XYZ (t, t  n) 100 put time spread delta  0.50  (0.45) or 0.05
Recall that the point of maximum loss of a short time spread is when
the underlying price is at the strike, at expiration. Therefore, it makes sense

167

168

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

that the delta of a short time spread is negative when the underlying price
is below the strike price and positive when the underlying price is above
the strike price. With a short time spread, one would like the underlying
price to move away from the strike price as quickly as possible. One does
not want the underlying price to return to the strike price. Figures 6.12 and
6.13 illustrate this.

Figure 6.12 Short Call Time Spread Delta vs. Time to Expiration—Short
XYZ June/May 500 Call Time Spread, Underlying Price  490
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

Figure 6.13 Short Put Time Spread Delta vs. Time to Expiration—Short
XYZ June/May 500 Put Time Spread, Underlying Price  490
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

The Greeks of the Time Spread

Notice in Figures 6.12 and 6.13 that the deltas of the short call time
spread and the short put time spread (same strikes, same set of expirations) are identical. This is because the call and the put time spreads are
synthetically equivalent, and again, we will discuss the relationship of
call time spreads and put time spreads later in the chapter. Notice also
that the delta of the short call time spread becomes increasingly sensitive
as expiration approaches. Recall that the delta of a short-dated option is
much more sensitive to moneyness than that of a long-dated option. In
other words, short-dated at-the-money options have a greater gamma
than longer-dated at-the-money options, and therefore the short time
spread will have a positive gamma when the underlying price is near
the strike price.
This means that as the underlying price moves away from the strike
price, the delta of the short-dated option will change faster than the delta
of the long-dated option, generating a long delta when the underlying
price rises above the strike price and a short delta when the underlying
price drops below the strike price. In the May 11, 2008, series shown in
Figures 6.12 and 6.13, the rate of change of the delta near the strike price is
much greater than it is with the other series.
• Gamma
The gamma (the rate of change of the delta) of a short time spread is
the sum of the position-adjusted gammas of its component options. Recall
from Chapter 1 that a long option position will have a positive gamma
while a short option position will have a negative gamma. So, in the case
of the short time spread, the long-dated option will generate a negative
gamma while the short-dated option will generate a positive gamma. For
example, the gamma of the short XYZ (t, t  n) 100 time spread would be
calculated as follows:
long XYZ t 100 gamma  0.10
short XYZ (t  n) 100 gamma  0.05
long XYZ (t, t  n) 100 time spread gamma  0.10  0.05 or 0.05
The gamma of a short time spread is positive when the underlying
price is at or around the strike price because the short-dated option has a
larger gamma than the long-dated option. However, the gamma curve of
the short-dated option has greater convexity than that of the long-dated
option, so if the underlying price moves far enough away from the strike
price, the gamma of the short time spread will flip back to negative as
illustrated in Figure 6.14.
As can be seen from the May 11, 2008, data series in Figure 6.14, the
gamma of the short time spread is positive when the underlying price
is near the strike price. When the expiration of the short-dated option is
near and the gamma of the short-dated option is very high (the May 500
time spread in this case), the gamma of the short time spread can be very
positive. As always, this is less pronounced when there is greater time
until the expiration of the first option, as can be seen with the April 11,
2008, and the April 26, 2008, data series.

169

170

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

Figure 6.14 Short Time Spread Gamma vs. Time to Expiration—Short
XYZ June/May 500 Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC
• Vega
The vega (the sensitivity to changes in implied volatility) of a short
time spread is the sum of the position-adjusted vegas of its component
options. Recall from Chapter 1 that a long option position will have a positive vega while a short option position will have a negative vega and that
a long-dated option will have a larger vega than a shorter-dated option of
the same strike. The vega of the short XYZ (t, t  n) 100 time spread would
be calculated as follows:
long XYZ t 100 vega  0.08
short XYZ (t  n) 100 vega  0.15
short XYZ (t, t  n) 100 time spread vega  0.08  0.15 or 0.07
Figure 6.15 illustrates the vega of the short time spread.
As can be seen in the preceding figure, the vega of the short time spread
is negative, with the magnitude dependent on the time differential between
the expiration of the two component options and the time until expiration
of the short-dated option. The vega of an option diminishes as the expiration approaches, so the vega of the short time spread will generally fall as
the expiration of the short-dated option approaches.
• Theta
The theta (the sensitivity to the passage of time) of a short time spread
is the sum of the position-adjusted thetas of its component options. Recall

The Greeks of the Time Spread

Figure 6.15 Short Time Spread Vega vs. Time to Expiration—Short XYZ
June/May 500 Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

from Chapter 1 that a long option position will have a negative theta while
a short option position will have a positive theta and that a short-dated
at-the-money option will have a larger theta than a longer-dated at-themoney option of the same strike. The theta of a short time spread with the
underlying price at or near the strike is negative. The theta of the short XYZ
(t, t  n) 100 time spread would be calculated as follows:
long XYZ t 100 theta  0.13
short XYZ (t  n) 100 theta  0.06
short XYZ (t, t  n) 100 time spread theta  0.13  (0.06) or 0.07
This means that the value of the time spread would theoretically expand by approximately 0.07 per day, all else being equal (a loss to a trader
short the time spread). The theta of the short time spread is also dependent
on the location of the underlying relative to strike prices, time left until expiration, implied volatility levels, and other factors. Figure 6.16 illustrates
the theta of the short time spread.
In the following figure, the theta of the short time spread is highly negative when the underlying price is near the strike price, but if the underlying
price moves far enough away from the strike price in either direction, the
theta of the long time spread can become positive. The theta of the shortdated at-the-money option increases rapidly as expiration approaches, and
therefore the time decay of the short time spread will generally increase as
the expiration approaches.

171

172

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

Figure 6.16 Short Time Spread Theta vs. Time to Expiration—Short XYZ
June/May 500 Time Spread, Underlying Price  500
Source: LiquidPoint, LLC

INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
As mentioned in “Strategy Overview,” time spreads can be used in a
variety of situations. Depending on the location of the strike price versus
the current underlying price, and whether the time spread is long or short,
time spreads can be used as directional strategies or they can be used as directionless strategies. They can be used for high-velocity, high-magnitude
directional movement, or for slow sideways movement. They can also be
used to target extreme differences in implied volatility between two expiration months. Because of the unique sensitivities of an intermonth long/
short option combination, long and short time spreads (Figure 6.17) can be
deployed to fit very specific market forecasts. Price, implied and timing
factors all can be built into a single strategy. To recap:

Spread Type

Delta
Up

ⴚ

Dn

ⴙ

Up

ⴙ

Dn

ⴚ

Long Time Spread

Short Time Spread

Gamma

Vega

Theta

Negative

Positive

Positive

Positive

Negative

Negative

Figure 6.17 Summary of the Greeks for the Long and the Short Time
Spreads

Investment Objectives

• Long Time Spreads
• Negative gamma, positive vega, positive theta
— Sideways trade; rising implied volatility
— Directional move toward a target price
• Short Time Spreads
• Positive gamma, negative vega, negative theta
— Sharp movement away from the strike; falling implied volatility
• Either Time Spread
• Address large implied volatility differentials.

Sideways Trade
The long time spread can be used to address the underlying that is moving in a sideways or directionless fashion. Because the long time spread
has a positive theta (a positive time decay), the value of an at-the-money
long time spread should rise as the underlying price hovers near the strike
price of the spread. Should the underlying price break out in either direction, risk is limited to the initial cost of the spread. Because the long time
spread is also long vega, it can be a good choice for a forecast of sideways
movement in the market or a particular underlying where implied volatility levels are already low.

Directional Moves Toward a Target Price
Long time spreads can be used as a directional strategy. If one’s forecast
is for the market to move to a certain price point in a certain time frame, an
effective strategy can be a long time spread structured at the strike nearest
the target price, with the short-dated option expiring at the time the trader
expects the underlying to “arrive” at that price. A long time spread with a
strike above the current underlying price is bullish because it is desirable
for the underlying price to move up to that particular strike. A long time
spread with a strike below the current underlying price is bearish because
it is desirable for the underlying price to move down to that particular
strike. Again, because the long time spread is long vega, it can be a good
choice for a directional strategy when implied volatility levels are low.

Sharp Move Away from the Strike
The short time spread can be used to be a directionless “breakout”
strategy. Sharp movement away from the strike causes the value of the
time spread to decline. The short time spread is long gamma, meaning that
movement in any direction away from the strike price will cause a change
in the delta of the overall spread that is favorable to the trader. If the
underlying price moves up away from the strike, the position will become

173

Chapter 6

Calendar Spreads

long delta; if the underlying price moves down away from the strike, the
position will become short delta (refer again to Figures 6.12 and 6.13). This
behavior is similar to a long straddle or long strangle, but unlike the long
straddle and strangle, the short time spread is short vega, so if the forecast
also includes declining implied volatility after the breakout (this sometimes
occurs after government reports are issued), or if overall implied volatility
levels are already high, the short time spread might be a better choice than
a long straddle or strangle for trading a breakout forecast.

Implied Volatility Differentials
Implied volatility is the options market’s consensus about a particular
underlying stock’s expected volatility through the expiration date of the
options. Implied volatility levels change constantly in response to the buyers and sellers of options entering and exiting the market in response to
events and nonevents. Because there are different expectations associated
with different expiration cycles and with the estimated volatility likely to
occur during a particular time period, implied volatility levels generally
differ for different expiration cycles. This is referred to as the term structure of implied volatility. The implied volatility of short-dated options will
conform to short-term events, spiking when underlying price movement
is volatile, collapsing when it is not, whereas the longer-dated options will
trade more in line with the historical long-term volatility. This means that
the term structure of implied volatility can show a great deal of variance,
and this sometimes leads to opportunity for the time spreader. Figure 6.18
is an example of the term structure of implied volatility after a recent low
volatility period.
