
In the original edition I went on to give one (then) current exam-

ple of this same sort of changed financial appraisal, by saying:

“One more example is a change in outlook that is taking place
right now. For years the shares of the machine tool manufacturers have
sold at a very low ratio to earnings. It was almost unanimously felt that
machine tools were the epitome of a feast or famine industry. No mat-
ter how good such earnings were, they did not mean much because
they were just the product of a prevailing boom and could not last.
Recently, however, a new school, while by no means predominating
the thinking on this subject, has been gaining converts. This school
believes that since World War II a fundamental change has taken place
affecting these companies. All industry has been swinging from short-
to long-range planning of capital expenditures. As a result, the cause of
extreme fluctuation for the machine tool companies has disappeared.
High and rising wage rates will prevent for many years, if not forever,
a return to the feast or famine nature of this business. The steady pace
of engineering advance has increased and will further increase the pace


160 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

of obsolescence of this industry’s products. Therefore, in place of the
largely cyclical prewar trends, the growth trend of the recent past will
continue further into the future. Automation may cause this growth
trend to be spectacular.

“Under the influence of’ those who think this way, the better
machine tool stocks are now appraised on a somewhat more favorable
basis in relation to the market as a whole than they were only a few
years ago. They still sell at a rather low ratio to earnings because the
influence of the feast or famine idea is still strong, even if it is not as
strong as it used to be. If the financial community comes more and more
to accept this non-cyclical and growth outlook for machine tool stocks,
their price-carnings ratio will improve more and more. They will then
do much better than the market. If the old feast or famine concept
regains its former hold, these shares will sell at a lower ratio to earnings
than prevails today.

“This current machine tool example brings into clear relief what the
common stock investor must do if he is to purchase shares to his great-
est advantage. He must examine factually and analytically the prevailing
financial sentiment about both the industry and the specific company of
which he is considering buying shares, If he can find an industry or a
company where the prevailing style or mode of financial thinking is con-
siderably less favorable than the actual facts warrant, he may reap himself
an extra harvest by not following the crowd. He should be extra careful
when buying into companies and industries that are the current darlings
of the financial community, to be sure that these purchases are actually
warranted—as at times they well may be—and that he is not paying a
fancy price for something which, because of too favorable interpretation
of basic facts, is the investment fad of the moment.”

Today, of course, we know the answer to the recent ideas of some
that the machine tool industry is no longer feast or famine in its
nature. The 1957 recession completely exploded the idea that long-
range corporate planning now cushions these stocks from their nor-
mal extreme vulnerability to downward movements in the business
cycle. However, for every problem of this sort which gets solved, the
ever-increasing pace of today’s technology opens up a dozen others
from which the wise investor can profit if he can think independent-
ly of the crowd and reach the right answer when the majority of
financial opinion is leaning the other way. Are the “exotic” fuel stocks


Five More Don’ts for Investors 161

and certain of the smaller electronics intrinsically worth the high
appraisals being given them today? Is there such a future for manufac-
turers of ultrasonic equipment that ordinary price-earnings may be
disregarded? Is a company better or worse for the American investor
if an abnormally large part of its earning power is derived from for-
eign operations? These are all matters about which the ideas of the
multitude may have swung too far or not far enough right now. If he
is thinking of participating in the affected companies, the wise investor
must determine which are fundamental trends that will go further, and
which are fads of the moment.

These investment fads and misinterpretations of facts may run for
several months or scveral years. In the long run, however, realities not
only terminate them, but frequently, for a time, cause the affected stocks
to go too far in the opposite direction. The ability to see through some
majority opinions to find what facts are really there is a trait that can
bring rich rewards in the field of common stocks. It is not easy to develop,
however, for the composite opinion of those with whom we associate
is a powerful influence upon the minds of all of us. There is one factor
which all of us can recognize, however, and which can help powerfully
in not just following the crowd. Vhis is realization that the financial
community is usually slow to recognize a fundamentally changed con-
dition, unless a big name or a colorful single event is publicly associat-
ed with that change. The ABC Company’s shares have been selling at a
very low price, in spite of the attractiveness of its industry, because it has
been badly managed. If a widely known man is put in as the new pres-
ident, the shares will usually not only respond at once, but will proba-
bly over-respond. This is because the time it takes to bring about basic
improvement will probably be overlooked in the first enthusiasm. How-
ever, if the change to a superb management comes from the brilliance
of heretofore little-known executives, months or years may go by dur-
ing which the company will still have poor financial repute and sell at a
low ratio to earnings. Recognizing such situations—prior to the price
spurt that will inevitably accompany the financial community's correc-
tion of its appraisal—is one of the first and simplest ways in which the
fledgling investor can practice thinking for himself rather than follow-
ing the crowd.


10

How I Go about Finding
a Growth Stock

fter the publication of the original edition of Common Stocks and

Uncommon Profits, 1 began receiving an amazing, to me, number of

letters from readers all over the country. One of the most common
requests made was for more detailed data about just what an investor
(or his financial advisor) should do to find investments that will lead
to spectacular gains in market price. Since there is so much interest in
this matter, it may be beneficial to include some comments on this
subject here.

Doing these things takes a great deal of time, as well as skill and
alertness. The small investor may feel a disproportionate amount of work
is involved for the sums he has at his disposal. It would be nice, not only
for him but also for the large investor, if there were some easy, quick way
of selecting bonanza stocks. I strongly doubt that such a way exists. How
much time should be spent on these matters is, of course, something
each investor must decide for himself in relation to the sums he has
available for investment, his interests, and his capabilities.

I cannot say with any assurance that my method is the only possible
system for finding bonanza investments. Nor can I even be completely
sure that it is the best method although, obviously, if I thought some other
available approach were better I would not be using this one. For some
years, however, I have followed the steps I am about to outline in detail;
doing this has worked and worked well for me. Particularly in the highly
important earlier stages, someone else with greater background knowl-
cdge, better contacts, or more ability might make some important varia-
tions in these methods and attain further improvement in over-all results.


How I Go about Finding a Growth Stock 163

There are two stages in the following outline, at each of which the
quality of the decisions made will have tremendous effect upon the
financial results obtained. Everyone will recognize instantly the over-
whelming importance of the decision at the second of these two critical
points, which is, “Do I now buy this ‘particular stock or do I not?” What
may not be as easy to recognize is that right at the start of an organized
method for selecting common stocks, decisions must also be made that
can have just about as great impact on the chance of uncovering an
investment that ten years later will have increased, say, twelve-fold in
value one rather than that has not quite doubled.

This is the problem that confronts anyone about to start on a quest
for a major growth security: there are literally thousands of stocks in
dozens of industries that could conceivably qualify as worthy of the
most intensive study. You cannot be sure about many of them until con-
siderable work has been done. However, no one could possibly have the
time to investigate more than a tiny per cent of the available field. How
do you select the one or the very few stocks to the investigation of
which you will devote such time as you have to spare?

This is a far more complex problem than it seems. You must make
decisions that can easily screen out from investigation situations that a
few years later have produced fortunes. You may make decisions that
limit your work to rather barren soil, in that as you gather more data the
outlook appears more and more clear that you are approaching the
answer you are bound to find in the overwhelming majority of all inves-
tigations. This is that the company is run of the mill or imaybe a little
better, but that it just is not the occasional bonanza that leads to spec-
tacular profit. Yet this key decision determines whether, financially
speaking, you are prospecting rich ore or poor on the basis of relatively
little knowledge of the facts. This is because you must make decisions
on what to or what not to spend your time before you have done
enough work to have a proper basis for your conclusion. If you have
done enough work to have adequate background for your decisions,
you will have already spent so much time on each situation that, in
effect, you will have made this vital first decision on a snap basis any-
way. You just will not have realized that you have done so.

Some years ago I would sincerely but mistakenly have told you that
TI used what would have sounded like a neat method for solving this
problem. As a result of companics which I had already investigated, and
particularly as a result of familiarity with the companies in which the


164 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

funds I manage were concentrated, I had become friendly with a sizable
number of quite able business executives and scientists. | could talk to
these people about companies other than their own. I believed that ideas
and leads furnished by such unusually well-informed contacts would
provide a magnificent supply of prospects for investigation that would
contain an abnormally large per cent of companies that might prove to
have the outstanding characteristics I am constantly seeking.

However, I attempt to use the same analytical and self-critical meth-
ods of improving the techniques of my own business that I expect the
companies in which I invest to use to improve their operations. There-
fore, some years ago I made a study to determine two things. How had
I come to select the companies which I had chosen for investigation?
With hindsight to help me, were there significant variations in the per-
centage of worthwhile results (in the way of outstanding investments
subsequently acquired) between investigations made as a result of the
original “spark plug” idea coming from one type of source and those
coming from sources of a completely different nature?

What I found astonished me but is entirely logical on analysis. The
business executive-scientist classification which I had believed was my
main source of original ideas causing me to investigate one company
rather than another, actually had furnished only about one-fifth of the
leads that had excited me enough to engage in a further study. Of even
greater significance, these leads had not proven an above average source
of good investments. This one-fifth of total investigations had led to
only about one-sixth of all worthwhile purchases.

In contrast, the first original idea for almost four-fifths of the inves-
tigations and almost five-sixths of the ultimate pay-out (as measured by
worthwhile purchases) had come from a quite different group. Across
the nation I had gradually come to know and respect a small number of
men whom I had seen do outstanding work of their own in selecting
common stocks for growth. A not necessarily complete list of these able
investment men would include one or more living in such widely scat-
tered places as New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Buffalo, Chicago, San
Francisco, Los Angeles, and San Diego. In many instances I might not
agree at all with the conclusions of any of these men as to a stock they
particularly liked, even to the point of feeling it worthy of investigation.
In one or two cases, I might even consider the thoroughness of their
work as suspect. However, because in each case I knew their financial
minds were keen and their records impressive, | would be disposed to


How | Go about Finding a Growth Stock 165

listen eagerly to details they might furnish concerning any company
within my range of interests that they considered unusually attractive for
major appreciation.

Furthermore, since they were trained investment men, I could usu-
ally get rather quickly their opinion upon the key matters most impor-
tant to me in my decision as to whether it might be a good gamble to
investigate the company in question. What are these key matters? Essen_
tially they cover how the company would measure up to our already
discussed fifteen points, with special emphasis in this preliminary stage
on two specific subjects. Is the company in, or being steered toward,
lines of business affording opportunities of unusual growth in sales? Are
these lines where, as the industry grows, it would be relatively simple for
newcomers to start up and displace the leading units? If the nature of
the business is such that there is little way of preventing newcomers
from entering the field, the investment value of such growth as occurs
may prove rather slight.

How about using investment men of fewer accomplishments or less
ability as a source of original leads on what to investigate? If I did not
feel that better men were available, | doubtless would use them some-
what more than I do. I always try to find the time at least to listen once
to any investment man, if only to be on the alert for keen younger men
coming up in the business and to be sure I am not overlooking one.
However, the competition for time is terrific. As I downgrade either a
financial man’s investment judgment or his reliability as to facts pre-
sented, I find my tendency to spend time Investigating the company he
presents decreasing even more than proportionally.

How about selecting original leads for investigation from the ideas in
printed material? Occasionally I have been influenced by the special
reports issued by the most reliable brokerage houses when these reports are
not for widespread distribution but solely to a few selected people. How-
ever, on the whole, I would feel the typical public printed brokerage bul-
letin available to everyone is not a fertile source. There is too much danger
of inaccuracies in them. More important, most only repeat what is already
common knowledge in the financial community. Similarly, I will occa-
sionally get a worthwhile idea from the best of the trade and financial peri-
odicals (which I find quite helpful for completely different purposes); but
because I believe they have certain inherent limitations on what they can
print about many of the matters of greatest interest to me, I do not find
them a rich source of new ideas on the best companies to investigate.


166 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

There is another possible source of worthwhile original leads which
others with better technical backgrounds or greater ability might be
able to employ profitably, although I have not successfully done so. This
source is the major consulting research laboratories such as Arthur D,
Little, Stanford Research Instittte, or Battelle. I have found that person-
nel of these organizations have great understanding of just the business
and technical developments from which worthwhile original invest-
ment ideas should come. However, I have found the usefulness of this
group largely blocked by their tendency (which is entirely praiseworthy)
to be unwilling to discuss most of what they know because it might vio-
late the confidence of the client companies for which they have
worked. If someone smarter than I am could find a way, without injury
to these client companies, of unlocking the mine of investment infor-
mation I suspect these organizations possess, he might well have found
a means of importantly improving on my methods regarding this par-
ticular step in the quest for growth stocks.

So much for step one. On the basis of a few hours’ conversation, usu-
ally with an outstanding investment man, occasionally with a business
executive or scientist, I have made a decision that a particular company
might be exciting. I will start my investigation. What do I do next?

There are three things I emphatically do not do. I do not (for rea-
sons that I think will soon become clear) approach anyone in the man-
agement at this stage. | do not spend hours and hours going over old
annual reports and making minute studies of minor year-by-year
changes in the balance sheet. I do not ask every stockbrokcr I know
what he thinks of the stock. I will, however, glance over the balance
sheet to determine the general nature of the capitalization and financial
position. If there is an SEC prospectus I will read with care those parts
covering breakdown of total sales by product lines, competition, degree
of officer or other major ownership of common stack (this can also usu-
ally be obtained from the proxy statement), and all earning statement
figures throwing light on depreciation (and depletion, if any), profit
margins, extent of research activity, and abnormal or non-recurring
costs in prior years’ operations.

Now I am ready really to go to work. I will use the “scuttlebutt”
method I have already described just as much as I possibly can. Here,
rather than as a source of original ideas for investment, is where the peo-
ple I have come to know in the business executive-scientist group can
be of inestimable value. I will try to see (or reach on the telephone)


How I Go about Finding a Growth Stock 167

every key customer, supplier, competitor, ex-employee, or scientist in a
related ficld that I know or whom I can approach through mutual
friends. However, suppose I still do not know enough people or do not
have a friend of a friend who knows enough of the people who can
supply me with the required background. What do I do then?

Frankly, if I am not even close to getting much of the information
T need, I will give up the investigation and go on to something else. To
make big money on investments it is unnecessary to get some answer to
every investment that might be considered. What is necessary is to get
the right answer a large proportion of the very small number of times
actual purchases are made. For this reason, if way too little background
is forthcoming and the prospects for a great deal more is bleak, I believe
the intelligent thing to do is to put the matter aside and go on to some-
thing else.

However, suppose quite a bit of background has become available.
You have called on everyone you know or can readily approach, but
have spotted one or two people who you believe could do much to
complete your picture if they would talk freely to you. I would not just
walk in on them off the street. Most people, interested as they may be
in the industry in which they are engaged, are not inclined to tell to
total strangers what they really think about the strong and weak points
of a customer, a competitor, or a supplier. I would find out the com-
mercial bank of the people I want to meet. If in matters of this sort you
approach a commercial bank that knows you, tell them frankly whom
you want to meet and exactly why, it is surprising how obliging most
commercial bankers will be in trying to help you—provided you do not
bother them too often. It is possibly even more surprising how helpful
most businessmen will try to be if you are introduced to them by their
regular bankers. Of course this help will only be forthcoming if the
bankers in question have no doubt whatsoever that the information you
are seeking is solely for background purposes in determining whether
to make an investment, and that under no circumstance would you ever
embarrass anyone by quoting the source of any derogatory information.
Tf you follow these rules, banking help can, at times, help complete the
stage of an investigation that otherwise might never be complete
enough to be of any value.

It is only after “scuttlebutt” has obtained for you a large part of the
data that in our chapter on the fifteen points I indicated can best be
obtained from such sources, that you should be ready to take the next


168 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

step and think about approaching the management. I think it rather
important that investors thoroughly understand why this is so.

Good managements, those most suitable for outstanding invest-
ment, are nearly all quite frank in answering questions about the com-
pany’s weak points as fully as about its strong points. However, no mat-
ter how punctilious a management may be in this respect, no
corporate officer in his own self-interest can be expected, unasked, to
volunteer some of the most significant matters for you, the investor, to
know. How can a vice president to whom you say, “Is there anything
else you think I, as a prospective investor, should know about your
company?” give a reply to the effect that the other top members of the
management team are doing splendidly but several years of poor work
by the vice president for marketing is beginning to cause weakness in
sales? Could he possibly volunteer further that this may not be too
important, since young Williams, on the marketing staff, has out-
standing ability and in another six months he will be in charge and
the situation brought back under control? Of course he could not
volunteer these things. However, I have found that if he learns you
already know of the marketing weakness, his remark may be diplo-
matically worded, but with the right type of management and if they
have confidence in your judgment, you will be furnished with a real-
istic answer as to whether anything is or is not being done to remedy
weaknesses of this type.
