important as execution. While Treasury may rely on its core banks for forecasting exchange
rates relative to its needs, it should also have its own forecasting ability, linked in with
its operational observations which are frequently more real time than any bank is capable
of. Treasury should also be able to model all its hedging positions using VaR and other
sophisticated modelling systems.
8. Create a risk oversight committee — In addition to the safeguard of a chief dealer position
for larger multinational corporations, a risk oversight committee should be established
to approve position taking above established thresholds and review the risk management
policy on a regular basis.
Clearly, this list of core principles of managing currency risk is aimed at the larger multinational corporations that have the means and the business requirements for such a sophisticated
Treasury operation. That said, such a list can also be used as a benchmark for those who, while
they cannot or do not need to comply with all elements, can still ﬁnd some useful. Corporations
of whatever size and sophistication must balance the real cost of implementing such an approach to managing currency risk against the possible cost of not doing so. The ﬁrst cost is
tangible, the second intangible — but by the time the second becomes tangible it is too late!
That is precisely what we are trying to avoid.
It may be useful for a corporation to split currency risk management into two parts — the
ﬁrst part focusing on the overall approach towards managing of currency risk, the second
dealing with the actual execution of currency risk management. Many corporations have this
kind of division of labour, whether or not they formalize it. However rigorous a currency
risk management policy is, it still runs the risk of being bypassed by events, technology and
innovation. Thus, it is very important to have a regular review process to ensure the currency
risk management policy remains up-to-date and in line with the corporation’s needs. In this
review process, important questions to be raised may include:

r Do the currency risk management policy and the Treasury’s mission statement still represent
the corporation’s business needs? Should the corporation maintain or change its approach
towards managing currency risk?
r How has currency hedging performed relative to the established benchmarks? How can the
costs of currency hedging be reduced?
r Are VaR or credit limits, or the ﬁnancial instruments relating to currency risk management,
still appropriate?
@Team-FLY

146

Currency Strategy

7.6 HEDGING — MANAGEMENT RELUCTANCE
AND INTERNAL METHODS
Having looked in detail at the issue of managing currency risk, we should now be looking
at the speciﬁcs of how to hedge that risk. Before we do that, we ﬁrst have to examine the
issue of management reluctance to hedge a risk many see as merely an operational hazard
of international investment. Some may dismiss this section, either because it is irrelevant to
them or because they view any such approach as inappropriate. While I too share the view
that currency risk should be managed, such management reluctance should not be ignored, but
instead should be understood and thereafter combated. Three key reasons for this reluctance
which come up time and again are the following:

r Management does not understand active currency management methods
r Management thinks currency risk cannot be measured accurately
r Management sees active currency management as outside of core business
Some of these points are reasonable. Currency forwards and options may well be outside
the ﬁeld of expertise of a corporation’s management, and will certainly be outside the core
business operations. Many managements consider such ﬁnancial instruments as speculative.
However, it is the job of Treasury to explain that not managing currency risk actively leaves the
corporation vulnerable to major exchange rate movements, which can cause substantial swings
in the company’s value. Using forwards or options may indeed be speculative, depending on
what they are used for. However, not hedging currency risk may be even more speculative.
Active currency management is a necessary byproduct of a corporation’s overseas investments
and operations. Again, it is the job of the Treasury to educate the management and ultimately
the board on the need for active currency management, not least to maintain and ensure the
corporation’s equity market value. A corporation may not be able to boost shareholder value
signiﬁcantly through active currency risk management, but it can certainly damage it by not
managing currency risk.
When management says it is difﬁcult to measure currency risk it is correct, but that does
not mean such risk cannot be quantiﬁed. Imprecision is not an excuse for indecision in the
corporation’s underlying business. Neither should it be tolerated with regard to currency risk
management.
Even if a management is willing to consider currency hedging, there are ways of “natural”
or internal hedging that it may consider ﬁrst, such as:

r Netting (debt, receivables and payables are netted out between group companies)
r Matching (intragroup foreign currency inﬂows and outﬂows)
r Leading and lagging (adjustment of credit terms before and after due date)
r Price adjustment (raising/lowering selling prices to counter exchange rate moves)
r Invoicing in foreign currency (this cuts out transactional exposure)
r Asset/liability management (for balance sheet, income or cash ﬂow exposure)
Netting involves the settling of intragroup debt, receivables and payables for the net amount.
The simplest form of this is bilateral netting between two afﬁliates.
Matching is similar but can be applied both to intragroup and third-party ﬂows. Here, a
corporation “matches” its foreign currency inﬂows and outﬂows with respect to amount and
timing.

Managing Currency Risk I

147

Leading and lagging refer to adjusting credit terms between group companies, where
“leading” means paying an obligation in advance of the due date and “lagging” means after the
due date. This is a tactic aimed at capturing expected currency appreciation or depreciation.
Price adjustment involves increasing selling prices to counter exchange rate moves.
Invoicing in foreign currency reduces transaction risk relating speciﬁcally to exports and
imports.
Asset and liability management can be used to manage the balance sheet, income statement
or cash ﬂow exposure. Corporations can adopt either an active or a passive approach to asset
and liability management, depending on their currency and interest rate risk management
policy.
Finally one can hedge internally by increasing corporate gearing. Leverage shields corporations from taxes because interest is tax-deductible whereas dividends are not. However, the
extent to which one can increase gearing or leverage is limited by costs. That said, if currency
hedging reduces taxes, shareholders beneﬁt.
For practical purposes, three questions capture the extent of a corporation’s currency risk:
1. How quickly can a corporation adjust prices to offset exchange rate impact on proﬁt
margins?
2. How quickly can a corporation adjust sources for inputs and markets for outputs?
3. To what extent do exchange rate moves have an impact on the value of assets?
Within a corporation, it is usually the case that those who can come up with the best answers to
these questions are directly involved in such tasks as purchasing and production. Thus, ﬁnance
executives who focus exclusively on the credit and currency markets can in fact miss the real
essence of a corporation’s currency risk. Furthermore, the exact answers to these questions
need to be known not only by the oversight or risk committee, but preferably by the CEO
as well. If they don’t, they effectively don’t know both the value and the exposure of the
corporation.

7.7 KEY OPERATIONAL CONTROLS FOR TREASURY
Assuming the corporation has accepted the need to manage currency risk, appointed a risk or
oversight committee and in the case of large multinational corporations a chief dealer as well,
it needs then to establish a set of operational controls in order to be able to monitor that risk and
ensure inappropriate positions are not being taken. The importance of doing this is underlined
every time the news headlines show another corporation has lost millions of pounds, dollars or
yen by not putting such controls in place, or rather by not ensuring their enforcement. There
are other operational controls that are important, but among the key ones to put in place are
the following:

r Position limits — Positions above a certain limit or threshold should not be undertaken
without the written authorization of the chief dealer, Treasurer, oversight committee and the
board.
r Position monitoring — Treasury must have the technological and manpower capability to
monitor and mark-to-market all the currency and interest rate positions it has taken on at
any one time.
r Performance benchmarks should be established — For corporations that only participate
in the currency market for hedging purposes, currency hedging benchmarks should be

148

Currency Strategy

established. For those that are allowed to trade in the currency market, a trading budget
should be established at the start of the year and the performance monitored on a monthly
or quarterly basis.

7.8 TOOLS FOR MANAGING CURRENCY RISK
The board has given Treasury free rein to manage the corporation’s currency risk within the
parameters set out in the currency risk management policy. Within that policy, there should
be a section on what ﬁnancial instruments can be used for this purpose. Hedging currency
risk in no longer a simple matter of using vanilla forwards and options. As the needs of the
modern corporation have changed, so the tools or structures for hedging that risk have changed
accordingly, consisting of ever greater speciﬁcity and ﬂexibility to meet those needs. Most of
the development within this ﬁeld has happened in ﬁnancial options, given the more ﬂexible
nature of the option instrument relative to the forward. Thus, I present a pair of tables looking
for the most part at the types of option structures that corporations are using today, breaking
these down into “traditional” (Table 7.1) and “enhanced” (Table 7.2) structures, relating to
their degree of sophistication.

Table 7.1 Traditional hedging structures
Instrument

Deﬁnition

Advantages

Disadvantages

Plain vanilla
call

Buy an upside strike in an
exchange rate with no
obligation to exercise

Higher cost than more
sophisticated structures

Plain vanilla
forward

Buy a currency contract
for future delivery at a
price set today
Buy an at-the-money call
(ATMF) and sell a low
delta call

Simplicity, cheaper than
the forward and the
maximum loss is the
premium
You are 100% hedged

Call spread

Calendar
spread
Risk reversal

“Seagull”

Buy a 3M call and sell a
1M call (of the same
delta)
Buy a 25 delta call, sell a
25 delta put

Buy an ATMF call, sell a
low delta call and sell a
downside put

Lower cost than a vanilla
call
Allows you to capture a
timing view on FX
moves
Risk reversals capture the
market’s “skew” thus
they offer buying/
selling opportunity
relative to historical risk
reversals; can be
structured to be low or
zero cost
Can be structured to be
zero cost

High cost and risk of the
exchange rate moving
against you
Allows cover only for
modest exchange rate
appreciation as dictated
by strikes
Leaves you vulnerable to
adverse moves in one of
the legs
Writing the 25 delta put
leaves you vulnerable to
an adverse move in spot
which may cause a
spike higher in vol not
offset by the higher vol
in the call
Unless structured in a
ratio, leaves you net
short vol; not covered
against a major spot
move

Managing Currency Risk I

149

Table 7.2 Enhanced hedging structures
Instrument

Deﬁnition

Advantages

Disadvantages

Knock-out

Buy a 30 delta call
with a downside
knockout
(down-and-out)
Buy a 30 delta call
with upside
knock-in
(up-and-in)
Buy a double
knock-out

Reduces cost of call;
lets you re-hedge
lower down in the
exchange rate
Reduces the cost;
you are not hedged
until knocked-in

If knocked-out you
are not hedged and
vulnerable to an
adverse FX move
If knocked-in, you
are then
vulnerable to a
spot reversal
If knocked-out, you
will have to
re-hedge

Knock-in

Range binary

Window option

Fade-in option

Buy the right to buy
a 30 delta call in a
given number of
periods
Buy a 30 delta call
and fade into the
call incrementally
over a given
period of time

Convertible forward

Buy a call, sell a
down-and-in put

Enhanced forward

Buy an up-and-in–
down-and-in
call/sell an
up-and-in–downand-in put; buy an
up-and-out–downand-out call/buy
an up-and-out–
down-and-out
put
Buy a currency swap
and at the same
time pay ﬁxed and
receive ﬂoating

Cross-currency coupon swap

Cross-currency basis swap

Buy a currency
swap, at the same
time pay ﬂoating
interest in a
currency and
receive ﬂoating in
another

Gives you leverage
premium,
expecting range
trading
Lets your currency
view be “wrong” a
number of times
Allows you to “fade
in” to the call for a
period, thus giving
you more cost and
time ﬂexibility
Converts to forward
at agreed rate;
client can take
advantage of a
contrarian move in
spot up to the KI
If the currency stays
within an agreed
range, the rate is
signiﬁcantly
improved relative
the vanilla forward

Lets you manage FX
and interest rate
risk in markets
suited to the
corporation
Currency risk is the
same as a standard
currency swap, but
the basis currency
swap allows you
to capture interest
rate differentials

Higher cost than the
vanilla call
If spot moves while
you are fading in,
you do not capture
as much of the
move as with a
vanilla call
The strike is more
expensive than the
forward and must
be paid if structure
is knocked-in
If spot goes outside
of the range, the
forward rate to be
paid becomes
more expensive

Leaves the buyer
vulnerable to both
currency and
interest rate risk
The risk in this
structure is interest
rate risk rather
than currency risk

150

Currency Strategy

7.9 HEDGING STRATEGIES
7.9.1 Hedging Transaction Risk
The unbiased forward rate theory suggests the expected spot exchange rate is the forward
rate. If this worked, it would mean that failing to hedge currency risk would yield similar
results in the long run to hedging. There are two problems with this. First, the Treasurer would
probably be ﬁred before the “long run” arrived. Second, the unbiased forward rate theory is
a poor predictor of future exchange rates in practice. Basically it does not work. Therefore,
a corporation should use market-based currency forecasting in addition to the forward rate
to predict future exchange rates. The discretionary aspect to the currency forecast means the
corporation has the choice of hedging:

r Tactically and selectively
r Strategically
r Passively
Corporations vary in their attitude towards transaction hedging. Some hedge passively, that
is to say they maintain the same hedging structure and execute over regular periods during
the ﬁnancial year. This type of transaction hedging does not involve the corporation “taking a
(currency) view”. The other two types of hedging strategy do indeed involve taking a currency
view. Strategic hedging involves the corporation taking a view for a longer period than immediate transaction receivables and payables might require. In January 1999, I remember wave
after wave of European corporations hedging both developed and emerging market currency
risk as far out as one year. Corporations who usually called in USD20–30 million to hedge
very short-term receivables were calling for prices in a number of emerging market currency
pairs in USD200–300 million. The Russian crisis of August 1998 and the collapse of LTCM
had clearly scared global ﬁnancial markets. With the threat looming of devaluation in Brazil
(which indeed happened in January 1999), many European corporations were apparently taking advantage of the relaxation in global market tensions and reduced risk premiums in the
market in the wake of the Fed’s extraordinary monetary easing of August and September,
with three interest rate cuts in quick succession to hedge their transactional currency risk as
far out as they could go. That is an example of strategic hedging. Finally, tactical and selective hedging of transactional currency risk is the usual business that a corporate dealing desk
does with its clients. A bank’s clients may choose to allow certain currency exposures to be
translated at the period end, and others they may choose to hedge, depending crucially on
their currency view. Typically, it makes sense for a corporation to use the tactical and selective approach for most transactional currency risks and only occasionally to pull the trigger
on strategic hedging should the need arise. While passive hedging may appeal to some, it
hurts ﬂexibility, not only with regard to the hedging strategy but also with regard to domestic
pricing.
7.9.2 Hedging the Balance Sheet
While corporate Treasury is usually active in hedging transaction currency risk, it rarely considers translation risk — or hedging the balance sheet. This is largely because balance sheet
risk is largely made up of foreign direct investment or the debt structure of the corporation. In
the ﬁrst case, the management has a natural and instinctive objection to the idea of hedging
@Team-FLY

Managing Currency Risk I

151

the balance sheet risk, involving a direct investment abroad, since that would seem to negate
the reason for the initial investment. For this very reason, many corporations do not hedge
translation or balance sheet risk because of:

r The long-term nature of their investments in subsidiaries
r The perceived zero-sum nature of currency risk over the long term
r Accounting and tax issues
r Cash ﬂow impacts

A further disincentive is that currency translation affects the balance sheet rather than the
income statement, which may make it less of an immediate priority for management. Equity
analysts tend to focus on EBIT (or EBITDA) before debt/equity ratios. Eventually, however,
the deterioration in balance sheet ratios can impact the corporation’s average cost of capital
and ultimately its valuation in the market place.
Example
European exporters with US subsidiaries have seen two major beneﬁts as a result of the Euro’s
weakness against the US dollar over the last two years. Firstly, at the direct level, this Euro
weakness has made their exports cheaper to the US, allowing them to lower export prices and
thus gain market share. Secondly, Euro weakness has, just as we saw with the previous Polish
example, boosted the Euro value of their US subsidiaries. At some stage, the Euro’s decline
against the dollar may reverse. How would the corporate Treasury best cope with this? The
export question concerns transaction exposure. The question of the subsidiary’s value when
translated back into Euros is one of translation currency risk or exposure. In this case, both
types of “polar” hedge — zero or 100% hedged — seem inappropriate. The risk of the Euro
rallying on a sustained basis against the dollar may be seen by many as small, but it is not
zero. Therefore it would be inappropriate to have a zero-rate balance sheet hedge to cover
the risk of valuation loss in the subsidiary. On the other hand, it would also seem extreme
to hedge 100% of the subsidiary’s value. A neat way round this dilemma might be to use a
variable hedge ratio for net balance sheet exposures, which are triggered by the interest rate
differential. Remember that when hedging balance sheet risk, what you are hedging is the net
assets (gross assets less liabilities) of the subsidiary or subsidiaries that may be affected by
an adverse exchange rate move. Thus, important considerations are the ﬁnancing, net cash
ﬂows and intangibles relating to those subsidiaries. The corporation’s debt structure is also
an important consideration. Corporations with higher local tax rates tend to debt ﬁnance their
investments in order to reduce their average cost of capital.
There are two parts to this issue however. Up to now, we have looked at the idea of hedging
the risk within the consolidated balance sheet relating to foreign investment. The other part of
this issue relates to the corporation’s debt proﬁle. The risk this represents is broadly affected by
the debt’s currency and maturity composition. The corporation can change this currency and
maturity composition to reduce the degree to which exchange rates are able to cause volatility
in net equity and earnings. Optimization can be used for this purpose, though this will not
completely eliminate currency risk and tactical hedging may be needed in addition.
There is no question that hedging balance sheet risk is more easily quantiﬁable than is
the case with economic risk. That said, hedging the remaining currency exposure after you
optimize the debt composition remains a controversial subject because it can be expensive, the
corporation may regret the decision to hedge if exchange rates do not move in the anticipated

152

Currency Strategy

direction and balance sheet hedging may cause either cash ﬂow or earnings volatility, which is
in fact what you are trying to avoid. Ultimately, the decision whether or not to hedge balance
sheet risk must be a function of weighing the real costs of hedging against the intangible costs
of not hedging. This is certainly not science. That should not be an excuse however for ignoring
balance sheet risk.
7.9.3 Hedging Economic Exposure
Economic risk or exposure reﬂects the degree to which the present value of future cash ﬂows
may be affected by exchange rate moves. However, exchange rate moves are themselves
related through PPP to differences in inﬂation rates. A corporation whose foreign subsidiary
experiences cost inﬂation exactly in line with the general inﬂation rate should see its original
value restored by exchange rate moves in line with PPP. In that case, some may argue economic
exposure does not matter. However, most corporations experience cost inﬂation that differs from
the general inﬂation rate, which in turn affects their competitiveness relative to competitors.
In this case, economic exposure clearly does matter and the best way to hedge it is to ﬁnance
operations in the currency to which the corporation’s value is sensitive.

7.10 OPTIMIZATION
As with investors, corporations can use an “optimization” model to create an “efﬁcient frontier”
of hedging strategies to manage their currency risk. This measures the cost of the hedge against
the degree of risk hedged. Thus, the most efﬁcient hedging strategy is that which is the cheapest
for the most risk hedged. This is a very efﬁcient and useful tool for hedging currency risk in
a more sophisticated way than just buying a vanilla hedge and “hoping” it is the appropriate
strategy. Hedging optimizers frequently compare the following strategies to ﬁnd the optimal
one for the given currency view and exposure:
