
skirmish that followed, bulls stood their ground well (T 8 ) and this now
-

,

165

Understanding Price Action
provided a stronger base for a bull-side wager (pattern break pullback
entry above bar 8).

More interesting than the entry on this trade (if accepted at all) is

the way the position could have been managed once open. In fact, the
reason this chart is selected is to point out a reversal exit that seem­
ingly defies standard operating policy, yet is defensible nonetheless. It
concerns the exit below bar 10.
To understand this call, we have to examine closely what exactly took
place after entry on the break of bar 8. First off, the breakout bar was a
huge powerbar that provided the trade with an excellent start. But then
the bears struck back. Their first feat was to put in a decent looking
powerbar of their own (9), but since it failed to match the strength of its
bullish neighbor, there was no reason yet to question the breakout, not
even if another bar was to extend the pullback all the way to the break­
out level. As we know very well, the first pullback that comes to test a
broken barrier is a likely candidate to get picked up.
Things are different, though, when there are strong signs of con­
trarian aggression within the correction. This is more likely to instill
suspicion, if not fear, in the minds of those positioned in line with the
break. And their potential companions on the sidelines may now view
the correction with less appetite as well. When in position and faced
with such predicament, always an option is to embrace the principle of
"better-safe-than-sorry".
Were such ominous signs present in the 9- 1 0 progression? Let's take
a moment to examine how things played out exactly. Right after bar 9
had come to a bearish close, new bulls arrived on the scene to counter
the bear attack with equal prowess. To visualize their initial success,
take careful note of the shape of bar 10. It started out at the low of bar
9 and then ran all the way up to the high of it; at the high, try to pic­
ture that at that point in time this bar will have shown a strong white
body, no doubt a pleasurable sight to all bulls in position. But then
things took a nasty turn. Within its 5-minute span, bar 1 0 went from
highly bullish to super bearish, a collapse that will have alarmed even
the most optimistic bull. Not only did the bar close at its low and even

166

Chapter 6

Manual Exits - Reversal Exit

lower than its bearish neighbor, it also formed a strong bearish combi
with that same bar (9- 1 0) .
This leaves u s to answer whether the bearish implications were in­
deed disturbing enough for the break of bar 1 0 to have signaled a valid
reversal exit on the long. To determine this with neutral eyes, we have
to fully ignore the bearish panic move that followed, for this may have
been a reaction to a US news report that favored the dollar ( 16 : 00 CET).
The technical question of relevance here is whether the adverse combi
9-10 was to be regarded as part of a relatively harmless pullback, or a
harbinger of more trouble ahead and thus a legitimate reason to exit
below.
Apart from the fact that the upcoming news report may already have
been reason to exit the long, or not to have entered on it in the first
place (see News Report Exit earlier in this chapter) , there is another way
to address this issue and that is to find out if we can detect within the
post-breakout action any signs of an M-pattern reversal formation.
There are only three bars outside the broken pattern line but if we
track them closely, bar by bar, we can see that they indeed make up an
M-formation variant. The bullish breakout bar is the right leg up; bar
9 is the middle-part down, and bar 10 is the middle-part up, as well as
the right leg powerbar down. This is an M-pattern variant and it harbors
within it the same breakout potential that we have come to appreciate
when trading off a combi setup. This is not to suggest that we should
make it a habit to immediately exit on any adverse combi; but the stron­
ger they present themselves, particularly in conditions that weren't too
favorable to begin with (but acceptable enough to trade), the more their
message should be taken to heart. In our next example, Figure 6.6, we
will explore some more variants of this most potent three-bar reversal
pattern: a powerbar followed by an adverse combi.

167

Understanding Price Action
·IFig 6.61

'WIINI. ProReamme.com

eur/usd 5-minute

1 .275

11:00

12:00

uoo

14:00

15:00

16:00

11:00

Figure 6.6 Before closing up bullishly, bar 2 had put in a ceiling test with

the high of bar 1 , plus a touch on the 2Sema and the round number;
this triple provided a solid base for the pattern break combi setup as
depicted, just outside the flag line. It is always nice to see a break im­
mediately take off, but alas, that is no guarantee for reaching target.
On the good side, when a trade starts to falter well away from entry, the
chances to exit with minimal damage, or even with profit, are usually
quite good. Of course, this is beneficial only if the reversal exit is part of
operating tactics.
It may not be so obvious at first sight, but the three-bar progression
3-4 is an M-pattern variant, not unlike the one discussed in the previ­
ous example, Figure 6.5 (concerning the 9- 1 0 situation). In this case, it
is a reversed combi that followed the bullish powerbar, but such order
does not alter the implications of the pattern itself. Readers familiar
with Japanese candlestick analysis may have recognized this three-bar
progression as the evening-star, a pattern renowned for its tendency to
trigger a bearish reversal from the top of a bull swing. Progression 3-4
represents a most classic version: a bullish powerbar on the left, a small
doji in the middle (false high) and a bearish powerbar on the right. The
6-7 progression is a variant of it.
Equally notorious is the evening-star's bullish mirror image, the
morning-star, particularly when situated in the bottom of a bear swing.
Progression 8-9 depicts a rather aggressive version, but if we track the
bars individually, the W-characteristics are easily found: bar 8 forms
the right leg down as well as the middle-part up; the bar in the middle,

168

Chapter 6

Manual Exits - Reversal Exit

although not the classic doji, is the middle-part down and a false low
with bar 8; powerbar 9 is the right leg up. Take note of the bullish re­
sponse when the high of bar 9 was taken out (a bit over the top, though) .
It doesn't require much imagination to find variations of evening and
morning-star patterns in almost every notable turn; but before looking
upon them as holy grail setups, do keep in mind that these patterns are
best judged in the light of the bigger picture. For example, an evening­
star break in a bull trend could trigger an exit on a long, but does not
necessarily make for a "safe" entry short.
In accordance with reversal exit policy, we could have used the break
of bar 4 to exit the long position for a minimal loss of 1 or 2 pip. One
could argue that this is against standard procedure, because it involves
the much-refuted break-even exit on a first pullback reaction. All true,
but ifwe compare progression 3-4 with the overall price action up to that
point, we can clearly see that we are not dealing here with a "harmless"
pullback in which the bars calmly retrace against the initial breakout.
In fact, bar 4 was the most bearish bar of the session so far. Another
issue of concern was that the entry on the long was taken about 7 or 8
pip above the 50-level, which had the stop uncomfortably positioned a
little below the adverse magnet. While not necessarily a reason to have
skipped the trade altogether (although I am never a big fan of trading
for continuation in the highs of a rally, especially during lunch hours),
this is certainly something to take into account when a position starts
to struggle and turn.
Furthermore, the 3-4 evening-star was not only of concern to bulls
who had bought themselves in from above the 50-level; those sitting on
profit from the UK morning bull rally will have taken note of the implica­
tions as well (extra sell-side potential). All in all, with adverse pressure
clearly visible, and possibly more of it on the lurk, a reversal exit on the
break of bar 4 is a defensible call.
Not much later the chart sent out another strong warning that bears
meant business above this round number. Following a brief bounce at
5 , the market had printed a second evening-star pattern (6-7) . Interest­
ingly, if we link both of them together, they make up the unmistakable
contours of an even bigger M-pattern (3-7) . If this does still not fit the

169

Understanding Price Action
description of a reversal exit candidate, then what does. On top of that,
bar 7 had already pierced a trendline on the way down; although a line
perforation by itself is usually not the most reliable harbinger of imme­
diate follow-through, with an M-pattern preceding the break, the event
certainly gains relevance.
Note: Whenever a significant trendline, or even a mediocre pattern

line, gets broken against a position, the implications can be equally
strong as those of the broken right leg powerbar in an M or W-forma­
tion. This implies that these perforations can also be used for exiting
purposes, or at least they should be taken into account on the scale of
pros and cons. In the end, when it comes to staying in or bailing out, it
is always a matter of weighing the technical odds. Should the prospects
of reaching target have gone down considerably, for whatever reason,
then, by all means, bailing out is always an option, regardless of what
exactly triggers the exit. The trick, of course, is to overrule the instinct
of flight and to judge each situation purely on technical grounds.
Later in the session, the chart came up with another evening-star
pattern, and this one, too, clearly lived up to its reputation: progression
1 0- 1 1 (quite a rough variant) . And at the end of the ensuing pullback,
yet another morning-star popped up ( 12- 1 3) .
Slightly off topic: if we are to judge pullback 1 1 - 1 2 purely on its rela­
tion with the foregoing rally 9- 1 0, it was an orderly, diagonal progression
and although it had retraced only about 40 percent, the correction was
substantial enough to reach the trending 25ema. That usually sits
well with a pullback reversal. However, if we consider the origin of the
trending move before it, there is a good reason here to be very cautious
about trading for continuation. Rallies that apparently take off "out of
nowhere", like the 9- 1 0 progression, crossing from bearish to bullish
territory without so much as a fight, are often regarded with a healthy
dose of suspicion. And that tends to have a limiting effect on pullback
reversal participation (and thus on follow-through). This is not to say,
however, that we should label these situations as untradable per se; but
should we decide to give it a shot, some specific entry conditions need
to be taken into account.
First off, zooming in on the action in the turn, we can see that morn-

1 70

Chapter 6

Manual Exits - Reversal Exit

ing-star 1 2- 13 (pullback reversal setup) was followed by an inside bar
doji outside the pullback line. So this set up a very nice pattern break
combi as well. But more important here were the entry conditions. Note
that the setup bars were all positioned right underneath the round
number level; although prices still needed to trade away from it, the
immediate danger of the adverse magnet was now reduced most consid­
erably. To understand the benefit, imagine for a moment that not long
after a successful breakout, prices would have come back to test the
round number, say, at point 14. If so, they stood to bounce favorably
in a triple of the 25ema, the round number and a ceiling test with the
highs of the morning-star pattern. And without the trade turning red
(no immediate danger for the stop) . Although hardly a guarantee for a
successful outcome, such bounce potential is always a welcome asset
in the total concept of a trade (a bounce could also facilitate a reversal

exit later on).
If we compare this entry setting with the break above bar 2, we can
see that on our earlier trade the round number was not nearly as fa­
vorably positioned, as a consequence of our entry being a number of
pip above it. Insignificant as these differences may appear on the price
axis, they can make all the difference when working with tight stops.
Put in another way: in questionable situations as shown above (regard­
ing continuation) , entry conditions of excellent standing may at times
tip the balance in favor of participation. But do be mindful not to resort
to these tactics when the session's overall pressure speaks unfavorably
of the event. And needless to mention also, conservative traders can
always skip any offer that does not meet their standard of indisputable
validity.
In our next chapter, we will have a closer look at the often subtle
yet crucial differences between favorable and unfavorable conditions.
But before going there, let us take up one last example of reversal exit
technique.

1 71

Understanding Price Action
IFi g 6 .71 www.ProRealTime.com

1 .33

eur/usd 5-minute

132

• ProRealrme.com
1200

14:00

15:00

16:00

18:00

17:00

Figure 6.7 It's not hard to detect the features of an M-pattern r�versal

in progression 4-S-6-7. But how about 4-S? Although less outspoken,
these three bars make up an evening-star variant, not unlike the first
pattern discussed in our previous chart (Figure 6.6, progression 3-4) .
However, in this version, the bear leg at S is rather small in comparison
to the bull leg at 4. When it comes to a signal bar for exiting purpos­
es, a powerbar (in relation to the neighboring activity) definitely earns
preference over a mediocre bar. The break of the latter tends to have
less of a bite, and is thus more prone to result in a shake (reversal exit
trap).
Even though bar S wasn't taken out in this chart, an exit below it
may have been premature for another reason also: the market was in
very bullish mode and had just broken away from a fine bull-flag (2 3
-

hanging from 1 -2 ) . In such an environment, it is fair to anticipate that
not too many bulls would immediately chicken out of their longs when
presented with a relatively minor reversal bar break.
Fair enough. But what if there are two evening-stars in a row. As
we can see, just a few bars later progression 6-7 finished off a textbook
M-pattern formation (4-7) ; and this time the right leg of it was more
prominently displayed (7) .
An M-pattern like 4-7 may not have the power to fully turn a trend­
ing session around, it is certainly an element of concern, specifically to
the parties, like ourselves, who entered on the flag break with a tight
stop for protection. If we then look at where the SO-level magnet was
located in relation to our stop, I believe we have little explaining to do

1 72

Chapter 6

Manual Exits - Reversal Exit

to justify a reversal exit on the break of bar 7. A pretty easy scratch, at
next to no damage.
This leaves us to evaluate the break of the rectangle pattern. The
reader is prompted to take note of a rather common mistake, quite re­
silient among traders, but essentially not too hard to avoid. It regards
the distinction between a reversal pattern for exiting purposes and one
on which break to take position.
Neutrally regarded, the four-hour range within the box had all the
makings of a reversal formation. If we track the bars from left to right,
we could look upon the total progression as an elongated M-pattern, or
maybe a flattened version of the head-and-shoulders formation. Thus,
we cannot blame a bull for exiting his long on the break of bar 8. But
a bear would have done well here to at least think twice about shorting
the event.
How could the break of such a fine barrier get a bear in trouble? If
we solely concentrate on the box progression, shorting below bar 8 does
not look so bad. But if we take into account the bull rally from which
the box was hanging, it is not hard to grasp why the sell-side potential
was limited. For several hours the bullish pressure may have lain dor­
mant, but that doesn't take away from the fact that the chart was still in
bullish mode. In such a session, basically any lower level could trigger
a new round of buying, even below a broken range. This is not to say
that a nimble scalper would not be able to steal some pip in the initial
breakout, but those who aim for more are well advised to at least moni­
tor their positions with a sharp eye on the post-breakout action.
Not serving the bearish cause either was the 50-level running directly
underfoot. And not much below it there waited another level of potential
support: a 50 percent retracement of the UK morning bull rally. All told,
the overall conditions were unsupportive of a serious break, which is
why the short below bar 8 was of dubious quality at best. But now that
we're at it, let us look at the options on how to have handled a situation
like this if caught in it anyway.
Initially, the break met with nice follow-through. Surely a number of
bulls will have exited their longs below the box barrier, and eager bears
will have been happy to play short; that is double pressure in favor

1 73

Understanding Price Action
of the break. However, as is often seen in breakout situations that go
against the tide, participation tends to dry up quickly at the first signs
of stalling momentum. And with reason: if taking position a little too far
away from a breakout level is already dangerous when going with the
trend, then even more so when going against it.
When compared to some of the reversal clusters discussed earlier
on, the 9- 1 1 buildup below the box barrier may appear quite nonde­
script, but this hardly mitigates the message within. Perhaps a bear in
position may have argued that prices stood good chance to bounce back
from the box barrier extension, as in many a post-breakout situation
(think pattern break pullback setup). But before such reasoning is ap­
plied, it would be wise not to lose track of the way the correction to the
broken barrier is built up.
Note: To distinguish between a "harmless" pullback and its more
poisonous counterpart, chart conditions may already put in their bit,
but very often the nature of the correction itself provides all the infor­
mation needed. On balance, an orderly, diagonal pullback to a broken
barrier is much less likely to scare breakout traders out of position than
anything that rebelliously travels sideways for a number of consecutive
bars. Such an ominous cluster may still break in favor of the original
breakout, but should it be broken at the other end, particularly with a
powerbar involved, the adverse implications are best not taken lightly.
Given the poor prospects for the bear break to begin with, perhaps
a reversal exit on the break of bar 1 0 was already a defensible call, but
most certainly on the break of bar 1 1 .

I[ not fully convinced of the bullish implications yet, three bars later
the break of bar 1 2 offered bears another major clue that prices weren't
likely to travel south anytime soon. And if that too was still no reason
to throw in the towel on the short, the absolute point of no return lay
above bar 1 3 . And still at zero damage. Best to accept!
For future purposes, it is elementary to absorb and remember the
way the bearish break below bar 8 was defied, for it is very common
practice. Take specific note of the W-features already in the making,

8 - 1 1 , 8- 1 2 and 8 - 1 3 . But do realize also that this type of response is not
just a consequence of the unfavorable conditions regarding the bear-

1 74

Chapter 6

Manual Exits - Reversal Exit

ish breakout, it is often seen following a "proper" break in line with
dominance as well. Therefore, when the reversal exit is part of operat­
ing procedure, any sideways development following a breakout always
deserves the utmost attention.
The two main things to take away from the chart above is that (a)
trend players in position will not easily exit, and (b) trend players on
the sidelines will be happy to accept almost any favorable level to join
in, even in defiance of a countertrend break. In other words, the more
a trade is set against the prevailing trend, the better the climate for the
contrarian trap.
This concludes our discussion on the reversal exit, but we will see
many more examples in the pages and chapters to come. On a final
note, as much as we can train our eyes to detect the typical warning
signs of an upcoming reversal, not always will we be so fortunate as to
receive them in time. In this respect, the best thing any trader can do for
himself is to at least shun the ventures that stand poor chance of suc­
cess from the outset. Our next chapter is specifically designed to shed
more light on this most crucial concept.

1 75

Chapter 7

Skipping Trades and Trad ing Breaks for Failure

Now that we have established a practical framework for entry and exit
techniques, it is essential to dig a bit deeper into the subtleties of trade
selection. For even with a decent methodology in place, nothing is more
common than to slip into the habit of accepting wagers of the unsa­
vory kind. Sure enough, psychological issues may play their fair part
in these matters, but all too often the root of this behavior simply lies
within a technical misconception of sorts. And chances are, we need not
look hard to pinpoint the most likely culprit: spending too much atten­
tion on the limited sphere of a setup and too little on the conditions and
pressures in which it shows up.
Saving yourself just one or two unnecessary losses per week could
already mean the difference between success and failure in this field. It
is therefore of crucial importance to embrace the virtues of trade selec­
tion from the very start. And this will keep you pleasantly ahead of all
those who take a less diligent approach.
Learning to be more selective not only serves to minimize our own
misfortunes, it will give us a better view on the trials and tribulations of
our fellow traders in the field. This harbors a strategic benefit not to be

taken lightly. After all, if we perceive the conditions highly unsupportive

of a certain break, yet we see traders act on the offer, this could entail
that at least some of these parties may soon find themselves forced to
bail out. And as we know, their flights to safety could help to swing the
market the other way around.

1 77

Understanding Price Action
There is one such setting that, in a certain climate of conditions,
could set up so well that it deserves a special spot in our toolbox of
favorite trade setups. This is when a particular breakout shows all the
characteristics of a tradable event (boundary, buildup, signal bar, etc) ,
if not for the fact that it clearly goes up against the dominant pressure.
Should the trap indeed fall shut on those who accept, this could set up
a counterbreak in line with dominance.
Understandably, not all false breakouts automatically qualify to be
traded in the opposite direction, which is why we need to establish a
good view on the requirements involved. But those that do pass the test
may very well be among the most potent of trade setups when it comes
to generating immediate follow-through. Should we take position on
such a counterbreak event, we can refer to this as trading a break for
failure.
How is this different from our other ventures? The main difference
lies within the contrarian touch. On a regular pattern break trade, for
example, the pre-breakout tension at the pattern boundary builds up
towards a breakout in line with the dominant pressure; on these type of
wagers there is no contrarian element involved. When we trade a break
for failure, on the other hand, the initial buildup is directed towards
what we perceive to be the nonfavorable side of the market. Now the
idea is not to trade the break from this buildup progression, but to an­
ticipate and trade the failure of it. (At times, this setup can bear strong
resemblance with a pullback reversal, or even a pattern break variant.)
In the coming pages, several chart examples will demonstrate the
tactics involved, but do keep in mind that before even considering to
exploit the follies of others, our first priority, always, is to avoid getting
caught in the notorious traps ourselves. Below is a list of common trad­
ing errors, all of which we have already taken up one way or another in
earlier discussions. Yet as easy as these mistakes can be pointed out on
the drawing board, with similar ease they can be overlooked in a live­
market environment where all sorts of devious emotions are known to
take their toll on a trader's better judgment.
Typical trading errors are:
