
Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 RECOMMENDED READING 
          Know thyself. 
 — Socrates 
 T HOSE WANTING MORE IN-DEPTH INFORMATION about relative and absolute momentum should consult the research papers listed in the bibliography. You should be able to find most of them online by doing a search on their titles or the authors’ names. Many are also available on the Social Science Research Network (SSRN): 
            http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/DisplayAbstractSearch.cfm . 
 As we know from George Santayana, those who cannot learn from history are doomed to repeat it. In the words of Warren Buffett’s mentor, Benjamin Graham, “The investor’s chief problem and even his worst enemy is likely to be himself.” The following books deal primarily with investor psychology, behavioral finance, and the history of financial markets. They should help you make better investment decisions. 
 Ariely, Dan (2009), Predictably Irrational , New York: HarperCollins Publishers. 
 Baker, Kent H., and Victor Ricciardi (2014), Investor Behavior: The Psychology of Financial Planning and Investing , Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Chancellor, Edward (1999), Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation , New York: Plume Books. 
 Galbraith, John Kenneth (1990), A Short History of Financial Euphoria , New York: Penguin Books. 
 Evans, Dylan (2012), Risk Intelligence: How to Live with Uncertainty , New York: Free Press. 
 Fox, Justin (2009), The Myth of the Rational Market , New York: HarperCollins Publishers. 
 Ilmanen, Antti (2011), Expected Returns: An Investor’s Guide to Harvesting Market Rewards , West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
 Kahneman, Daniel (2011), Thinking, Fast and Slow , New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
 Kindleberger, Charles P., and Robert Z. Aliber (2011), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises , New York: Palgrave MacMillan. 
 Knight, Timothy (2014), Panic, Prosperity, and Progress: Five Centuries of History and the Markets , Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Mauboussin, Michael J. (2008), More Than You Know: Finding Financial Wisdom in Unconventional Places , New York: Columbia University Press. 
 Nofsinger, John R. (2013), The Psychology of Inve s ting , 5th ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
 Shiller, Robert J. (2006), Irrational Exuberance , 2d ed., New York: Crown Books. 
 Shleifer, Andrei (2001), Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance , New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Thaler, Richard T. (1994), The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies of Economic Life , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Weatherall, James Owen (2013), The Physics of Wall Street: A Brief History of Predicting the Unpredictable , New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing.

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk