Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) or the “law of one price” is probably the best known exchange
rate model within currency analysis. The basic idea behind PPP is that in a world without
barriers to free trade the price of the same good must be the same everywhere over time. As a
result, the exchange rate must move towards a long-term equilibrium value that ensures this is
true. PPP or the law of price should hold if:

18

Currency Strategy

r There are no barriers to trade or arbitrage in the good
r There are no transaction costs
r The good being traded is perfectly homogeneous
This is best shown by an example. Say, for argument’s sake, the price of exactly the
same sports car in the Czech Republic and Germany is CZK1 million and EUR100,000.
If we use this sports car as broadly representative of the price differential between these two
countries, then we derive from this that the PPP equilibrium value of the Euro–Czech koruna
exchange rate should in turn be 10 (i.e. 1,000,000/100,000). Obviously, the prices in this example are not meant to be representative of the actual price of a sports car. Rather, we have
used these numbers to illustrate the basic concept more easily.
If the PPP equilibrium value of the Euro–Czech koruna exchange rate is 10, we can derive
from this ﬁrstly that the actual exchange rate should revert towards this over time and secondly
that the actual exchange rate reﬂects a quantiﬁable degree of over- or undervaluation relative
to that PPP value. At the time of writing, the actual Euro–Czech koruna exchange rate was
around 31.50. If we used our example to reﬂect the Euro–Czech koruna’s PPP value, this would
suggest the Czech koruna was signiﬁcantly undervalued relative to PPP and should appreciate
over time to eliminate that undervaluation. In a world where there are no barriers to trade or
knowledge, a German car buyer will be fully aware that the same car is cheaper in the Czech
Republic. Hence, if there are no laws against such practice, he or she will travel there, buy
the car and drive back. Whether or not this is realistic misses the point. Rather, it is meant to
illustrate the principle at work within the PPP concept. The transmission mechanism that is
at work in this example and more generally that would cause an eventual elimination of that
Czech koruna undervaluation is as follows:
Cheap currency → Attracts buyers → Increased demand to buy goods →
Currency appreciates
In this book, every effort will be made to spare the reader from complex mathematical formulae,
which though impressive do little to advance the argument in the face of incomprehension.
There are however a few basic mathematical constructs which have to be deﬁned, and PPP is
one of those. Thus, the basic mathematical expression of PPP is:
E=

P
P∗

Or, another way to express this is:
P = E × P∗
where
E = The PPP long-term equilibrium exchange rate value
P = Domestic price level of goods
P ∗ = Foreign price level of goods
This reﬂects the fundamental view of PPP, which is that the long-term equilibrium value of an
exchange rate is a direct function of the ratio between the “internal” prices of the same tradable
goods between two countries. Currency market practitioners, however, think of exchange rates
with regard to the base and the term currencies, naturally using the base currency ﬁrst, as the

Fundamental Analysis

19

point of reference. Thus, the exchange rate between the US and Japan is not seen as yen per
dollar, but expressed instead as dollar–yen. This is how foreign exchange traders quote and this
is how clients ask for those quotes. Thus, in our PPP formula, we could express this slightly
differently as:
E=

Pt
Pb

where:
E = The PPP long-term equilibrium exchange rate value
Pt = Price level in the term currency
Pb = Price level in the base currency
Returning brieﬂy to our sports car example, this is indeed how we derived the supposed PPP
value of the Euro–Czech koruna exchange rate using the price levels given.
1.1.1 Reasons for “Misalignments”
Exchange rates which do not reﬂect the PPP value are said to be “misaligned” and it is assumed
therefore that they have to revert towards PPP. Such misalignments are seen as being caused
by temporary distortions, either to the price of the good or the exchange rate, which should
quickly be eliminated by a rational, proﬁt-seeking market. In reality, such “misalignments”
can last for months or even years. In other words, traders, investors or corporations who base
short-term ﬁnancial decisions on the PPP model of exchange rate value do so at their own risk.
The track record of the PPP model over the short term leaves a lot to be desired, to the extent
it is known in the market as the “Pretty Poor Predictor”. How can such misalignments occur in
a free market economy where the price adjustment mechanism should be immediate? If there
is free trade between nations, a price differential in a good (or basket of goods) should create
an arbitrage opportunity — you buy the good in the cheaper country. Such buying should push
up the currency in the cheaper country relative to the more expensive one. Yet still, this is not
necessarily what happens over the short term. Why?

r We do not have perfectly free trade — Such a concept would imply zero import tariffs,
zero export subsidies and perfect competition across all business sectors. Needless to say,
this is not the case. Whatever progress we have made, we are not there yet. As a result, there
remain signiﬁcant trade-related price (and therefore exchange rate) distortions.
r The adjustment mechanism is not necessarily immediate — During periods of market
volatility, corporations may delay setting prices and budget exchange rates until they have a
better idea of where the appropriate levels should be to retain competitiveness and margin.
r The price of goods may not be the most important exchange rate determinant — A
basic PPP assumption is that the relative pricing of goods is the main driver of exchange
rates. However, since the liberalization of capital markets, this may no longer be the case.
r The good or basket of goods may not be exactly the same in different countries — The
consistency of the good should not be taken for granted as the same good may vary between
countries in terms of quality, cost and speed to market.
r Base-year effects — There is also the question of when to start the PPP analysis. Logic might
suggest starting from the end of the Bretton Woods exchange rate system in the 1971–1973
period, yet this took place at a time of very high inﬂation, thus signiﬁcantly distorting the
results.

20

Currency Strategy

1.1.2 Tradable and Non-Tradable Goods
There is a further point, which is that clear differentiation has to be made between tradable and
non-tradable goods. PPP may not hold for non-tradable goods such as services. The dry world
of economics is frequently best explained through example and anecdote. Thus, a haircut might
be cheaper in New York than London (most things are and this is not one of the exceptions), but
few people would be prepared to ﬂy to New York from London just to get that cheaper haircut.
This is not just because to do so you would have to pay for a London–New York return ﬂight,
which would negate any haircut-related gains you would make. Even supposing the air ticket
was free would you really ﬂy 8 hours for a cheaper haircut? The PPP concept assumes there
are no barriers to the arbitraging of price differentials, yet with non-tradable goods this may
not be the case. Granted, there may always be some wayward individuals who would actually
take that ﬂight!
PPP or the law of one price holds better of necessity for homogeneous commodities that are
traded internationally, with arbitrage opportunities being quickly eliminated. However, even
here, care is needed. While PPP may hold generally, prices even of homogeneous commodities
may vary widely between countries depending on local supply/demand dynamics. Indeed, the
very fact that the price of a McDonalds Big Mac, which is a homogeneous commodity, can
vary between countries for even a short period of time proves this point.
1.1.3 PPP and Corporate Pricing Strategy
The law of one price assumes the exchange rate will move over time so that the price of the
same good is the same everywhere. However, corporations do not necessarily follow this as
they may vary national prices of the same good to reﬂect a variety of factors in those countries
such as local supply/demand dynamics, delivery costs, cultural tastes, customer price tolerance,
target margin, competitor prices, market share considerations and so forth. To an economist,
such price variations represent temporary distortions, which should over time be eliminated
by market efﬁciency. To a corporate executive, faced with the frequently competing real-world
priorities of proﬁt maximization and raising market share, there may be nothing temporary
about such “distortions”. As a result, PPP may in some cases not hold over the “short term”
for homogeneous goods since such pricing strategies may not allow it to hold.
Example 1
In the mid-1990s, US–Japanese trade relations went through one of their periodic bouts of bitter
dispute, with the US side accusing Japan of a host of uncompetitive practices including “price
dumping”. Having followed this situation closely when I was a foreign exchange analyst living
in New York, I think it is a good practical example of the theoretical principle of PPP faced
with the real world of corporate pricing strategy. It was certainly a heated time, with news
headlines from trade representatives of both sides causing wild gyrations in the dollar–yen
exchange rate.
From a purely objective viewpoint, it should be instructive to look at the various transmission
mechanisms that were at work. PPP, of course, states that the price of the same good should be
the same everywhere over time and that the exchange rate should adjust to ensure this. How
then does an economist deal with a clear disparity in pricing? PPP suggests that this disparity
is unsustainable and that the market will move to eliminate it over time. Corporate pricing
@Team-FLY

Fundamental Analysis

21

strategy may however be an obstacle to this. In the case of the US–Japan trade deﬁcit, a key
issue — undoubtedly only one of many — was the US view that Japanese auto manufacturers
were selling their export production to the US at cheaper prices than those charged domestically
in Japan for the same production. Whatever the merits of this view, this makes perfect economic
sense. A Japanese manufacturer’s cost base is likely to be considerably higher than elsewhere.
Thus in order to maintain margin domestically it has little choice but to charge higher prices
domestically relative to those that would be tolerated elsewhere, such as in the US. A trade
negotiator, ﬁxated with the idea that trade is some kind of national war-game, would cry foul.
However, a higher domestic cost base means of necessity that a manufacturer of whatever
nationality either deliberately undercuts the domestic price structure, thus making a loss, or
keeps export prices lower than domestic ones.
The higher cost base and consumer price tolerance work hand in hand. In the US, because US
consumers are used to a system which exempliﬁes a very high level of competition, this drives
down retail prices, reducing consumer “price tolerance”. PPP theory states that the exchange
rate should adjust for price differentials in the same good. Thus, the currency where the good
is priced cheaper should appreciate relative to that where it is priced more expensively. In
this case, the US dollar should appreciate relative to the yen. Assuming that trade in autos
can affect exchange rates over a sustained period of time, this is what should take place in
the exchange rate as a result of the relationship between PPP and a potential price disparity
between Japanese autos sold in the US and Japan.
In reality, this is of course not what happened, conﬁrmation if such were needed that PPP
can be distorted by “temporary” factors. Between 1993 and 1995, the dollar–yen exchange
rate fell sharply from around 120 to a record low of 79.85, a decline of some 33%. A rise in
the yen against the US dollar should push Japanese export prices higher in US dollar terms.
As Japanese domestic prices are substantially higher than those tolerated in the US, such an
appreciation in the yen’s value would merely compound an existing problem. Our Japanese
manufacturer would face the dilemma of either maintaining the Japanese domestic price in
the US and thus losing market share — and pleasing the US trade negotiator — or cutting the
US dollar price sharply, sacriﬁcing its margin on the alters of sales and market share.
In the ﬁrst case, one would assume US consumers would not tolerate Japanese domestic
prices, that Japanese exports would fall as a result and that if PPP holds the yen would fall to the
extent that Japanese export production becomes competitive once more. In the second case, the
Japanese manufacturer could either cut its US price to the extent it attracted US consumers or
else to the extent it believed the perception of superior quality would offset a price differential
relative to its competitors. The natural inclination would be the latter, in which case PPP would
again be distorted because price would be “distorted” by the inﬂuence of consumer taste.
Hence, from an exchange rate perspective, one would not expect the dollar–yen exchange rate
to move to offset the price differential. Indeed, if anything it might actually move in favour of
the yen if there were a US preference for Japanese autos that offset price considerations, until
yen appreciation put the manufacturer’s US dollar prices under such upward pressure that it
was forced to raise them.
For such a dramatic move in the dollar–yen exchange rate, there is of course a third alternative
for our Japanese auto manufacturer, which is in the face of inexorable yen appreciation, to move
production out of Japan to the US. This is indeed what happened in speciﬁc cases and to an
extent how the two sides found some degree of compromise. From the perspective of PPP,
this did not end the issue because the newly US-made auto would still be cheaper than its
counterpart made back in Japan. However, it would no longer be exactly the same auto, taking

22

Currency Strategy

into account differences in quality, cost and so forth, thus one could argue that the law of
homogeneity no longer applies. This is splitting hairs. The important thing is to demonstrate
how PPP plays a part in the real world of merchandise trade and corporate pricing strategy.
Thus, care needs to be taken with PPP as it can be distorted by a wide variety of factors,
particularly over the short term. Over the long run, however, PPP serves as an extremely useful
benchmark. Indeed, another example should hopefully put the PPP model in a better light.
Example 2
The Economist newspaper uses a well-known method of monitoring PPP levels, the “Big Mac
Index”. This model of “burger-nomics” examines the domestic price of a McDonalds Big Mac
in a range of countries, translates that into US dollars and seeks to measure the disparity between
the price of a Big Mac in the US and that in other countries as a reﬂection of medium-term
under- or overvaluation.
To some, this may seem a jovial if spurious exercise, but it is PPP in its simplest and purest
form, not least because a Big Mac is a homogeneous product — it is the same wherever you
go. This is exactly what you need for PPP analysis in order to avoid distortions. Moreover,
the Big Mac Index actually has an impressive record of forecasting exchange rate trends over
long periods of time and as a result has been the subject of several academic research papers.
For instance, when the Euro came into being in January 1999, most currency forecasters
predicted the Euro–dollar exchange rate would appreciate over time — that is, the Euro would
appreciate against the dollar — based on anticipation of capital ﬂows and the view that the
new single currency was undervalued. The fact that most currency forecasters in turn got this
prediction entirely wrong shows the danger and the limitation of valuation considerations.
You can be looking at the wrong measure of valuation, and even if you are looking at the
right one you can get the wrong time horizon. To be fair to my fellow currency forecasters
in the industry, the Euro–dollar exchange rate did rise initially, reaching a high of 1.1885.
From then, however, it fell like a stone, grinding lower remorselessly, greatly disappointing
not only the expectations of the market, but also those of European Union ofﬁcials. One must
give credit where it’s due, however. In early 1999, not everyone was a raging bull on the Euro.
On January 7 of that year, The Economist published the latest readings of its Big Mac Index,
suggesting the Euro was not undervalued, but actually overvalued by some 13%! In order to
calculate the Big Mac PPP for the Euro–dollar exchange rate, you simply translate the Euro
price of a Big Mac into US dollars at the prevailing exchange rate and divide that by the
US dollar price of a Big Mac in the US. Clearly, if you had followed that forecast and run
your position over the next two years, you could have made a lot of money. The usefulness
of PPP applies not just with industrial country currencies but also with those of the emerging
markets.
In order to give a slightly more up-to-date edition of this entertaining — and informative —
variation on the theory of PPP equilibrium theory, I include Table 1.1 from The Economist
as of April 19, 2001. At the time, these results would have suggested a number of interesting
possibilities for currency valuation, some of which have proved largely accurate, others that
have yet to show such accuracy. Within the industrialized world, these results suggested at
the time that the Euro was still undervalued by around 11% as of mid-April 2001, estimating the PPP level for the Euro–dollar exchange rate at 0.99. In addition, it suggested that
the Japanese yen was around 6% undervalued against the dollar, implying a PPP rate for
dollar–yen of around 116. Subsequently, it should indeed be remembered that since then the

Fundamental Analysis

23

Table 1.1 McParity

[[Table not available in this electronic edition.]

Euro–dollar exchange rate has indeed appreciated from 0.88 through 1.00. Meanwhile, the
dollar–yen exchange rate fell from 124 to 116. Readers will no doubt claim that a plethora
of factors could have been at work, irrespective of goods’ price differentials and undoubtedly that was the case. That said, there is no getting away from the fact that the Big Mac
Index in this case showed the way in terms of the forthcoming trend for these exchange
rates.
As with every model, there are also cases where it has not worked so well and there are
indeed cases of that in Table 1.1 (e.g. the South African rand was undervalued by 53%). In
response, I would say that broadly speaking any type of PPP model should only be viewed
from a long-term perspective. In addition, it has to be acknowledged that PPP can be distorted
for substantial periods of time. Thus it may have differing levels of importance and relevance
depending on the type of currency market practitioner. For instance, a corporation that is looking
to hedge out a year’s worth of receivables may ﬁnd PPP a very useful valuation consideration
come January. That said, an investor would most likely not be able to wait that long. For a
trader, medium-term valuation considerations such as PPP cannot be afforded in a world of
split-second timing.

24

Currency Strategy

In the Big Mac example, “McParity” can be signiﬁcantly distorted by cultural and religious
considerations, notably in India and Israel. That said, while some in the market like to ridicule
PPP measures such as but not exclusive to this, the beauty of it is in its simplicity and transparency. Furthermore, its results have been impressive, certainly to the extent that it should be
taken seriously.
1.1.4 PPP and the Real Exchange Rate
The real exchange rate is a function of the price or inﬂation differential and the nominal
exchange rate. The relationship between the concept of PPP and the “real exchange rate” —
or the nominal exchange rate adjusted for price differentials — is of necessity a close and
important one. In line with this relationship is the core idea that if PPP is seen to hold over the
long term, then the real exchange rate should remain constant. This is the case because if PPP
holds relative price differentials between two countries will over the long term be offset by an
appropriate nominal exchange rate adjustment. Granted, the real exchange rate may ﬂuctuate
signiﬁcantly over the short term, with the result that such ﬂuctuations can have potentially
important economic impact, however, it should revert to mean over time assuming PPP holds.
When the real exchange rate is constant, the international price competitiveness of a country’s
tradable goods is maintained. Another way of expressing this is to say that when a country
experiences high inﬂation, its tradable goods become proportionally uncompetitive. In order
to restore price competitiveness, there has to be a depreciation of the nominal exchange rate.
In order to gain competitiveness, a country needs a real depreciation, not simply depreciation
in the nominal value of the exchange rate.
The behaviour of the real exchange rate and its components can be broken down into that
existing under ﬁxed and ﬂoating exchange rate regimes. Under a ﬁxed exchange rate regime,
the nominal exchange rate’s ability to move is of necessity limited, hence changes in the real
exchange rate must be a direct function of the change in the inﬂation differential, and this is
indeed what we ﬁnd empirically. By contrast, under a ﬂoating exchange rate regime, both
the nominal exchange rate and the inﬂation differential can change or “adjust” in economists’
jargon. Thus, the relationship between the real and the nominal exchange rates is considerably
closer. Indeed, because inﬂation differentials adjust relatively slowly in ﬂoating exchange rate
regimes, most of the adjustment to the real exchange rate comes from an adjustment in the
nominal exchange rate. Hence, the same cautions of applying PPP to nominal exchange rate
valuation should also apply to real exchange rate techniques.
To summarize this concept of PPP or the law of one price, it is a poor predictor of short-term
exchange rate moves. However, it is considerably more accurate on a multi-month or multiyear basis. Note that in the case of the Euro–dollar forecasts, the 13% overvaluation noted in
January 1999 and the 11% undervaluation noted in April 2001 was a multi-month guide to the
future nominal exchange rate. Thus, a corporate Treasury department or a long-term strategic
investor can ﬁnd a PPP model highly useful in terms of providing a directional framework for
medium- to long-term currency forecasting. A “macro” hedge fund or leveraged investor might
also ﬁnd this highly useful for spotting disparities between fundamental valuation and market
perception. On the other hand, this is clearly less so for short-term traders whose perspective
is measured in days or weeks.
Some ﬁnal points to note with regard to PPP:
