Reprinted with permission.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

149

(which now became much like a speculative warrant with
good terms) worth considerably more than cost as the ink
dried on acquisition papers; and
(3) the new "owners" then resorted to strategies, difficult
neither to conceive nor implement, including the
following:
(a) they eliminated many of the easily removable costs
(largely personnel costs) and sub-par segments which
in some mix (i) bedevil successful corporations (including ours) with sloth and folly and (ii) create their
humane grace and, through present sacrifice, good
long-term prospects, justifying sacrifice endured; and
(b) they sold off a few operations at super-high prices,
sometimes exercising the easiest microeconomic insight by selling to a direct competitor and sometimes
selling to a surprisingly easy-to-find non-competitive
corporate buyer, not owned by its managers, willing to
pay almost as high a price as a competitor would; and
(4) the new "owners" then profited, in due course, not only
from the tax effect and other simple reshuffling activities
described above, but also from the wonderful upside effects of extreme financial leverage during a long business
boom accompanied by a rising stock market.
Whether the country wants a large number (or even any) of its
large corporations to have extremely leveraged capitalizations, except through occasional adversity, presents interesting social questions. Is one social function of corporations to be financially strong
so that they act as shock absorbers, protecting dependent employees, suppliers and customers from part of the volatility implicit in
capitalism? Was Ben Franklin right when he included the following folk wisdom in Poor Richard's Almanac: "It is hard for an
empty sack to stand upright." Is a weak corporation, borrowed to
the hilt, the social equivalent of a bridge with an inadequate reserve of structural strength? Granting that leveraged buyouts
have some favorable effects (as well as unfavorable effects) on long
term efficiency, how many thousands of able people do we wish to
attract into promotional corporate recapitalization activity which
(1) reduces corporate income taxes, (2) often tests the limits of antitrust law, and (3) focuses business attention on short-term cash
generation to pay down oppressive levels of debt? Finally, as Columbia Law School's Professor Lou Lowenstein puts it (more or

150

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

less): "Do we really want entire corporate businesses, as important
social institutions, continuously traded like pork belly contracts?"
However the social questions are answered, three aspects of
the present situation are clear. First, the corporate tax effect is so
large in LBO transactions that easy success in such transactions
does not imply that success is easy in ordinary corporate acquisitions. Second, the hordes of leveraged-buy-out operators now with
us raise the general level of acquisition prices to the detriment of
other would-be acquirers, including Wesco, which are not willing to
maximize tax benefits through maximized borrowing. And, third,
the LBO operator will not go away so long as present permissive
laws last. The operators have a real advantage under such laws,
not just a fig leaf aiding promotion. Even though failure and disgrace will reduce their number, and prices paid in leveraged-buyout transactions will fall, the capitalized value of reducing the corporate income tax will remain. Therefore, plenty of rational incentive will remain for transactions. The LBO genie will encounter
reverses, but he is not going back in the bottle unless ordered to do
so by new laws.
It should also be noted that the LBO operators' incentives to
bid high do not end with real advantages derived from tax law and
willingness to reshuffle businesses with much speed and few
scruples. Additional incentives for high bids come from typical
structures in which general partners of LBO partnerships risk little
of their own money (often less than none after fees are taken into
account), yet share significantly in gains. Such arrangements are
similar to the system of the race track tout. And who has ever seen
a tout who didn't want his backer to make a lot of bets?
To Wesco, as a non-LBO operator, the good-corporate-acquisition game was always tough. And that game in each recent year
has become more like fishing for muskies at Leech Lake, in Minnesota, where the writer's earliest business partner, Ed Hoskins, had
the following conversation with his Indian guide:
"Are any muskies caught in this lake?"
"More muskies are caught in this lake than in any other lake
in Minnesota. This lake is famous for muskies."
"How long have you been fishing here?"
"19 years."
"And how many muskies have you caught?"
"None."
When a management has our point of view, infrequency of
business acquisition may safely be predicted. Whether this hap-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

151

pens, as we like to believe, because the game is hard for almost
everyone, or merely because the game is hard for us, the result for
Wesco shareholders is the same: less worthwhile activity than we
all would like. But there may be one consolation: A series of big,
incorrectable acquisition troubles, with no meaningful salvage, is
seldom caused by people who think the acquisition game is like
fishing for muskies at Leech Lake.

D.

Sound Acquisition Policies41

It may seem strange that we exult over a year in which we

made three acquisitions, given that we have regularly used these
pages to question the acquisition activities of most managers. Rest
assured, Charlie and I haven't lost our skepticism: We believe most
deals do damage to the shareholders of the acquiring company.
Too often, the words from HMS Pinafore apply: "Things are seldom what they seem, skim milk masquerades as cream." Specifically, sellers and their representatives invariably present financial
projections having more entertainment value than educational
value. In the production of rosy scenarios, Wall Street can hold its
own against Washington.
In any case, why potential buyers even look at projections prepared by sellers baffles me. Charlie and I never give them a glance,
but instead keep in mind the story of the man with an ailing horse.
Visiting the vet, he said: "Can you help me? Sometimes my horse
walks just fine and sometimes he limps." The vet's reply was
pointed: "No problem-when he's walking fine, sell him." In the
world of mergers and acquisitions, that horse would be peddled as
Secretariat.
At Berkshire, we have all the difficulties in perceiving the future that other acquisition-minded companies do. Like they [sic]
also, we face the inherent problem that the seller of a business
practically always knows far more about it than the buyer and also
picks the time of sale-a time when the business is likely to be
walking "just fine."
Even so, we do have a few advantages, perhaps the greatest
being that we don't have a strategic plan. Thus we feel no need to
proceed in an ordained direction (a course leading almost invariably to silly purchase prices) but can instead simply decide what
makes sense for our owners. In doing that, we always mentally
41 [Divided by hash lines: 1995; 1991 (the latter with similar versions beginning in 1982
and continuting thereafter).]

152

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

compare any move we are contemplating with dozens of other opportunities open to us, including the purchase of small pieces of the
best businesses in the world via the stock market. Our practice of
making this comparison-acquisitions against passive investments-is a discipline that managers focused simply on expansion
seldom use.
Talking to Time Magazine a few years back, Peter Drucker got
to the heart of things: "I will tell you a secret: Dealmaking beats
working. Dealmaking is exciting and fun, and working is grubby.
Running anything is primarily an enormous amount of grubby detail work ... dealmaking is romantic, sexy. That's why you have
deals that make no sense."
In making acquisitions, we have a further advantage: As payment, we can offer sellers a stock backed by an extraordinary collection of outstanding businesses. An individual or a family
wishing to dispose of a single fine business, but also wishing to defer personal taxes indefinitely, is apt to find Berkshire stock a particularly comfortable holding. I believe, in fact, that this calculus
played an important part in the two acquisitions for which we paid
shares in 1995.
Beyond that, sellers sometimes care about placing their companies in a corporate home that will both endure and provide
pleasant, productive working conditions for their managers. Here
again, Berkshire offers something special. Our managers operate
with extraordinary autonomy. Additionally, our ownership structure enables sellers to know that when I say we are buying to keep,
the promise means something. For our part, we like dealing with
owners who care what happens to their companies and people. A
buyer is likely to find fewer unpleasant surprises dealing with that
type of seller than with one simply auctioning off his business.
In addition to the foregoing being an explanation of our acquisition style, it is, of course, a not-so-subtle sales pitch. If you own
or represent a business earning $25 million or more before tax, and
it fits the criteria [set forth below], just give me a call. Our discussion will be confidential. And if you aren't interested now, file our
proposition in the back of your mind: We are never going to lose
our appetite for buying companies with good economics and excellent management.
Concluding this little dissertation on acquisitions, I can't resist
repeating a tale told me last year by a corporate executive. The
business he grew up in was a fine one, with a long-time record of
leadership in its industry. Its main product, however, was distress-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

153

ingly glamorless. So several decades ago, the company hired a
management consultant who-naturally-advised diversification,
the then-current fad. ("Focus" was not yet in style.) Before long,
the company acquired a number of businesses, each after the consulting firm had gone through a long-and expensive-acquisition
study. And the outcome? Said the executive sadly, "When we
started, we were getting 100% of our earnings from the original
business. After ten years, we were getting 150%."
It's discouraging to note that though we have on four occasions made major purchases of companies whose sellers were represented by prominent investment banks, we were in only one of
these instances contacted by the investment bank. In the other
three cases, I myself or a friend initiated the transaction at some
point after the investment bank had solicited its own list of prospects. We would love to see an intermediary earn its fee by thinking of us-and therefore repeat here what we're looking for:
(1) Large purchases (at least $10 million of after-tax
earnings),
(2) Demonstrated consistent earning power (future projections are of little interest to us, nor are "turnaround"
situations),
(3) Businesses earning good returns on equity while employing little or no debt,
(4) Management in place (we can't supply it),
(5) Simple businesses (if there's lots of technology, we won't
understand it),
(6) An offering price (we don't want to waste our time or that
of the seller by talking, even preliminarily, about a transaction when price is unknown).
We will not engage in unfriendly takeovers. We can promise
complete confidentiality and a very fast answer-customarily
within five minutes-as to whether we're interested. (With [H.H.]
Brown, we didn't even need to take five.) We prefer to buy for
cash, but will consider issuing stock when we receive as much in
intrinsic business value as we give.
Our favorite form of purchase is one [in which] the company's
owner-managers wish to generate significant amounts of cash,
sometimes for themselves, but often for their families or inactive
shareholders. At the same time, these managers wish to remain
significant owners who continue to run their companies just as they
have in the past. We think we offer a particularly good fit for own-

154

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

ers with such objectives, and we invite potential sellers to check us
out by contacting people with whom we have done business in the
past.
Charlie and I frequently get approached about acquisitions
that don't come close to meeting our tests: We've found that if you
advertise an interest in buying collies, a lot of people will call hoping to sell you their cocker spaniels. A line from a country song
expresses our feeling about new ventures, turnarounds, or auctionlike sales: "When the phone don't ring, you'll know it's me."42
Besides being interested in the purchase of businesses as described above, we are also interested in the negotiated purchase of
large, but not controlling, blocks of stock comparable to those we
hold in Capital Cities, Salomon, Gillette, USAir, Champion, and
American Express. We are not interested, however, in receiving
suggestions about purchases we might make in the general
stockmarket.

E.

On Selling One's Business43

Most business owners spend the better part of their lifetimes
building their businesses. By experience built upon endless repetition, they sharpen their skills in merchandising, purchasing, personnel selection, etc. It's a learning process, and mistakes made in one
year often contribute to competence and success in succeeding
years.
In contrast, owner-managers sell their business only oncefrequently in an emotionally-charged atmosphere with a multitude
of pressures coming from different directions. Often, much of the
pressure comes from brokers whose compensation is contingent
upon consummation of a sale, regardless of its consequences for
both buyer and seller. The fact that the decision is so important,
both financially and personally, to the owner can make the process
more, rather than less, prone to error. And, mistakes made in the
once-in-a-lifetime sale of a business are not reversible.
Price is very important, but often is not the most critical aspect
of the sale. You and your family have an extraordinary businessone of a kind in your field-and any buyer is going to recognize
that. It's also a business that is going to get more valuable as the
years go by. So if you decide not to sell now, you are very likely to
42 [In 1988 and 1989, the last sentence read: "Our interest in new ventures, turnarounds, or auction-like sales can best be expressed by the Goldwynism: 'Please include
me out."']
43 [1990 Appendix B-form of letter sent to potential sellers of businesses.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

155

realize more money later on. With that knowledge you can deal
from strength and take the time required to select the buyer you
want.
If you should decide to sell, I think Berkshire Hathaway offers
some advantages that most other buyers do not. Practically all of
these buyers will fall into one of two categories:
(1) A company located elsewhere but operating in your business or in a business somewhat akin to yours. Such a buyer-no
matter what promises are made-will usually have managers who
feel they know how to run your business operations and, sooner or
later, will want to apply some hands-on "help." If the acquiring
company is much larger, it often will have squads of managers, recruited over the years in part by promises that they will get to run
future acquisitions. They will have their own way of doing things
and, even though your business record undoubtedly will be far better than theirs, human nature will at some point cause them to believe that their methods of operating are superior. You and your
family probably have friends who have sold their businesses to
larger companies, and I suspect that their experiences will confirm
the tendency of parent companies to take over the running of their
subsidiaries, particularly when the parent knows the industry, or
thinks it does.
(2) A financial maneuverer, invariably operating with large
amounts of borrowed money, who plans to resell either to the public or to another corporation as soon as the time is favorable. Frequently, this buyer's major contribution will be to change
accounting methods so that earnings can be presented in the most
favorable light just prior to his bailing out. . .. [T]his sort of transaction . . . is becoming much more frequent because of a rising
stock market and the great supply of funds available for such
transactions.
If the sole motive of the present owners is to cash their chips
and put the business behind them-and plenty of sellers fall in this
category-either type of buyer that I've just described is satisfactory. But if the sellers' business represents the creative work of a
lifetime and forms an integral part of their personality and sense of
being, buyers of either type have serious flaws.
Berkshire is another kind of buyer-a rather unusual one. We
buy to keep, but we don't have, and don't expect to have, operating
people in our parent organization. All of the businesses we own
are run autonomously to an extraordinary degree. In most cases,
the managers of important businesses we have owned for many

156

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

years have not been to Omaha or even met each other. When we
buy a business, the sellers go on running it just as they did before
the sale; we adapt to their methods rather than vice versa.
We have no one-family, recently recruited MBAs, etc.-to
whom we have promised a chance to run businesses we have
bought from owner-managers. And we won't have.
You know of some of our past purchases. I'm enclosing a list
of everyone from whom we have ever bought a business, and I invite you to check with them as to our performance versus our
promises. You should be particularly interested in checking with
the few whose businesses did not do well in order to ascertain how
we behaved under difficult conditions.
Any buyer will tell you that he needs you personally-and if
he has any brains, he most certainly does need you. But a great
many buyers, for the reasons mentioned above, don't match their
subsequent actions to their earlier words. We will behave exactly
as promised, both because we have so promised, and because we
need to in order to achieve the best business results.
This need explains why we would want the operating members
of your family to retain a 20% interest in the business. We need
80% to consolidate earnings for tax purposes, which is a step important to us. It is equally important to us that the family members
who run the business remain as owners. Very simply, we would not
want to buy unless we felt key members of present management
would stay on as our partners. Contracts cannot guarantee your
continued interest; we would simply rely on your word.
The areas I get involved in are capital allocation and selection
and compensation of the top man. Other personnel decisions, operating strategies, etc. are his bailiwick. Some Berkshire managers
talk over some of their decisions with me; some don't. It depends
upon their personalities and, to an extent, upon their own personal
relationship with me.
If you should decide to do business with Berkshire, we would
pay in cash. Your business would not be used as collateral for any
loan by Berkshire. There would be no brokers involved.
Furthermore, there would be no chance that a deal would be
announced and that the buyer would then back off or start suggesting adjustments (with apologies, of course, and with an explanation that banks, lawyers, boards of directors, etc. were to be
blamed). And finally, you would know exactly with whom you are
dealing. You would not have one executive negotiate the deal only
to have someone else in charge a few years later, or have the presi-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

157

dent regretfully tell you that his board of directors required this
change or that (or possibly required sale of your business to finance some new interest of the parent's).
It's only fair to tell you that you would be no richer after the
sale than now. The ownership of your business already makes you
wealthy and soundly invested. A sale would change the form of
your wealth, but it wouldn't change its amount. If you sell, you will
have exchanged a 100%-owned valuable asset that you understand
for another valuable asset-cash-that will probably be invested in
small pieces (stocks) of other businesses that you understand less
well. There is often a sound reason to sell but, if the transaction is
a fair one, the reason is not so that the seller can become wealthier.
I will not pester you; if you have any possible interest in selling, I would appreciate your call. I would be extraordinarily proud
to have Berkshire, along with the key members of your family, own
____; I believe we would do very well financially; and I believe
you would have just as much fun running the business over the
next 20 years as you have had during the past 20.
Sincerely,
/s/ Warren E. Buffett

V.

ACCOUNTING AND TAXATION

To those of you who are uninterested in accounting, I apologize for this dissertation. I realize that many of you do not pore
over our figures, but instead hold Berkshire primarily because you
know that: (1) Charlie and I have the bulk of our money in Berkshire; (2) we intend to run things so that your gains or losses are in
direct proportion to ours; (3) the record has so far been satisfactory. There is nothing necessarily wrong with this kind of "faith"
approach to investing. Other shareholders, however, prefer an
"analysis" approach and we want to supply the information they
need. In our own investing, we search for situations in which both
approaches give us the same answer. 44
A.

A Satire on Accounting Shenanigans 45

u.S. STEEL ANNOUNCES SWEEPING MODERNIZATION
SCHEME*
Myron C. Taylor, Chairman of U.S. Steel Corporation, today
announced the long awaited plan for completely modernizing the
world's largest industrial enterprise. Contrary to expectations, no
changes will be made in the company's manufacturing or selling
policies. Instead, the bookkeeping system is to be entirely revamped. By adopting and further improving a number of modern
accounting and financial devices the corporation's earning power
will be amazingly transformed. Even under the subnormal conditions of 1935, it is estimated that the new bookkeeping methods
would have yielded a reported profit of close to $50 per share on
the common stock. The scheme of improvement is the result of a
comprehensive survey made by Messrs. Price, Bacon, Guthrie &
Colpitts; it includes the following six points:
1. Writing down of Plant Account to Minus $1,000,000,000.
