Conviction is probably an important quality for any trader, but it is essential to the contrarian
trader. Steinhardt has repeatedly demonstrated amazing resolve in maintaining large positions
during difficult times, as long as he was convinced he was still right. Witness his conviction in
staying with his treasury note position during the six-month climax in interest rates in 1981,
remaining immune not only to the market move against him, but also to the psychological pressures
of complaining investors who questioned his sudden transition into treasuries after a career as a
stock trader. Throughout it all, Steinhardt held on, and even built his position, because he remained
106

convinced that he was right. Without his strong sense of conviction, the world probably would
never have heard of Michael Steinhardt.
Steinhardt also stresses that there are no absolute formulae or fixed patterns. The markets are
always changing, and the successful trader needs to adapt to these changes. In Steinhardt's view,
traders who try to find fixed approaches will be doomed to failure sooner or later.

107

William O'Neil-The Art of Stock Selection
William O'Neil is an unreserved optimist and ebullient fan of the American economic system and
its possibilities. O'Neil says, "Great opportunities occur every year in America. Get yourself
prepared and go for it. You will find that little acorns can grow into giant oaks. Anything is
possible with persistence and hard work. It can be done, and your own determination to succeed is
the most important element."
O'Neil is living proof of his own words: a classic American success story. Born in Oklahoma
during the lean Great Depression years and raised in Texas, he went on to build dual fortunes as
both an immensely profitable investor and a highly successful businessman.
O'Neil began his financial career as a stockbroker for Hayden, Stone and Company in 1958. It was
there that he first began the research that led to the formulation of the key elements of his
investment strategy. O'Neil's trading concepts proved remarkably effective from the start. During
1962-63, by pyramiding the profits in three exceptional back-to-back trades—short Korvette, long
Chrysler, and long Syntex—he managed to parlay an initial $5,000 investment into $200,000.
In 1964, O'Neil used his investment winnings to buy a seat on the New York Stock Exchange and
to form William O'Neil and Co., an institutional research brokerage firm. His firm was a leader in
offering comprehensive computerized stock market information and today is one of the most highly
respected securities research firms in the country. William O'Neil and Co. services more than 500
major institutional accounts and 28,000 individual subscribers to their Daily Graphs charting
service. The firm's data base contains 120 different statistics on each of 7,500 securities.
In what was certainly his boldest endeavor, in 1983, O'Neil launched Investor's Daily in direct
competition with the Wall Street Journal. He financed the newspaper with his own funds, knowing
that it would be many years before he could hope to break even. Skeptics abounded when the paper
began with a press run under 30,000 in 1984, compared to over two million for the Wall Street
Journal. By mid-1988, Investor's Daily's subscribership had expanded to over 110,000, and the
growth in circulation was accelerating. The estimated breakeven point of 200,000 subscribers no
longer seems far-fetched. O'Neil believes Investor's Daily can eventually grow to 800,000 readers.
His unflagging confidence in the paper stems from the fact that Investor's Daily's financial tables
contain statistical information unavailable anywhere else— earnings per share (EPS) rank, relative
strength, and volume percent change. (These measures are discussed in the interview.)
In 1988, O'Neil combined his concepts in the book How to Make Money in Stocks, published by
McGraw-Hill. The book combines clarity and brevity with excellent and very specific trading
advice. It was the best-selling investment book of the year.
O'Neil's various business ventures have not impeded his performance as a virtuoso stock investor.
During the past ten years, O'Neil has averaged over a 40 percent profit annually on his stock
investments. Some of his biggest winners were the Canadian oils during the 1970s and Pic'n'Save
and Price Co. during the late 1970s and early 1980s. Perhaps O'Neil's most famous market calls
were two full-page Wall Street Journal ads heralding imminent major bull markets. The timing of
these ads could hardly have been better: March 1978 and February 1982.
William O'Neil and Company is a no-frills operation. Rarely have I seen a more crowded office
environment. O'Neil, however, does not single himself out for any special privileges. In what must
surely be a rarity among chief executive officers, he shares his office with two other employees.
O'Neil impressed me as being articulate, confident, opinionated, and very bullish on America.
I think it would be fair to describe your stock investment approach as individualistic and
original. Where did you first develop your trading ideas?
I went through the same process that most people do. I subscribed to a few investment letters and
most of them didn't do too well. I found that theories like buying low-priced stocks or stocks with
low price/earnings (P/E) ratios were not very sound.
When did you first find an approach that worked?
Back in 1959,1 did a study of the people that were doing very well in the market. At that time, the
Dreyfus fund was a very small fund, managing only about $15 million. Jack Dreyfus, who managed
the fund, was doubling the results of all of his competitors. So I got copies of their prospectus and
108

quarterly reports and plotted on charts precisely where they had purchased each of their stocks.
There were over 100 of these securities and when I laid them out on a table, I made my first real
discovery: Not some, not most, but every single stock had been bought when it went to a new high
price.
So the first thing I learned about how to get superior performance is not to buy stocks that are near
their lows, but to buy stocks that are coming out of broad bases and beginning to make new highs
relative to the preceding price base. You are trying to find the beginning of a major move so that
you don't waste six or nine months sitting in a stock that is going nowhere.
I studied the stocks that were big winners in past years and tried to find the characteristics they had
in common before they became major successes. I didn't just limit myself to preconceived notions
like P/E ratios; I examined a lot of variables to develop a model based on how the real world
worked.
Can you describe this model for picking winning stocks?
I use the easy-to-remember acronym CANSLIM. Each letter of this name represents one of the
seven chief characteristics of the all-time great winning stocks during their early developing stages,
just before they made huge advances.
The "C" stands for current earnings per share. The best performing stocks showed a 70 percent
average increase in earnings for the current quarter over the same quarter in the prior year before
they began their major advance. I am continually amazed by how many individual investors, and
even pension fund managers, buy common stocks with unchanged or lower current quarter
earnings. There is absolutely no reason for a stock to go up if the current earnings are poor. If, as
our research demonstrated, the best stocks had large profit increases before they advanced rapidly
in price, why should anybody settle for mediocre earnings? So, our first basic rule in stock selection
is that quarterly earnings per share should be up by at least 20 to 50 percent year to year.
The "A" in our formula stands for annual earnings per share. In our studies, the prior five-year
average annual compounded earnings growth rate of outstanding performing stocks at their early
emerging stage was 24 percent. Ideally, each year's earnings per share should show an increase
over the prior year's earnings.
It is a unique combination of both strong current earnings and high average earnings growth that
creates a superb stock. The EPS rank, which is published in lnvestor's Daily, combines a stock's
percent earnings increase during the past two quarters with the past five-year average percent
earnings and compares that figure to every other stock we cover. An EPS rank of 95 means that a
company's current and five-year historical earnings have outperformed 95 percent of all other
companies.
The "N" in our formula stands for something new. The "new" can be a new product or service, a
change in the industry, or new management. In our research we found that 95 percent of the
greatest winners had something new that fell within these categories. The "new" also refers to a
new high price for the stock. In our seminars we find that 98 percent of investors are unwilling to
buy a stock at a new high. Yet, it is one of the great paradoxes of the stock market that what seems
too high usually goes higher and what seems too low usually goes lower.
The "S" in the formula stands for shares outstanding. Ninety-five percent of the stocks that
performed best in our studies had less than twenty-five million shares of capitalization during the
period when they had their best performance. The average capitalization of all of these stocks was
11.8 million shares, while the median figure was only 4.6 million. Many institutional investors
handicap themselves by restricting their purchases to only large-capitalization companies. By doing
so, they automatically eliminate some of the best growth companies.
The "L" in our formula stands for leader or laggard. The 500 best-performing stocks during the
1953-1985 period had an average relative strength of 87 before their major price increase actually
began. [The relative strength measures a stock' s price performance during the past twelve months
compared to all other stocks. For example, a relative strength of 80 would mean that the given
stock outperformed 80 percent of all other stocks during the past year.] So, another basic rule in
stock selection is to pick the leading stocks—the ones with the high relative strength values—and
avoid the laggard stocks. I tend to restrict purchases to companies with relative strength ranks
above 80.
109

The "I" in the formula stands for institutional sponsorship. The institutional buyers are by far the
largest source of demand for stocks. Leading stocks usually have institutional backing. However,
although some institutional sponsorship is desired, excessive sponsorship is not, because it would
be a source of large selling if anything went wrong with the company or the market in general. This
is why the most widely owned institutional stocks can be poor performers. By the time a company's
performance is so obvious that almost all institutions own a stock, it is probably too late to buy.
The "M" in our formula stands for market. Three out of four stocks will go in the same direction as
a significant move in the market averages. That is why you need to learn how to interpret price and
volume on a daily basis for signs that the market has topped.
At any given time, less than 2 percent of the stocks in the entire market will fit the CANSLIM
formula. The formula is deliberately restrictive because you want to pick only the very best. If you
were recruiting players for a baseball team, would you pick an entire lineup of .200 hitters, or
would you try to get as many .300 hitters as possible?
Since you use such a restrictive selection process, do you have a high percentage of winning
trades?
I guess over the years, about two-thirds of my stock purchases were actually closed at a profit.
However, I have found that only one or two stocks of every ten I have bought have turned out to be
truly outstanding.
Wouldn't most of the indicators in your CANSLIM formula, such as EPS, pick up a stock
before it goes to new highs? Why not just buy the stock when it is still forming a base instead
of waiting for it to go to a new high?
You don't want to anticipate a breakout from a base because a stock may never break out. You can
buy too soon as well as too late. The idea is to buy when there is the least probability of a loss. If
you buy within the base, the stock will frequently fluctuate 10 or 15 percent in normal trading
action, and it is very easy to get shaken out of the position. But if I buy at exactly the right time, the
stock is usually not going to go down to my maximum 7 percent stop-loss point.
You have stated that the superior stocks have high relative strength figures—80 or higher.
Although high relative strength is good, is there such a thing as it being too high? In other
words, might a relative strength of 99 indicate that the stock is overextended and vulnerable
to a sharp correction?
You have to look at a chart to make that determination. The key point is not how high the relative
strength is, but rather how far the stock is extended beyond its most recent price base. You buy
stocks that have a high relative strength if they are just beginning to emerge from a sound basebuilding period. However, I would generally not buy a stock with a high relative strength that is
already more than 10 percent beyond its prior price base.
The "M" in the CANSLIM formula makes sense since few stocks can buck a general bear
market. However, that rule sounds easier in theory than in practice. After all, how do you tell
the difference between a market top and a normal bull market correction?
Top formations in the market averages occur in only one of two ways. First, the average moves up
to a new high, but does so on low volume. This tells you that the demand for stocks is poor at that
point and that the rally is vulnerable. Second, volume surges for several days, but there is very
little, if any, upside price progress as measured by market closes. In this latter case, there may not
be a pickup in volume when the market initially tops, since the distribution has taken place on the
way up.
Another way to determine the direction of the general market is to focus on how the leading stocks
are performing. If the stocks that have been leading the bull market start breaking down, that is a
major sign the market has topped. Another important factor to watch is the Federal Reserve
discount rate. Usually, after the Fed raises the rate two or three times, the market runs into trouble.
The daily advance/decline line is sometimes a useful indicator to watch for signs of a market top.
[The advance/decline line illustrates the difference between the total number of New York Stock
Exchange stocks advancing each day versus the number declining.] Frequently, the advance/decline
line will lag behind the market averages and fail to penetrate prior peaks after the averages reach
110

new highs. This indicates that fewer stocks are participating in the market advance.
When you believe that the general market has entered a bearish phase, would you advise
going short rather than merely liquidating longs?
I don't normally advise people to sell short unless they are professional traders. Selling short is
quite tricky. I myself have only made significant profits on the short side of two of the last nine
bear markets.
A stock should never be sold short because its price looks too high. The idea is not to sell short at
the top, but at the right time. Short selling of individual stocks should only be considered after the
general market shows signs of a top. The best chart pattern to short is one in which a stock breaks
out on the upside of its third or fourth base and then fails. The stock should be breaking down
toward the low end of its previous base pattern on increased volume. After the first serious price
break below the base, there will usually be several pullback attempts. The prior base will now
provide an area of overhead supply, as all investors who bought in that zone will be losing money,
and a number of them will be eager to get out near breakeven. Therefore, pullbacks to failed price
bases also provide good timing for short sales.
Does the element of unlimited risk present any special problem in short selling?
No, because I never take unlimited risk. If a short position goes against me, I will be out after the
first 6 or 7 percent loss. Before you sell any stock short, you should decide the price at which you
will cover that short position if a loss occurs.
Besides the CANSLIM formula, which is critical to your stock selection process, risk control
obviously plays an important role in your overall strategy. Can you talk a little bit more
about that element of trading?
My philosophy is that all stocks are bad. There are no good stocks unless they go up in price. If
they go down instead, you have to cut your losses fast. The secret for winning in the stock market
does not include being right all the time. In fact, you should be able to win even if you are right
only half the time. The key is to lose the least amount of money possible when you are wrong. I
make it a rule never to lose more than a maximum of 7 percent on any stock I buy. If a stock drops
7 percent below my purchase price, I will automatically sell it at the market—no second-guessing,
no hesitation.
Some people say, "I can't sell that stock because I'd be taking a loss." If the stock is below the price
you paid for it, selling doesn't give you the loss; you already have it. Letting losses run is the most
serious mistake made by most investors. The public doesn't really understand the philosophy of
cutting losses quickly. If you don't have a rule like cutting a loss at 7 percent, then in bear markets
like 1973-74, you can lose 70 or 80 percent on your holdings. I have seen people go bankrupt in
that type of situation. If you aren't willing to cut your losses short, then you probably should not
buy stocks. Would you drive your car without brakes?
In my book, I repeat a story told by Fred C. Kelly, the author of Why You Win or Lose, that
provides the best example I know of how the typical investor procrastinates when it comes to
making a selling decision. A man has rigged up a turkey trap with a trail of corn leading into a big
box with a hinged door. The man holds a long piece of twine, connected to the door, that he can use
to pull the door shut once enough turkeys have wandered into the box. However, once he shuts the
door, he can't open it again without going back to the box, which would scare away any turkeys
lurking on the outside.
One day, he had a dozen turkeys in his box. Then one walked out, leaving eleven. "I should have
pulled the string when there were twelve inside," he thought, "but maybe if I wait, he will walk
back in." While he was waiting for his twelfth turkey to return, two more turkeys walked out. "I
should have been satisfied with the eleven," he thought. "If just one of them walks back, I will pull
the string." While he was waiting, three more turkeys walked out. Eventually, he was left emptyhanded. His problem was that he couldn't give up the idea that some of the original turkeys would
return. This is the attitude of the typical investor who can't bring himself to sell at a loss. He keeps
expecting the stock to recover. The moral is: To reduce your stock market risk, stop counting
turkeys.
111

OK, you use your CANSLIM methodology for selecting stocks, and your 7 percent rule for
getting out if you are wrong. How do you decide when to liquidate a winning stock position?
First, you should hold a stock as long as it is performing properly. Jesse Livermore said, "It is never
your thinking that makes big money, it's the sitting." Second, you have to realize that you will
never sell the exact top. Therefore, it is ridiculous to kick yourself when a stock goes higher after
you sell. The goal is to make substantial profits on your stocks and not be upset if the price
continues to advance after you get out.
Your writings express disdain for a number of factors that many people consider important,
including P/E ratios, dividends, diversification, and overbought/oversold indicators. Could
you explain what you think is wrong with the conventional wisdom regarding these subjects.
Let's start with P/E ratios.
To say that a stock is undervalued because it is selling at a low P/E ratio is nonsense. In our
research, we found there was a very low correlation between the P/E ratio and the best-performing
stocks. Some of these stocks had P/E ratios of 10 when they started their major advance; others had
P/E ratios of 50. During the thirty-three years in our survey period [1953-1985], the average P/E
ratio for the best-performing stocks at their early emerging stage was 20, compared to an average
P/E ratio of 15 for the Dow Jones Average during the same time. At the end of their expansion
phase, these stocks had an average P/E ratio of approximately 45. This means that if, in the past,
you were not willing to buy stocks with above-average P/Es, you automatically eliminated most of
the best-performing securities.
A common mistake a lot of investors make is to buy a stock solely because the P/E ratio looks
cheap. There is usually a very good reason why a P/E ratio is low. Many years ago, when I was first
beginning to study the market, I bought Northrop at four times earnings and watched in disbelief as
the stock eventually declined to two times earnings.
Another common mistake is selling stocks with high P/E ratios. I still remember in 1962 when an
investor barged into my friend's brokerage office, declaring in a loud voice that Xerox was
drastically overpriced because it was selling at fifty times earnings. He went short at $88. Xerox
eventually went to $1,300, adjusting for stock splits.
Your thoughts on dividends?
There is no correlation between dividends and a stock's performance, hi fact, the more a company
pays in dividends, the weaker their posture because they may have to pay high interest rates to
replace funds paid out in dividends. It is naive to hold stocks that are going down because they pay
dividends. If you are getting a 4 percent dividend and the stock goes down 25 percent, your net
yield is a 21 percent loss.
How about overbought/oversold indicators?
I rarely pay any attention to overbought/oversold indicators. I once hired a well-known professional
who specialized in such technical indicators. At the very point during the 1969 market break when I
was trying to convince portfolio managers to liquidate stocks and move to cash, he was telling them
it was too late to sell because his indicators said the market was very oversold. Once his indicators
were oversold, the market break really accelerated.
The final item on my list of your most prominent conventional wisdom targets is
diversification.
Diversification is a hedge for ignorance. I think you are much better off owning a few stocks and
knowing a great deal about them. By being very selective, you increase your chances of picking
superior performers. You can also watch those stocks much more carefully, which is important in
controlling risk.
How many issues would you advise a typical investor to hold at any one time?
For an investor with $5,000, one or two; $10,000, three or four; $25,000, four or five; $50,000, five
or six; and $100,000 or more, six or seven.
Aside from the subjects we have just discussed, is there anything else you consider a major
public misconception?
112
