
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

The Market Cycle and the Four Trades

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

41

reason is related to self-control and psychology—there is an old saying: “If the only tool
you have is a hammer, every problem you encounter will look like a nail.” If you are
only a skilled breakout trader, you may find it difficult to wait for the excellent breakout
trades, and may try to force suboptimal patterns into this mold. If you have the freedom
and the skills to switch to the setups that match the market conditions, you will be a able
to adapt your trading skills to the market environment. There is certainly room for the
specialist who does one trade and does it very well, but many traders find success with
a broader approach.
Some market environments favor certain kinds of plays over others. If you are a
trader who trades all categories, are you applying the right kind of plays to the right
market environments? For instance, do you find yourself having many losing trades trying to short against resistance levels in uptrends because you feel they have gone too
far? If so, your results might improve if you apply with-trend trades to those situations
and more carefully define the market environments that will reward your fading (going against the trend) of strength into resistance. Those environments exist—you just
aren’t finding them with your plays. If you are a specialist who focuses on only one setup
or pattern (and, to be clear, this is not a criticism if you are successful this way), then
you need to realize that only a few specific market environments favor your play and
wait for those environments. You can redefine your job description to include not trading. Wait on the sidelines, and wait for the environments in which you can excel. Again,
those environments exist, but you probably are burning through a lot of mental and financial capital trying to find them. Clarify your setups. Categorize them, and then simplify,
simplify, simplify.
Let’s look briefly at each of the four broad categories and ask the following questions
from a general, high-level perspective:

r Which trade setups fall into this category?
r What are the associated probabilities, reward/risk profiles, and overall expectancies
of these trades?

r How do these trades fail?
Trend Continuation
Trend continuation plays are not simply trend plays or with-trend plays. The name implies that we find a market with a trend, whether a nascent trend or an already wellestablished trend, and then we seek to put on plays in the direction of that trend. Perhaps
the most common trend continuation play is to use the pullbacks in a trend to position
for further trend legs. It is also possible to structure breakout trades that would be withtrend plays, and there is at least one other category of trend continuation plays—trying
to get involved in the very early structure of a new trend. In the context of our simplified
stage model, trend continuation trades are most appropriate in markup or markdown,
but these early trend trades may be attempted where accumulation breaks into the uptrend or where distribution breaks down into the new downtrend. If you are trading in

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

42

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

these areas of uncertainty, it is important to not be stubborn. An aborted breakout of
accumulation into an uptrend may well be an upthrust, which is a sign of potential distribution. Listen to the message of the market and adjust accordingly.
Trend continuation plays tend to be high-probability plays because there is a verifiable, statistical edge for trend continuation; these plays are aligned with one of the
fundamental principles of price behavior. It is important to have both the risk and the
expectation of the trade defined before entry; this is an absolute requirement of any specific trade setup, but it can be difficult with trend continuation trades. The key to defining
risk is to define the points at which the trend trade is conclusively wrong, at which the
trend is violated. Sometimes it is not possible to define nonarbitrary points at which the
trend will be violated that are close enough to the entry point to still offer attractive reward/risk characteristics. On the upside, the best examples of these trades break into
multileg trends that continue much further than anyone expected, but the most reliable
profits are taken consistently at or just beyond the previous highs.
There are several common failure patterns associated with these types of trades.
First, there may simply not be enough with-trend pressure to push the market into another trend leg, so previous resistance holds (in the case of an uptrend) and the market
rolls over into a trading range (or distribution). Traders trading simple pullbacks need to
be aware that many pullbacks in strong trends are complex, two-legged consolidations
(see Chapter 3), so a good trading plan will plan for that possibility. Dramatic failures of
these trades are somewhat uncommon, but they do happen. Most failed trend continuation trades tend to be rather polite affairs, usually giving the trader a chance to get out for
a small loss. However, there is always danger when everyone is leaning the same way in
a market, and, especially in well-established trends, there are places where many market
participants have piled into a very obvious trend continuation play. In these situations,
especially in extremely overextended markets, reversals can be dramatic as everyone
scrambles for the exit at the same time.

Trend Termination
More than any other category, precise terminology is important here. If we were less
careful, we might apply a label like “trend reversal” to most of the trades in this category,
but this is counterproductive because it fails to precisely define the trader’s expectations.
If you think you are trading trend reversal trades, then you expect that a winning trade
should roll over into a trend in the opposite direction. This is a true trend reversal, and
these spots offer exceptional reward/risk profiles and near-perfect trade location. How
many traders would like to sell the high tick or buy the very low at a reversal? However,
true trend reversals are rare, and it is much more common to sell somewhere near the
high and to then see the market stop trending. Be clear on this: This is a win for a trend
termination trade—the trend stopped. Anything else is a bonus, so it is important to
adjust your expectations accordingly.
The obvious spots in the cycle for trend termination trades are where the uptrend
stops and moves into distribution, and vice versa on the downside, but there are other

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

The Market Cycle and the Four Trades

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

43

possibilities. Some traders specialize in finding overextended spots in established trends,
and fading (going against the trend) these for a very quick and short reversal. For instance, a trader might find spots where the rallies in the uptrend have run up too far too
fast, and take short positions against those rallies, planning to cover one to three bars
later. These are trades for only the fastest and most nimble traders; developing traders
are well advised to avoid these countertrend scalps because they remove focus from the
big picture. Staying in a consistent time frame is important for these definitions; a trader
might look for spots where the short-term downtrends (pullbacks) in the uptrend have
overextended themselves, and then take long positions against those lower time frame
downtrends. In this case, the trader is actually positioning countertrend on the lower
time frame but with the trend on the trading time frame. Is this a trend continuation or
trend termination trade? The answer depends on your perspective and your time frame,
and it is only important to be consistent. Understand what you are trying to accomplish
with the trade and how this best fits in the evolving market structure.
Trend termination plays are not usually high-probability plays, but the compensation
is that winning trades tend to offer potential rewards much larger than the initial risk. If
your patterns allow you to position short near the absolute high point of a trend leg with
some degree of confidence, then you have a well-defined risk point and the potential for
outsized profits on some subset of these trades. Over a large enough sample size, the
risk/reward profile may be very good, leading to a solid positive expectancy even if most
of these trades are losers.
Trend termination trades are countertrend (counter to the existing trend) trades, and
trade management is an important issue. Most really dramatic trading losses, the kind
that blow traders out of the water (and that don’t involve options) come from traders
fading trends and adding to those positions as the trend continues to move against them.
If this is one of the situations where the trend turns into a manic, parabolic blow-off,
there is a real possibility for a career-ending loss on a single trade. For swing traders,
there will sometimes be dramatic gaps against positions held countertrend overnight,
so this needs to be considered in the risk management and position sizing scheme. More
than any other category of trade, iron discipline is required to trade these with any degree
of consistency.

Support or Resistance Holding
There is some overlap between these categories, and it is possible to apply trades from
these categories in more than one spot in the market structure. We might expect that
most support/resistance trades will take place in accumulation or distribution areas
while the market chops sideways, but a trader trading with-trend trades could initiate
those trades by buying support in the trend. Are these trend continuation trades or support holding trades? The answer is both, so traders must build a well-thought-out classification system that reflects their approach to the market. Your trading patterns and rules
are the tools through which you structure price action and market structure, and they
must make sense to you. Take the time to define them clearly.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

44

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

It is easy to find examples of well-defined trading ranges on historical charts where
you could buy and risk a very small amount as the market bounces off the magic price
at the bottom of the range. These trades do exist, but they are a small subset of support
holding trades. Support, even when it holds, usually does not hold cleanly. The dropouts
below support actually contribute to the strength of that support, as buyers are shaken
out of their positions and are forced to reposition when it becomes obvious that the
drop was a fake-out. For the shorter-term trader trading these patterns, there are some
important issues to consider. If you know that support levels are not clean, how will you
trade around them? Will you sell your position when the level drops, book many small
losses, and reestablish when it holds again? Will you simply position small in the range,
plan to buy more if it drops, and accept that you will occasionally take very large losses
on your maximum size when the market does drop? If you are scaling in, how will you
deal with the fact that your easy wins will not be on your full size, as you did not have
the opportunity to buy your full line near the bottom of the range? By the time you see
the support level is holding, the market will already be far from the level, increasing the
size of the stop loss needed.
Because of these issues, support/resistance holding trades, as a group, tend to have
the lowest reward/risk ratios. By definition, at support, there is an imbalance of buying
pressure that creates the support, but the market is usually in relative equilibrium just
above that support. Most traders will try to avoid trading in these equilibrium areas, so
many support holding trades set up in suboptimal trading environments. It is worth mentioning that there is a special subset of support/resistance holding trades that actually
are very high-probability trades: failed breakouts. Remember, when everyone is leaning
the wrong way, the potential for dramatic moves increases greatly, and nowhere is that
more true than in a failed breakout.

Support or Resistance Breaking or Failing
Support/resistance breaking trades are the classic breakout or breakout from channel
trades and, ideally, would be located at the end of accumulation or distribution phases.
In fact, these trades actually define the end of accumulation or distribution, as the
support or resistance fails and the market breaks into a trend phase. Another place for
support/resistance breaking trades is in trends, but many of these are lower time frame
breakout entries into the trading time frame trending pattern. Many traders, especially
daytraders, find themselves drawn to these patterns because of the many examples
where they work dramatically well. Many trading books show example after example
of dramatic breakouts, but there is one small problem with breakout trades—most
breakouts fail.
In addition, the actual breakout areas tend to be high-volatility and low-liquidity areas, which can increase the risk in these trades. They occur at very visible chart points,
and so they are often very crowded trades. The presence of unusual volume and volatility can create opportunities, but it also creates dangers. Execution skills probably matter more here than in any other category of trade, as slippage and thin markets can

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

The Market Cycle and the Four Trades

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

45

significantly erode a trader’s edge. These trades can offer outstanding reward/risk profiles, but, especially in short-term trades, it is important to remember that realized losses
can sometimes be many multiples of the intended risk, significantly complicating the
position sizing problem. This is not a fatal flaw, but it must be considered in your risk
management scheme.
Depending on the time frame and intended holding period for the trade, it may be
possible to find that there are patterns that precede and set up the best examples of these
trades. The best resistance breaking trades will be driven by large-scale buying imbalances, and these imbalances usually show, for instance, as the market holds higher lows
into the resistance level before the actual breakout. Breakouts driven by small traders
who are simply trying to scalp small profits in the increased volatility are less reliable
and are usually not set up by these larger-scale patterns. In the very best examples of
these trades, buyers who are trapped out of the market by the suddenness of the breakout will be compelled to buy into the market over coming days or weeks, and this buying
pressure will provide favorable tailwinds for the trade. Traders specializing in breakout
trades usually spend a lot of time studying the patterns that set up the best trades, and
maintain a watch list of potential candidates for trades at any time. Executing unplanned
breakout trades in a reactive mode is unlikely to be a formula for long-term success.

SUMMARY
These four categories of trades provide an excellent framework for thinking about technical trades. This is a simple, valid, and consistent labeling scheme, and it is nearly impossible to find a technical trade that does not fit within these categories. Many trades
may fit into more than one, especially when the complexities of multiple time frames are
considered, but this does not compromise the utility of the system. This is not intended
to be a rigid, artificial classification system, but rather a dynamic framework that can
grow and evolve with your trading style and your understanding of market behavior.
Not to wax too philosophical, but there is another way to think about this cycle.
Some branches of Eastern philosophy believe that every manifest thing we see, feel, or
experience in any way comes from the interaction of two opposing, primordial forces.
These philosophies tell us that one force can never fully overcome the other, and, when
one seems to predominate, it contains within itself the seed of the other. In the market,
buying and selling pressure are these twin opposing forces. When buying pressure seems
to be strongest, the end of the uptrend trend is often near. When the sellers seem to be
decisively winning the battle, the stage is set for a reversal into an uptrend. This is why
it is so important for traders to learn to stand apart from the crowd, and the only way to
do this is to understand the actions and the emotions of that market crowd.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c03

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:26

Printer: Hamilton Printing

PART II

Market Structure

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c03

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:26

Printer: Hamilton Printing

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c03

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:26

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 3

On Trends

Don’t fight forces, use them.
—R. Buckminster Fuller

arket movements can create a bewildering number of patterns and variations
of patterns. Simple structures take on different meanings depending on context,
and patterns sometimes develop and resolve in unexpected ways. Add to this the
complexities of the interactions of multiple time frames and related markets, and we end
up with a seemingly infinite number of possibilities. The human mind needs some kind of
structure to help process information, so various solutions have been proposed by different schools of technical analysis. The classic chart patterns (head and shoulders, double
top, pennant, flag, wedge, etc.) are one attempt at providing structure. Other solutions
have been proposed, ranging from in-depth quantitative analysis to the various schools
of wave and cycle analysis; these, and many other approaches, work for some traders.
All of these offer valuable perspectives, but let us turn our attention to a simple, robust
framework that focuses on the fundamental price structures created by price trends.

M

THE FUNDAMENTAL PATTERN
What I am presenting here is not new; I owe a tremendous debt to the authors and
traders who have come before me. No significant intellectual construct emerges ex
nihilo—anything of value rests on a foundation built by someone else. In the case of
trend structure, Tony Plummer (2010) has written about the basic trend pattern, which
he calls the “price pulse,” with clarity and in-depth. This simple, fundamental trend pattern is found at the core of even elaborate methodologies, like Gann or Elliott, when
they are stripped to bare essentials. This pattern, very simply, is how markets move, and

49

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c03

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:26

Printer: Hamilton Printing

50

MARKET STRUCTURE

D

A
C

B

C
A

B
D

FIGURE 3.1 The Fundamental Trend Pattern: Impulse, Retracement, Impulse in an Uptrend and
a Downtrend

it is a profoundly powerful concept. The fundamental pattern of market movement on
all time frames is this: a movement in one direction, a countertrend retracement in the
other direction, and another leg in the original direction. Visually, these movements are
often labeled with letters, as in Figure 3.1.
This is a very rough schematic structure, but it is a powerful pattern that repeats on
all time frames. Whether we look at trends spanning decades or seconds, we will find this
same impulse, retracement, impulse structure, though the psychological significance of
the pattern will vary depending on the time frame. It is also reasonable to ask why this
structure should exist at all, and there are several possible answers. Put yourself in the
shoes of a trader who has to buy a significant amount of an asset in a very short time.
Your primary objective is to get the order done without having a large impact on prices.
How might this best be done?
The best option in most cases is to buy a little bit, wait so that you don’t move the
market too much, then buy some more, and repeat until the order is completely filled.
This is how good execution traders work large orders. Smart traders (or smart algorithms) will judge how to plan their buying by the market’s response to their orders. In
this way, they are judging the supply or the selling conviction hanging over the market.
A single trader executing an order in a market otherwise composed of pure noise traders
would create some variation of this price pattern by trying to fill a buy order through this
natural process.
There must be a firm theoretical foundation for anything in the market; you should
be able to clearly articulate why something should be the way it is. Market prices are the
result of buyers and sellers negotiating for prices, nothing more and nothing less. We do
not need to invoke some mystical force to create the patterns we see in the markets; they
are simply the result of buyers and sellers finding prices in a competitive environment.
This is also why the fundamental structures in the markets have not changed since antiquity. Some of the earliest written records we have are price records from Phoenician
merchants, which paint a story of price movements very similar to those we see today,
albeit on a much slower scale.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c03

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

On Trends

7:26

Printer: Hamilton Printing

51

FIGURE 3.2 Each Trend Leg Breaks Down into a Three-Legged Structure on the Next Lower
Time Frame

Fractal Markets
A fractal is a type of pattern in which the parts resemble the whole (see Mandelbrot and
Hudson 2006). Markets are fractal in nature, meaning that essentially the same patterns
appear on all time frames: Patterns on single-tick charts combine to form 1-minute bars.
The patterns on the 1-minute bars are the same as those on the single-tick bars, and
they combine to form the patterns on 5-minute bars. (The time frames are a convenient
but unavoidably arbitrary structure.) This pattern building continues all the way to daily,
weekly, monthly, and yearly patterns, which all contain essentially the same patterns.
Figure 3.2 shows a schematic example of how this might play out in the market.
Each trend leg is an impulse, retracement, impulse pattern, and each of those legs also
breaks down into the same pattern on the lower time frame. Though only three levels are
shown on the diagram, this structure theoretically extends down to the one-tick level.
Furthermore, the entire large structure in Figure 3.2 could be a setup leg for a trend on
the next higher time frame.
This is not an abstract concept, but an important tool to understand market structure. No pattern exists in the vacuum of a single time frame. The market is like a set of
Russian nesting matryoshka dolls—digging into one time frame will reveal similar structures nested on lower time frames, all the way down to the tick level. Understanding
this structure is a key component of building intuition about markets. Traders usually
focus on one specific time frame, but it is important to understand that the patterns of
the lower time frame actually create the patterns on the trading time frame, and that the
patterns on the trading time frame are influenced by evolving patterns on the next higher
time frame. In practice, the interactions of structures on lower time frames are usually
components of price action, while higher time frames are more likely to provide context
or motivation for market structure patterns within the trading time frame.
