
There is a random
distribution between wins
and losses for any given
set of variables that
defines an edge. In other
words, based on the past
performance of your edge,
you may know that out of
the next 20 trades, 12
will be winners and 8
will be losers. What you
don’t know is the
sequence of wins and
losses or how much
money the market is
going to make available
on the winning trades.
This truth makes trading
a probability or numbers
game. When you really
believe that trading is
simply a probability
game, concepts like
“right” and “wrong” or
“win” and “lose” no
longer have the same
significance. As a result,
your expectations will be
in harmony with the
possibilities.
Mark Douglas
Trading in the Zone

Is there a perfect portfolio composition? No. Many traders trade
many different portfolios. That said, generally speaking, trend
followers trade the same markets. However, although larger trend
following funds might avoid smaller markets, such as pork bellies or
wheat, other trend followers might trade currency or bond only
portfolios. Salem Abraham (profiled in Chapter 2, “Great Trend
Followers”), for example, made a killing off cattle a few years back.
Whatever markets trend followers choose to trade, they must
remain open to opportunity when it arrives. Author Tom Friedman
gives a strong argument for sound strategy in a complex world:
“If you can’t see the world, and you can’t see the
interactions that are shaping the world, you surely cannot
strategize about the world. And if you are going to deal with
a system as complex and brutal as globalization, and
prosper within it, you need a strategy for how to choose
prosperity for your country or company.”13
Friedman knows that the real power brokers in today’s world
are traders, not politicians.

How Much of a Market Do You Buy or Sell at
Any Time?
The question investors typically avoid at all costs is the
question of money management. Money management is also called
risk management, position sizing, or bet sizing, and it is the critical
component to trend following success as Gibbons Burke observes:

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

257

“Money management is like sex: Everyone does it, one way
or another, but not many like to talk about it and some do
it better than others. When any trader makes a decision to
buy or sell (short), they must also decide at that time how
many shares or contracts to buy or sell—the order form on
every brokerage page has a blank spot where the size of the
order is specified. The essence of risk management is
making a logical decision about how much to buy or sell
when you fill in this blank. This decision determines the
risk of the trade. Accept too much risk and you increase the
odds that you will go bust; take too little risk and you will
not be rewarded in sufficient quantity to beat the
transaction costs and the overhead of your efforts. Good
money management practice is about finding the sweet
spot between these undesirable extremes.”14
When you look at a trading strategy, you must ask, “I’ve only
got a certain amount of money. How much do I trade?” If you have
$100,000 and you want to trade Microsoft, well, how much of your
$100,000 must you trade on Microsoft on your first trade? Must you
trade all $100,000? What if you’re wrong? What if you’re wrong in
a big way, and you lose your entire $100,000 on one bet?
How do you determine how much to bet or trade each time?
Trend followers make small bet sizes initially. So, if you start at
$100,000, and you’re going to risk 2 percent, that will be $2,000.
You might say to yourself, “Oh my gosh, I’ve got $100,000, why am
I only risking $2,000? I’ve got $100,000. $2,000 is nothing.” That’s
not the point. You can’t predict where the trend is going to go. One
trend follower presented a view on the initial risk decision:
“There are traders who are unwilling to risk more than 1
percent, but I would find it surprising to hear of any trader
who risks more than 5 percent of assets per trade. Bear in
mind that risking too little doesn’t give the market the
opportunity to allow your profitable trade to occur.”15
Think about money management as you would about getting
into physical shape. Let’s say you’re a male athlete and you want to
get into great shape. You weigh 185 pounds, and you’re six foot one.
Well guess what? You can’t lift weights six times a day for 12 hours
a day for 30 straight days without hurting yourself sometime during

If you look at the past 30
years, there is only one
fundamental investor
who has consistently
produced huge absolute
returns—Warren Buffet.
Compare that, however,
with countless trend
following traders who
have outperformed
throughout bull and bear
market cycles. One of the
keys to our success is to
have a huge
diversification of over
100 financial and
commodity markets. A
systematic, mechanical
approach is the only way
to successfully trade so
many markets…every
decision…from market
entry, position sizing,
stop placement…must be
fully automated.
Christian Baha
CEO Superfund

258

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

those 30 days. There’s an optimum amount of lifting that you can
do in a day that gets you ahead without setting you back. You want
to be at that optimal point just as you want to get to an optimal
point with money management. There indeed is just such a
number. Ed Seykota describes that optimal point with the concept
of “heat”:
“Placing a trade with a predetermined stop-loss point can
be compared to placing a bet: The more money risked, the
larger the bet. Conservative betting produces conservative
performance, while bold betting leads to spectacular ruin. A
bold trader placing large bets feels pressure—or heat—from
the volatility of the portfolio. A hot portfolio keeps more at
risk than does a cold one. Portfolio heat seems to be
associated with personality preference; bold traders prefer
and are able to take more heat, while more conservative
traders generally avoid the circumstances that give rise to
heat. In portfolio management, we call the distributed bet
size the heat of the portfolio. A diversified portfolio risking
2 percent on each of five instruments has a total heat of 10
percent, as does a portfolio risking 5 percent on each of two
instruments.”16
Chauncy DiLaura, a student of Seykota’s, adds to the
explanation, “There has to be some governor so I don’t end up with
a whole lot of risk. The size of the bet is small around 2 percent.”
Seykota calls his risk-adjusted equity “core equity” and the risk
tolerance percentage “heat.” Hcan be turned up or down to suit the
trader’s pain tolerance—as the heat gets higher, so do the gains, but
only up to a point. Past that point, more heat starts to reduce the
gain. The trader must be able to select a heat level where he is
comfortable.17
Also critical is how you handle your capital as it grows or
shrinks. Do you trade the same with $100,000 as you would
$200,000? What if your $100,000 goes to $75,000?
Trend follower Tom Basso knows traders usually begin trading
small, say with one contract and as they get more confident they
might increase to 10 contracts. Eventually they attain a comfort
level of 100 or 1,000 contracts, where they may stay. Basso
counsels against this. He stresses that the goal is to keep things on
constant leverage. His method of calculating the number of

259

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

contracts to trade keeps him trading the same way even as equity
increases.18
One of the reasons traders sometimes can’t keep trading
proportional as capital increases is fear. Although it might feel
comfortable when the math dictates that you trade a certain
number of shares or contracts at $50,000, when the math dictates
to trade a certain amount at $500,000, people might become riskaverse. So instead of trading the optimal amount at whatever capital
you have, people trade less. How can this be avoided? Create an
abstract money world. Don’t think about what the money can buy,
just look at the numbers like you would when playing a board game,
such as Monopoly or Risk.
However, because capital is always changing, it’s critically
important to keep trading consistent. A description of Dunn
Capital’s trading echoes Basso’s view: “Part of [Dunn’s] approach is
adjusting trading positions to the amount of equity under
management. He says if his portfolio suffers a major drawdown, he
adjusts positions to the new equity level. Unfortunately, he says not
enough traders follow this rather simple strategy.”19

In limiting risk, people
also limit the opportunity
for gain. It is common,
today, for investors to
own six or eight mutual
funds, each of which is
likely to be invested in
hundreds of stocks. This
will, they hope, assure
that no little bump, no
little meltdown, overly
upsets their portfolios.
But since when was
investing about avoiding
the bumps?
“The Way We Live Now;
See a Bubble?”
Roger Lowenstein
June 5, 2005

If you start with $100,000 and you lose $25,000, you now have
$75,000. You must make your trading decisions off $75,000, not
$100,000. You don’t have $100,000 any more. However, Paul
Mulvaney felt I was missing a critical final aspect of money
management:
“Trend following is implicitly about dynamic rebalancing,
which is why I think successful traders appear to be
fearless. Many hedge fund methodologies make risk
management a separate endeavor. In trend following it is
part of the internal logic of the investment process.”

When Do You Buy or Sell a Market?
When do I buy? When do I sell? These are the questions that
keep people up at night. Yet there is no reason why the buy and sell
process should become a melodrama. Obsessing about when to buy
or sell, keeps your limited time on things you can’t control.
Needless to say, trend followers apply a precise method to the buy
and sell process.

What are the three best
market indicators? In
order they are:
1. Price
2. Price
3. Price

260

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

When do trend followers enter? After a trend has begun. As I
mention in Chapter 1, trend followers have no ability to predict
when a trend will start. The only way to know that a trend has
started is when it starts to move either up or down. For example,
let’s say Apple is trading between 100 and 120 for six months. All of
a sudden Apple jumps, or breaks out, to a price level of 130. That
type of upward movement from a range is a trigger for trend
followers. They say, “I might not know that Apple is going to
continue upward, but it’s been going sideways for a while, and all of
a sudden, the price has jumped to 130. I’m not in this game to try
and find bargains or cheap places to buy. I’m in this game to follow
trends, and the trend is up.” This approach is counterintuitive for
many. One trend trader outlined the simplicity:
“As our systems are designed to send a buy or sell signal
only when a clear trend develops. By definition, we never
get in at the beginning of a trend or get out at the top.”20
If your goal is to ride a trend that starts at 50 and perhaps goes
to 100, does it really make a difference whether you got in at 52 or
60 or 70? Even if you got in at 70 and the trend went to 100, you
still made a lot, right? Of course if you got in at 52 (and how you
think you might predict the bottom, I will never know), you made
more money than if you got in at 70. There are plenty of traders out
there who think, “Oh, I couldn’t get in at 52, so I don’t get in at all,
even if I have the chance to get in at 70.” Richard Dennis
elaborates:
You’ve got to think about
big things while you’re
doing small things, so
that all the small things
go in the right direction.
Alvin Toffler

“Anytime the market goes up a reasonable amount—say a
strong day’s work—after you’ve put on a position, it’s
probably worth adding to that position. I wouldn’t want to
wait for a retracement. That is everyone’s favorite
technique—to buy something strong that retraces. I don’t
see any justification in the statistics for that. When beans
are at $8.00 and go to $9.00, if the choice is to buy them at
$9.00 or buy them if they retrace to $8.80, I’d rather buy
them at $9.00. They may never retrace to $8.80. Statistics
would show that you make more money buying them and
not waiting for a retracement.”21
Even if people are familiar with Dennis’ approach to trading,
they still focus on entry—a misdirection of energy and focus.

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

Seykota dead-panned: “The entry is a big concern before it
happens, a small concern thereafter.”22
He is saying that after you are in a trade, the entry price isn’t
important. You have no idea how high the market is going to go,
right? You should be concerned about protecting your downside in
case the market goes against you as opposed to creating dramas
associated with entry. How long can trend following trades last?
Another trend trader opined:
“Positions held for two to four months are not unusual, and
some have been held for more than one year, says a
spokesman. Historically, only 30–40 percent of trades have
been profitable.”23
The words of great baseball player Ted Williams immediately
come to mind: “Hitting a baseball, I’ve said it a thousand times, is
the single most difficult thing to do in sport. If Joe Montana or Dan
Marino completed 3 of every 10 passes they attempted, they would
be ex-professional quarterbacks. If Larry Bird or Magic Johnson
made 3 of every 10 shots they took, their coaches would take the
basketball away from them.”24
However analogous it is to baseball, only 40 percent winners is
hardly a percentage worth most people would think wise to
emulate. So how is it possible to make money with 40 percent of
your trades winners? Jim Little of trend follower Campbell and
Company was clear:
“Say, for example, on the 60 percent, you lose 1 percent of
your capital, but on the 40 percent winning trades you
make 2 percent. Over longer periods of time, say a year or
more, this would net 20 percent on a broadly diversified
program.”25
In other words, winning and losing trades over time are blended
together. Winners make up for small losers. Trend followers’ rules to
enter and exit are driven by what many call technical indicators.
The technical indicator for trend followers is price action. However,
most traders remain preoccupied with the hundreds upon hundreds
of other indicators that promise “prediction.” They discuss and
debate which is better—MACD or Bollinger Bands? Which is more
profitable—ADX or Williams %R?

261

262

“I didn’t necessarily have
system creation as a
goal…What I did have
as a goal was
supplementing my
fundamental trading with
some technical insights.”
What resulted was his
long-term technical
system that he realized
worked well for diverse
markets, not just grains.
He says that moving
away from fundamentals
made it easier to create
something that held true
for a variety of markets.
Bernard Drury
Drury Capital
Futures Magazine, August 2001

I learned you are not
trading a commodity—
you are buying and
selling risk. As a
technical trader, that’s the
only way to look at it.
Mark van Stolk26

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Of course the answer is: none of them. Technical indicators are
small components of an overall trading system and are not a
complete system. They are like a couple of tools in a toolkit, not the
kit itself. A technical indicator accounts for typically 10 percent of
the overall trading success of a trend following system. When
traders say, “I tried Indicator X and found it was worthless” or “I
tried Indicator Y and found it useful,” they make no sense. These
statements imply that an indicator is the actual trading system. By
itself, a technical indicator is meaningless.
Bottom line, because trend followers never know which trend
will be their big winner, they accumulate small losses trying to find
it. It’s like sticking the toothpick in the cake to find out if it’s done.
They are testing the market to find out if the little trend will grow
into a big trend. Hence, you can end up with the 60-percent losing
trades.

When Do You Get Out of a Losing Position?
The time to think most clearly about why and when to exit is
before getting in. In any trading system, the most important thing
is to preserve your capital. A sell strategy gives the opportunity to
not only preserve capital, but to also redeploy into more opportune
markets. When do trend traders actually get out of a losing
position? Fast! This is a fundamental element of trend following.
The logic of cutting your losses and then cutting them even more
has been around far longer than trend following as Bernard Baruch
reminds:
“If a speculator is correct half of the time, he is hitting a
good average. Even being right 3 or 4 times out of 10 should
yield a person a fortune if he has the sense to cut his losses
quickly on the ventures where he is wrong.”
For example, you enter GOOG with a 2-percent stop loss. This
means if you lose 2 percent, you exit. Period. Get out. Don’t debate
it. Look back at the British pound trade in the Dunn profile. That
chart (see Chart 2.4) shows the constant starts and stops. Dunn
keeps receiving entry signals and then exit signals. The trend is up,
and then it is down. He enters and then exits. Dunn knows he can’t
predict the direction of the British pound. He only knows that he
has received an entry signal, so he gets on board. Then he receives

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

an exit right after that, so he gets out. Then another entry signal,
then another exit comes. Dunn did say he “rides the bucking
bronco.”
Traders call these back and forth swings “whipsaws.” Whipsaws
are quick ups and downs that go nowhere. Your trade is jerked, or
whipsawed, back and forth. Seykota has said that the only way to
avoid whipsaws is to stop trading (see Seykota’s “Whipsaw” song on
YouTube). He is saying that whipsaws are part of the game. Live
with them. Don’t want to live with them? Don’t trade.
Before you ever start trading as a trend follower, you should
already know you will have small losses, but that is easier said than
done. An old pro trader sent in a funny story about his days at trend
following incubator Commodities Corporation:
“Back in the early ‘90s, Commodities Corporation (CC)
brought a few Japanese traders in for some in-house
‘training.’ Of course the ultimate and true goal was to
capture some big Japanese money. I was still in their good
graces and [CC] asked me to have lunch with a couple of
these gentleman. They were new to the program, and I
hoped to give them some insight into how I handled the
process of trading. I told them they had to come up with a
method or system that fitted who they were. Then I told
them I thought it was great to find a mentor and I was
available anytime they had questions or issues and that is
still me today. I then began to discuss how important risk
management was and that I was willing at that time to risk
only 1 percent per bet in dealing with public money. I am
more aggressive today, but that was then. I told them that
losses were part of the process in finding winners. I will
never forget as long as I shall live the youngest trader looked
me square in the eye and with a very puzzled look asked
‘You have losses?’ I knew right then these birds had a very
long way to go and I often wonder what happened to them.”

When Do You Get Out of a Winning Position?
You have seen the headline hype: “Use Japanese candlesticks to
spot reversals” or “Determine support and resistance” or “Learn
proper profit-taking.” Stop. You can’t spot reversals until they

263

From the beginning of my
investigation, it became
evident that the most
direct way to make
money and the one most
compatible with my
strengths was to be a
position trader using
computer models to
develop the entry and exit
points.
Michael J. Clarke
Clarke Capital Management, Inc.

264

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Reason’s biological
function is to preserve
and promote life and to
postpone its extinction as
long as possible. Thinking
and acting are not
contrary to nature; they
are, rather, the foremost
features of man’s nature.
The most appropriate
description of man as
differentiated from
nonhuman beings is: a
being purposively
struggling against the
forces adverse to his life.
Ludwig von Mises27

happen. There is no way to define the concept of support and
resistance, as 100 people could have 100 different definitions.
These ideas all try to do the impossible—predict. Tom Basso
pointed out the futility of profit objectives:

Evaluating quantitative
traders is much more
about understanding
their research process
than looking at the last
few years of a track
record. The firmest grasp
of all the individual,
specific risks involved;
the most critical and
accurate analysis of the
inherent underlying
assumptions of their
research; the knowledge
of which statistical
measurements are
applicable or not; the
creation of the purest
mathematical
descriptions of price
structures, moves, and
volatility…these abilities
will determine the trader
most likely to deliver the
highest reward-to-risk in
the future.
Mark Abraham
Quantitative Capital Management, L.P.

Because trend followers do not play the game with the belief
that picking tops and bottoms is feasible, they do not have profit
targets generally. Profit targets cap profits. If you have a profit
target, you will stop trading after a set amount of profit. For
example, you enter at 100 and before you ever enter you establish
that you will exit if the price reaches a 25 percent gain, or 125. The
idea of a profit target sounds secure and wise at first blush.
However, if you have the experience of top trend traders, you know
profit targets are not the way to big wins. If you are riding a trend,
you have to let it go as far as it can go. You need to fully exploit the
move. You don’t want to exit at 125 and watch the trend go to 225.

“A new trader approaches an old trend follower and asks,
‘What’s your objective on this trade?’ The old trend follower
replies that his objective is for the position to go to the
moon.”
Exiting a winning position can be a challenge because you have
to be comfortable with letting a trend run as far as it can, crest, and
then begin to decline before considering an exit with profits. Say
you are up 100 percent in paper profits. If you cash in, those paper
profits become real. However, the trend is still up. You have just
made a big mistake because you limited yourself in how much you
could make. If you are long several positions, there are huge open
profits on the table, and the trend is still up—that is not time to get
out of your winning position.
