
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

JWBT439-Michalowski

252

January 18, 2011

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

target and map the next levels higher. “Is it a boy or girl, Doc?” Hopefully,
the decision will come soon.
The next chapter will go through the trade entry and trend trade progression. The triggers will be triggered, the risk will be defined, and the
targets will be set. How far the trend will go will depend on the strength of
the trend and the ability to keep the bullish or bearish bias intact. What we
do know is the market is ready to move.
See the Webinar: “Trading Forex in a Non-Trending Market”
In September 2010, I gave a webinar at FXStreet (www.fxstreet.com)
and later for customers at FXDD (http://forex.fxdd.com/webinars) titled
“Trading Forex in a Non-Trending Market” (both can be found archived on
those websites).
In the webinar, I talked about the 345-pip high-to-low trading range. I
looked at the diﬀerent charts and focused in on the key borderline levels. I
spoke of what needed to happen to push the market out of the nontrending
quagmire that had gripped the currency markets for a month’s time. I gave
the bias at the time from what the clues were saying and knew that a break
below the 100 day MA was needed to start the process to the downside,
while a move above the 200 hour MA was needed to get things going on
the upside. The message was clear, “I don’t know where we are going, but
we are going somewhere.”

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 11

Executing the
Game Plan

he snap cadence of football quarterbacks everywhere goes something
like this: “Blue 52. Blue 52. Hut. Hut.” That snap cadence gives clues
to the offensive linemen, the running backs, and the receivers, who
remain motionless as they await the snap of the ball. Sometimes the quarterback’s snap cadence will change the play. Sometimes its intention is to
confuse the opponent’s defense. In all situations, during the snap cadence
the players coil like springs. Then, when the ball is snapped, the spring explodes and the players execute the play. Each play is a part of the team’s
game plan. The play should support the team’s objectives set up by the
game plan. Sometimes the play does what the team thought it would do,
and a good gain is achieved. Other times it does not, and a small loss or
gain is made on the play.
In currency trading, there is no quarterback calling out a cadence; the
market does give clues that often ignite a “play.” That play is a trade, and
the trade is part of the game plan. Our game plan—to trade trends and
keep fear to a minimum—should be a requirement of all our trades. Sometimes the trades do what is expected and the market trends. A good gain is
achieved. Other times it does not, and the trade is closed for a small loss
or gain.
In Chapter 10, the snap cadence for a trend trade was developed. It was
the market’s cadence to the trade. The market clues from the five-minute,
hourly, and daily charts all pointed to a potential trend move—to a good
gain. To be successful in attacking the currency trends you need to see
and recognize the clues from the market. Recognize the cadence that the
market provides to traders.

T

253

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

254

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

Once that is done, it becomes a matter of executing what you have
been preparing for—the game plan. If the market does not do what you
think it should do, you adjust by exiting the trade. Sometimes you will put
together a few nice trades in a row and have a sustained profit drive. This
is the equivalent of a trader’s touchdown. Other times you may have some
losing trades, which are the equivalent of allowing the opposition to score.
However, just like in any athletic competition, you try not to make the mistakes that will kill you or cause you to lose the game. Ultimately, if you are
able to anticipate the trend and stay on that trend, and the profits start to
accrue, you will be successful, a winner. It is time to celebrate.
By now we know the mission statement. We know the game plan. We
can define the borderlines with our tools. By doing so, we understand
the risks. We will look to not make the big mistake but understand that
there will be losses. You cannot trade and not have losses. It is just part of
the business. It is a business. It is all business. Anyone who trades currencies is going against the market, the big boys.
In order to win and be successful at trading, you have to think like
the market. Anticipate the trend by following the clues. If the market is
not trending, look for it to trend. Look for the sustained trend trade—the
equivalent of the long drive in football. When you are on the trend, stay on
it. Make those who are trading against the trend pay. Stay on it until you
reach the end zone. Then after the position is closed out and the market
starts to correct, give yourself a high five, be happy, and start to prepare
for the next series, the next trend trade.
“Blue 52. Blue 52. Hut. Hut.” It is time to execute the trade and look for
the trend.

THE KICKOFF: THE ENTRY TRADE
In the initial hour of trading on September 13, the market went to a low of
1.2703 and a high of 1.2718. The range was narrow. The market was quiet.
The second hour had the same low price but extended to the 1.2724 high.
In the third hour the market made its move (see Figure 11.1). The price
moved above the 100 hour MA and triggered a buy at the 1.2725. There is
a key reason to trade. Risk can be defined by the closing price from Friday
at the 1.2709 or 16 pips. The anticipation of a trend move propelled the
market higher. The buyers were there. The market was seeing what I was
seeing. The initial risk was never threatened.
Is this trade realistic? Or is it a made-for-TV script where everyone lives
happily ever after? Needless to say, I know how the trade developed and
ended in this example, but that does not mean that what happened is not

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

Executing the Game Plan

January 18, 2011

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

255

FIGURE 11.1 The EURUSD Breaks above the 100 Hour MA at 1.2725 and Gets oﬀ
to a Great Start

replicated at other times in the currency market. When the trend clues are
lined up in the market, when the borderlines are evident and clear, they
are clear for everyone. It is no secret formula. It is a combination of lines,
moving averages (MAs), and Fibonacci retracements—simple things that
everyone can see, and that often lead to trend moves!
If I know a nontrending market will eventually trend, a break of a 100
bar MA will solicit a reaction from me. If the price breaks the 100 bar MA,
goes up 15 pips, and goes back down below it, I lose a little. It does not
make it a wrong trade. Trading successfully is not about being right all the
time. It is about being really right when you are right, and when you are
wrong being wrong by only a little.
The first few hours after major surgery, the anxious moments after a
rocket launch, the first offensive series in a football game—those beginning
moments are often critical to success or failure. Trading is no different. All
traders want to see the market do what it is supposed to do during the
first few hours after the trade. A profit right away is a tremendous boost to
confidence (and ego), but like many other things, you don’t know until that
initial time is over.
In my trade, it got off to a good start (see Figure 11.1). The market price
trended higher and broke the 200 hour MA at the 1.2769 level. It broke the
38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement at 1.2776 soon after that. The moves
happened in the first several hours of trading.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

256

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

FIGURE 11.2 The First Trend Leg Should Hold the 38.2 Percent Correction; Be
Patient.

The next key levels to target are the 1.2915 to 1.2931 levels, which are
the month-long high price. That is a big jump from the 1.2776 level, but it
is the trade’s first major target. If reached, the trade would yield nearly 200
pips. Not a bad return for 16 pips of risk.
There is going to be some resistance along the bullish journey, but
there are ways to manage it. There is still the risk that market could turn
around. But that is trading, and I have the tools to know if the trade is
wrong. If I am wrong, I will get out. If the market does not do what it is
supposed to do, I don’t mess around. My focus, however, is on a trend. The
trend is my rocket launch and the first few hours look good. The market
price goes to 1.2794, the profit is up to 68 pips, and the market finds some
profit takers (see Figure 11.2). What am I now thinking as a trader?

MANAGING THE TRADE
Managing the trade requires using all of our tools together. It is also about
using the five-minute, hourly, and daily charts to find key borderline levels
that give entry signals, confirm the trend, give exit signals, and provide
clues for retracements and the resumption of the trend.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Executing the Game Plan

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

257

The entry trade has been done, and the market has done what I expected it to do (i.e., climbed to 1.2794). It has trended higher away from the
key initial resistance. In outlining the progression and management of the
trend trade going forward, I will step through the initial legs of the trade.
The initial major target will be the 1.2931 level. That is where we want to
go. The only way to get there is to stay with a bullish bias. Let’s see how
the trade progresses.

The First Leg: Risk Profit for Rewards
When I manage a trend trade, the goal is to stay on the trend as long as
possible. In order to stay on a trend I need to risk profit. By this I mean that
there may be a correction within the early part of the trend that can take
unrealized gains from an account. However, if the trend is truly a trend, and
a trend is anticipated, the directional move will be reestablished before the
bias is changed from bullish to bearish (or vice versa). The potential return
is the rewards from a sustained, directional trend move.
Note the words risking profit. When you are on a trend there should
be profit from having a position with the trend, even if it is toward the start
of the trend. As a result, the risk that traders need to take is in the form of
investing some of the profit in the trade, not a risk of loss from the trade.
Think of a retail business. Most retail businesses invest some of their
profits in their business. The hope is that the money invested will lead to
greater rewards. It is no different in the trading business. If you anticipated
a trend trade and you have an early profit in that trade, you will need to
make an investment of some profit in the trend when the market corrects.
The best investment traders can make when attacking currency trends is
risking profit when a trend trade is anticipated.
If the trend is anticipated and the market appears to be obliging, be
sure that you do all you can to stay on that trend. You want to be greedy
because if this is a trend, the market will go higher.
I often feel that the first leg of the trend is often the most difficult.
There is a quick gain, and there tends to be a quick correction too. This is
because those traders who are happy with 20, 30, 40, 50 pips come in and
sell. There is also a group of traders at the beginning of a trend who are so
used to the nontrend that when the price goes higher, they are like Pavlov’s
dog. The bell rings and they sell simply because the price is higher.
This is normal, so let them sell. The first correction should be a healthy
correction, and the correction will often tell you about what may lie ahead
for the trend. By this I mean that you will often find out if the move has
support from the market and in particular the big boys, the most successful
traders. They are the ones that matter the most and carry the most influence for a trend-type move.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

21:3

258

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

Where you find if they are participating is usually at any key technical level that lies below the current spike high (there usually is at least
one borderline from the five-minute, hourly, or daily chart that can be pinpointed). In addition, the 38.2 percent retracement level of the move from
the low to the high (see Figure 11.2 Fibonacci retracements) is also a level
that, if held on a correction, gives confidence for the trend type move. The
38.2 percent retracement is the shallowest of the Fibonacci retracements,
and holding it is indicative of good buying interest from smart traders. If the
first correction can hold those levels, the potential for a currency trend is
looking good.
In the trade, the 200 hour MA (or confirming MA on the hourly chart)
was at 1.2769 today. This was the line that held the tops the prior week for
three successive days (look back in Chapter 10 at Figure 10.6). Using the
“If . . . Should” rule: If the price breaks the 100 hour MA trigger (which it
did) and the confirming 200 hour MA (which it did), the price should go
higher. If it does not, think about getting out. Since the current price in
Figure 11.2 is above the 200 hour MA line, this is a level I want the market
to stay above on a correction.
My getting-out point (or stop loss) in this trade is actually down to the
38.2 percent line at 1.2759 since that is below the 200 hour MA line. If the
200 hour MA line was at 1.2755 instead, I would put my stop below 1.2755.
With that stop loss in place, I am saying that I am willing to risk a move
below the 200 hour MA and down to the 38.2% retracement at 1.2759 (from
1.2794). That is a 35-pip investment. You are probably wondering why I was
willing to risk so much. The answer is that at the start of the trade I was
initiating a position at the borderline. I did not have profit. I had nothing. I
was anticipating a trend, but I did not know it was going to trend.
Now I have profit. I also have some clues that the market should trend.
I want to stay on the trend because I know that the gain will be much
greater than 70 pips if it is in fact a trend. I also know the hardest thing to
do is get back on that trend trade once the position is closed. I am willing
to invest 35 pips of profit in anticipation of a trend move. I also do not want
to scare myself out of a trend trade early—especially since I expect a trend.
I worked hard to catch the trend, and I want to stay on it. I am willing to
reinvest profit.
The trade progressed and the big boys held support (low came in at
1.2773) against the 200 hour MA at 1.2769 and the 38.2 percent retracement
at 1.2759. The second leg of the trend has begun.

The Second Leg: Temptations to Take Profit
The second leg of the trend trade starts to take shape (see Figure 11.3).
The upward momentum is slowing a bit, but the price still works its way up

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

21:3

Executing the Game Plan

Printer: Yet to come

259

FIGURE 11.3 The Second Leg of the Trend Should Still Find Buyers on Dips

to the 1.2833 level from the 1.2773 corrective low. Is it time to take profit?
After all, 100 pips can be locked in on the trade. There is another temptation
to book a profit and get out of the trade, but does it make sense? Is there a
reason?
In my opinion, it is still too soon to take profit. The reasons include:

r The market has only moved 108 pips from 1.2725 entry level. If this is
a trend move, it will have more room to roam.

r I am up 108 pips on the trade, but in order to make trend profits, you
need to risk trend profits. Give me a better reason to sell. That is, give
me a reason that says the bias is bearish.
r The first leg support held like a charm. There is likely to be support
from the big boys below.
r There are logical stops below that, if triggered, would mean there is
something very wrong with the idea of a trend and the bias would be
bearish.
For this leg higher, I have moved the stop up modestly. The new stop
loss zone is between 1.2768 and 1.2783 (see Figure 11.3). The reason I have
a range for the stop is that it gives an option. I like to do this early in a

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

260

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

trend move when the market is still influenced by quick profit takers and
countertrend traders.
The top stop level is a more conservative stop. Maybe I take partial
profit? Maybe I am still not sure of the trend (although all reasons point to
a trend)? Maybe the level is of significance?
In the trade, the 38.2 percent retracement of the move up from the low
is still a level that should hold support early in a trend move. Note that at
the level there were some buyers earlier, so there should be a good base of
support at the level.
If I were to decide to stop myself out at the higher 1.2783 level, but
the price holds the bottom stop zone price at 1.2768 levels, I would look to
purchase at least part of my position back when it goes back above 1.2783.
The reason is that it is still early in the trend, and the holding of the 1.2768
level should be encouraging to the market. Stay on the trend as long as
you can!
The other lower stop level I set is at 1.2768. This stop level is what I like
to call the “This is not a trend; I want out” stop level. The level corresponds
with four separate borderlines: the 200 bar MA on the five-minute chart, the
200 hour MA, the 50 percent retracement, and it is also where the big boys
bought earlier.
Is the level significant? Yes, it is! Needless to say, if the price goes below this level, I get out. I make 43 pips on the trade, I risked 16 pips initially,
and I go back to the drawing board. It is not my fault. It is the market’s fault
for not wanting to trend!
There will always be a level that makes you doubt the trend and consider bailing. These levels are obvious. The stop at 1.2768 is obvious. There
are four reasons why the price should not go below that level. The old saying goes, “If it walks like a duck, quacks like a duck, and looks like a duck,
it is a duck.” Find the ducks that say stop and regroup. The good news is
you still are likely to have a profit on the trade, and you can regroup with a
clear, fear-free head.
Be prepared for some chinks in the armor, but don’t panic. Note in
Figure 11.3 how the price fell below the 100 bar MA (solid MA line) on the
five-minute chart. Is that a worry? Not really. I am still more focused on
the 38.2 percent as being more of a worry. The trend is still young. The
1.2915 to 1.2931 level still is our minimum target. There are better levels of
support below. Remember, be patient, especially early in the anticipated
trend. Look for reasons to stay on the trend.

The Third Leg: Exiting with a Reason
If you have made it this far, the rewards are about to start getting more serious. We are also now talking about a trend day (see Figure 11.4). The

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

Executing the Game Plan

January 18, 2011

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

261

FIGURE 11.4 Third Leg Higher Surges Nearly 100 Pips. Is It Time to Take Some
Proﬁt?

market has been trending higher with little in the way of corrections
(higher highs and higher lows). The price has moved comfortably back
above the 100 bar MA on the five-minute chart after the minor drops below it earlier. The stop levels on the last leg were not threatened and the
price surged to the upside.
On this leg up there should not have been any fear. Sure, the price
moved up and corrected below the previous high (see gray line), but it had
a V reversal well before it even got to the 100 bar MA. The price peaks at
the 1.2891 level, tacking on nearly 100 pips from the last corrective low.
I am long at 1.2725 and the price is at 1.2891. All is good with the trend.
However, with the price approaching key resistance at 1.2915 to 1.2931
(the month-long high-ceiling level), it is time to think what lies ahead and
plan the next trade. It is time to think about a temporary exit.
It may have seemed unlikely at the start of the trade and the day, but
the high area for the month of trading at the 1.2915 to 1.2931 level is within
sight. This is a level that is likely to lead to some profit taking, selling on
the first test.
The smart traders who anticipated the trend, and who have 165 pips
of profit, will likely sell and take profit or partial profit against the level,
with the knowledge that if the price goes above the 1.2931 level, they will
buy. This is simply sound money management and makes logical trading

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

262

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

sense. The traders who have been selling (and are short) as the market goes
higher and higher and higher will also be selling against the level. In their
minds it is time to have that correction that gets them back to breakeven.
Don’t be one of these traders!
If the price does find sellers and moves lower, buying and reestablishing at a lower support level is what should happen. In order to take profit
(or exit), I always need a technical reason to sell. Selling because you have
a profit is not a good reason. However, selling against the key resistance at
1.2915 to 1.2931 is a good reason to sell. It is a key borderline. Borderlines
give us reasons to trade. Are there any other reasons to sell at this area
other than the 1.2915 to 1.2931 level? After all, 1.2891 is still 40 pips away
from 1.2931.
Because I am always looking ahead and my charts are dynamic, not
static, there are three options for exiting.

Option 1 Sell against the top trend line (point A in Figure 11.5). When
the market is trending higher (or lower), it is not only important to draw
the bullish trend line by connecting the higher lows, but it is also important
to connect the highs in the chart to higher highs.

FIGURE 11.5 This Leg Higher Is Starting to Approach Resistance Levels Where
Proﬁt Taking Is Likely

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c11

JWBT439-Michalowski

Executing the Game Plan

January 18, 2011

21:3

Printer: Yet to come

263

In Figure 11.5, while the shorts were covering one last time, they were
pushing the price right up to the top trend line that connected the earlier
highs for the day. That level came in at the 1.2891 level. Is that a low-risk
selling borderline? Yes!
What is my risk selling against the top trend line borderline? I do have
risk because I am taking myself out of a trend that I want to be on. My
risk at this point is if the price goes higher above the trend line and breaks
above the month-long high at 1.2931. If this happens, I need to buy on that
break. So, by selling here I forgo 40 pips of profit and have to buy a new
break.
I can define my risk another way. I can sell against the trend line at the
1.2891 area, but simply buy my position back if the price goes above the
