
Are you ready to bring this all together? In our opening example,
we assumed that we have a $100,000 trading account. Based on the

c12.indd 257

11/2/07 12:47:47 PM

258

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

1% Rule, we cannot lose more than $1,000 on this trade. This maximum
loss number was determined before we ever set eyes on our chart.
Next, we need to determine our risk per share in this trade. The
risk per share is simply the entry price minus the stop price. How’s
that for easy math? Written as an equation, it looks like this:
Risk per share  $44.50  $43.50  $1.00
Notice that if the stock drops by $1, that represents a 2.2 percent drop in the stock. Many people mistakenly think that the stock
can drop only 1 percent according to this rule. That’s not the case.
The stock may drop by more or less than 1 percent, but the impact
on our trading account is limited to 1 percent.
The last step here is to calculate your position size or how many
shares you may trade. The following equation is used to determine
position size:
Position size  Risk amount/Risk per share
In the example we’re creating, the position size is found as
follows:
Position size  $1,000/$1.00  1,000 shares
What this tells us is that based on the chart setup that we’ve
analyzed, we can buy 1,000 shares of DIA at $44.50. If it should
drop to our stop level of $43.50, we would lose $1,000, which is our
maximum loss set by the 1% Rule.
There are two factors that influence our position size. The first is
the account value. As the account value increases, the value of 1 percent
of the account increases and vice versa. Second, as the risk per share
increases, the number of shares that we can purchase decreases. This is
how we accommodate the higher risk trades. If we had to purchase this
stock at $45.50, our risk per share would have increased to $2. Using
the same $1,000 maximum loss, we could now buy only 500 shares in
order to stay within our defined risk plan.
What happens if we had to buy this stock at $53.50? Now we have
a risk per share of $10, and we could buy only 100 shares. Some traders would raise the stop in order to allow them to buy more shares.

c12.indd 258

11/2/07 12:47:47 PM

Managing Risk

259

This is absolutely the wrong approach because we’d be placing our
stop above support and we should expect to get stopped out for a loss.
Never tell the market what you need or want; it doesn’t care. Your
placement of the stop order should be based on the chart alone. If
the trade doesn’t meet your standard, then go find another trade.
6. Execute Your Opening Trade and Stop Order

It’s as simple as that; you’ve found the trade, now take the risk. How
soon after the opening trade should you place your stop order? Let’s
list the tasks that may not be done until the stop order is placed:
• Get coffee
• Use the restroom
• Answer the phone
• Sneeze
• Breathe
Are you getting the picture? Once your opening trade is filled,
you should immediately enter your stop order. If you give it any more
time, you’re just inviting trouble. And, as we’ve said many times, the
stop order must be physically entered with your broker. Don’t keep
the infamous mental stop because it has a nasty habit of failing to fire
when the stop level is reached.

Managing Risk in a Probabilistic World
The issue of managing risk for the trader essentially boils down
to the fact that we are required to take specific action in a market that
is probabilistic rather than deterministic. We can make our besteffort guess at what the future holds, but it can never be known with
certainty. Dr. Lloyd S. Nelson, director of statistical methods for
the Nashua Corporation, is quoted as saying, “The most important
figures that one needs for management are unknown or unknowable, but successful management must nevertheless take account
of them.” Extending that concept to the trading community tells
us that sometimes the most important considerations are not to be
found in the relative strength index (RSI) percentage or whether
the candlestick has a bottom shadow. These may serve as guidelines

c12.indd 259

11/2/07 12:47:47 PM

260

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

for our action, but the analysis is sometimes trumped by factors
beyond our control: an unexpected economic report, litigation
against the company, accounting irregularities, and so on. These are
the trader’s “unknown or unknowable,” but successful trading must
nevertheless take account of them.
Our probabilistic world may not be the most predictable or, at
times, the most profitable. Nevertheless, the lure of the market continues to reside in the challenge of navigating through the uncertainty.
Navigate with care and you’ll be amply rewarded.

c12.indd 260

11/2/07 12:47:48 PM

13

C H A P T E R

Trading Hall of Shame
TRA DERS Y O U DO N ’ T WANT TO IMITATE

O

ver the years that we have worked with traders, both new and
experienced, we have seen some personalities emerge. Some traders
exhibited more of these personality characteristics than others. Some
traders captured various characteristics from several personality
types.
We used to joke about the trader who always bought the high and
sold the low. No matter what he tried, he was always on the wrong
side of the trade. That led his fellow traders to consider him a reliable contrarian indicator. When the predictable loser would buy, his
fellow traders would all quietly sell. As long as you took the other
side of the trade, profits were almost guaranteed.
In the United States, Chapter 13 is the bankruptcy law that allows
for reorganization. Filing a straight bankruptcy forces you into liquidation and does not allow for redeeming yourself. Chapter 13 gives
you the breathing room to recognize the problem and implement
corrective action. If you see yourself in the profiles that follow, then
consider this Chapter 13 to be your path toward reorganization.
In that light, and with perhaps a bit of lightheartedness, we offer
the trader personalities on the following pages. While these characters are fictional (for the most part), they really do exist in the
market. Your goal is to make sure you are not one of them. We’ll
start by describing the characters, including their quirks and trading
habits. Following each character development is the prescription for
261

c13.indd 261

11/2/07 12:48:19 PM

262

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

curing the bad habits. It doesn’t do any good to point out a problem
without providing a solution. Read both sections for your enjoyment
and, if necessary, your improvement.

Barry the Bottom Fisher: Always Buys the Low
(Until It Makes a New Low)
Barry is the type of person who buys bulk toilet paper because it’s his
way of getting a bargain. The caption under his high school yearbook
picture reads “Penny wise, pound foolish” and he still thinks that price
is everything. The truth is he’ll drive across town to save a penny per
gallon on gas just as quickly as he’ll change his broker to save on commissions. He is so resistant to paying up for an option contract that the
tattoo on his arm reads “The further the strike the more I like.”
He is, by far, the most popular guest at the dinner party because
his friends consider him to be the ultimate contrarian indicator. He’s
even been known to break up a party or two by talking about his trading positions during the course of a meal. Hosts have since learned
not to schedule any more parties during trading hours as people
will tend to race home to place a trade once they’ve found out that
they have the same stocks as Barry. He tries hard to convince others
of the favorite trading strategies he’s learned from long-time buddy
Double-Down Dan, and often wonders why his positions never move
from the average cost basis. It just so happens that Barry is the average cost basis, and you will find that he holds over a million shares of
stock, but his account equity is still hovering about the $12,000 mark.
Barry never has trouble identifying support for his stocks. He simply
uses the bottom of the chart. His trend lines look like the flight path
of a homesick groundhog in freefall.
His great grandfather Phil Orkillit just happened to be the author
who introduced the buy and hold strategy in his 1928 best seller, Buy Till
You Die. Feeling confident that time is on his side, Barry would never
ever consider using a stop loss order because this would interfere with
his plan to accumulate the position. He will spend many long hours
studying the fundamentals of a company to help him make a buy decision, and once he is in, he is committed to that stock.
Prescription

Barry the Bottom Fisher obviously has it in his head that buying
a stock when it’s on a 52-week low means the stock is selling for

c13.indd 262

11/2/07 12:48:19 PM

Trading Hall of Shame

263

a bargain. There is nothing further from the truth. Of course, there
will be times when you will get lucky and actually be the person who
buys the 52-week low, but in all our years in the market, we have yet
to meet the person who does this consistently.
If your strategy is to “bottom fish” in the market, then there is
a good chance you have at one point or another, bought a stock,
watched it go down, bought more, and had it go down again; then,
after you ran out of buying power, you grabbed the analyst report
to find reasons why you should hold on to this stock for the long
term. Experienced traders do not trade this way. The great traders
buy high to sell higher. If you find yourself trying to predict the bottom for a stock move, change your approach and make it a point to
only buy a stock that has evidence of a support level and one that is
already on its way up after it has bounced off of the support line.
Another thing you can try in order to change your strategy is to
look for stocks that are in upward trends and try to buy the highs.
This will feel a little uncomfortable for you in the beginning, but
after you have had some success with this, you will feel much better
about it later on.
With regard to shopping for a lower commission, please don’t
pinch pennies by changing brokers every time the competition lowers the cost of a trade. Building a relationship with your broker is a
very important part of your business. If you are a long-time client
who is active in the markets, your broker will be more willing to fight
for you the next time you get a bad trade execution. If you ask for
it, there will be times where your broker will give you a customer
service adjustment just to keep you happy (this one piece of information could pay for the cost of this book). If you are trading 50
to 120 times per year, you are categorized as an active trader in the
eyes of your broker. Even if you consider yourself to be a long-term
investor, 50 to 100 trades per year make you a very valuable client
who generates revenue for the company you have your account with.
If you left your broker, it could cost them anywhere from $2,000 to
$10,000 to replace you. You represent a very competitive segment of
the market, and most brokers will fight for your business.
Take time and get to know the people you are speaking with on
the phone and shop for good customer service and not a cheaper
commission. Think about it—even if you trade as much as 200 times
per year, is it worth leaving a good company just to save a dollar
or two per trade? We are talking about a $200 to $400 difference.

c13.indd 263

11/2/07 12:48:20 PM

264

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Would you trade good service for $400? If your answer is yes, then
you are focusing your attention in the wrong direction. A good
broker who gives good service could save you many thousands of
dollars over time.
We have a good time whenever we talk about Barry the Bottom
Fisher because his character is based on a real person who actually
lives in London. Barry has called in to our radio show a few times,
and we are happy to say he has kept a good sense of humor when we
discuss his losses in front of the world. Note to Barry: If you are reading this, we do hope you have learned your lessons.

Breakeven Betty: Forget Profits, Breaking
Even Is Her Goal
Fifty-two years old, slightly optimistic, and full of ideas, Betty doesn’t
embrace success—she absolutely fears it. She drives a hybrid to work
because acceleration frightens her. The bumper sticker on her rear
window reads “Born to be Mild.”
Betty is the type of person who so badly wants to be a trader she
can taste it, but somehow she’s never been able to get in a groove.
Her timing is always just a little off. The stocks she picked in the past
always seemed like good ones at first, but when they turned on her,
she’d always find a way to hold on. She loved all of her stocks equally
and maybe that was her problem—she didn’t quite know how to
let go of them when the price moved against her. When Betty was
younger, she always dreamed of having an only child because she
didn’t think she could handle sibling rivalries.
Once in a while her friends would come over to visit for some
Reg-T and crumpets. Her trades took on personalities of their own,
with Betty occasionally naming them. Betty’s friends became her support group, and they would hold her accountable by asking the tough
questions: “Why do you like this guy so much? If you hold on any
longer, you are not only going to waste your precious time but also
a lot of money carrying this loser.” Sooner or later, her friends were
right. She would hold on to these guys just long enough to get back the
money she had invested in them, and then she would boot them out.
Prescription

The number one thing we can learn from Betty is that that you should
not marry your stocks. Dump them just as quickly as you would an

c13.indd 264

11/2/07 12:48:20 PM

Trading Hall of Shame

265

abusive relationship. The longer you wait for things to get better, the
worse it will get and the more money it will cost you.
You’ll find that the only time Betty sells a stock is when it has
come back up to her entry price. You see, she buys the stock, suffers
all the pain of the crash, and then exits just as it breaks even. That
is often the point when the buyers have regained control, and the
pain is amplified by the fact that Betty watches the stock she just sold
move into a profit. The fatal flaw is that Betty buys on the way down
and sells on the way up. That is the exact opposite strategy from the
Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success.
Another rule that is good to follow is this: If you ever find yourself in a margin call, the first thing you should do is sell out of the
losing position and move to cash. This is the safest thing to do; then,
once you are in cash, you can always find another stock that will treat
you better. Just because Betty has her broker’s margin department
on speed dial doesn’t mean you have to. From our experience, we
have seen that the majority of the time traders will receive a second
and sometimes third margin call after they have deposited funds in
their trading accounts to meet the minimum cash requirement set
by the Federal Reserve Board. If you get a margin call from your
broker, this means your stock is not working out the way you thought
it would. Otherwise, you would be making money from your investment. If you are holding on to a stock that is collapsing and you give
money to your broker to finance this losing position, chances are the
stock will continue in the direction that is hurting you, much like a
bad relationship.

Seminar Sal: He’s Everywhere, But Is
He Making Money?
On day one of the Super Swingtrader Software Symposium, you will
see him standing at the check-in door like a homesick puppy. Genuinely a nice guy, very outgoing, wide-eyed, and one who idolizes
the seminar speakers, Sal actually reads the expo agenda in order to
time his lunch breaks around the speaker schedule.
He doesn’t bother to pick up the exhibitor schwag bag because
he has his own monogrammed leather schwag bag custom-made to
accommodate the inventory of pens he picks up along the way. In
fact, he’s made more money selling exhibitor-branded stress balls
on eBay then he has the whole time he’s been trading. Even in the

c13.indd 265

11/2/07 12:48:20 PM

266

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

warmest weather he comes with four jackets so he can save seats at
his favorite seminars. You’ll know who he is because he’s the one in
the crowd who laughs uproariously before each punch line simply
because he’s heard all the jokes before.
Like Indiana Jones in search of the Holy Grail, he arrives at each
expo with the eager anticipation that this is the event where he will
find the elusive black box for trading. In fact, it’s been rumored that
he really does carry a whip at the bottom of that schwag bag. He has
never visited a city that doesn’t have a trading expo because seminars
are his only reason to travel. He is hoping that Kalamazoo will one
day host a trading expo because that’s where his mom lives.
Prescription

We meet Seminar Sal at every money show and trader expo. When are
you going to learn that there is no Holy Grail for trading? A good friend
of ours, Martin Pring, has told us that you have bought every book he
has written and he has told you the same, yet you are still searching for
the golden secret. Sal, it’s time for you to Keep It Super Simple.
It’s important for us to tell you that there are a lot of good things
you can get from a seminar. The markets will continue to evolve
and you will be able to learn how to trade an exchange-traded fund
(ETF) or you may learn how to correctly invest in a hedge fund, but
at the same time it’s important for you to know that there are
snake oil salesmen out there who will try to sell you the useless software package that will cost you many thousands of dollars. Here are
some pointers that will help you get the most out of a trade show:
• Avoid the impulse buy and don’t get caught up in the emotion
of the moment. The vendor at the trade show will have little
time to capture your attention; therefore, their approach will
be enthusiastic and one that plays on your emotions. Be aware
of this; make sure you have all of the facts and take the information home with you so you can make your decision without
the influence of the enthusiastic salesperson.
• Watch out for false claims. Check the performance record of
anyone who is making income claims. In other words, vet your
source and see if your expert is willing to show you the losing
trades along with the winners. This goes for money managers
as well. Many times, we have seen people just highlighting the

c13.indd 266

11/2/07 12:48:21 PM

Trading Hall of Shame

267

best of show while they ignore the worst performers. Don’t fall
for the sales gimmicks.
• Make sure you know your financial objectives before you get to
the show. This will help you get the most of the show, and you will
be able to focus your attention on topics most important to you.
• Get a copy of the speaker schedule and cross off anyone who
uses language that appeals to the person who is looking to get
rich quick.
• Allocate your time and frequent the speakers who showcase
risk management strategies.
• Visit the brokerage firms to see what they are doing to stay
competitive with the other firms. Don’t focus as much on commissions, but rather what they are doing to improve customer
service and availability.
Once you have your trading platform in place, you should be
ready to go. Stick with some basic strategies that will help you stay
consistent in the market and try not to jump from one idea to the
next because this will lead you off on tangents that could distract you
from your most profitable trades.

The Frozen Chosen: Holding Back Because of Fear
As one of the Frozen Chosen, Margarita knows it all, but she can’t
seem to get herself to make a trade. We met with her the other day in
an effort to help her with her trading problem and found that there
is more to her story than meets the eye. Here are just some of the
notes we took away from our meeting:
• She is difficult to drive with because she tends to want to stop
at green lights.
• She’s an enthusiastic individual, but one who pays a monthly
fee for a dummy account on her trading software.
• She doesn’t really care what commissions cost her because
she’s never paid one.
• She will lose sleep at night over a bad paper trade.
• She has a collection of dice from the craps tables at Vegas
because she could never bring herself to throw them.
• Fearful of making a commitment, things went terribly wrong
at her wedding ceremony when she said, “I might.”

c13.indd 267

11/2/07 12:48:21 PM

268

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

• On her birthday she makes it a point to blow out all but one
candle on her cake, for fear that her wish might come true.
• She has never won the pick-six lottery because she will only
pick five numbers.
• She knows that the early bird catches the worm, but she’s fearful that she may be the early worm. This may be something
she learned from her father, whose favorite quote was, “Eagles
may soar, but moles don’t get sucked into jet engines.”
• She attempted to place a trade one day, but it scared her half
to death. Now she wonders, “What happens if you get scared
half to death twice?”

Prescription

The solution for Margarita is for her to overcome her fears, not just
in trading but in every aspect of her life. This may sound like an easy
thing to do, but if you have conditioned yourself to react to challenges in a fearful way, this can be a very tough step to take. We are
talking about changing a mind-set, and the only way to reverse this
way of thinking is for you to condition yourself to take action.
From a trading standpoint, the best way to overcome the fear
of the trade is to start small. Buy 50 shares of the stock that you’re
considering. You may be thinking that it will be difficult to make a
profit on 50 shares. Your goal is not to make a profit but rather to
overcome your fear of the market. You will find that 50 shares are
easy to manage. You can buy them quickly, sell them quickly, and you
won’t lose sleep if the stock moves in the wrong direction.
Once you are comfortable with trading 50 shares, move up to
100 shares. Continue building your confidence until you are ready
to fully implement the Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success
Point IV (The 1% Rule). At that point, you will have the confidence
to trade 500 or 1,000 shares.
We might also suggest some of the following activities that many
of our friends around the world have found useful:
• Read a short motivational book once a month for a year.
Consider starting with The Generosity Factor by Ken Blanchard
and S. Truett Cathy (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2002),
or Wins, Losses, and Lessons by Lou Holz (New York: William
Morrow, 2006).
