
How Are Forex Moves Measured?
Forex trading, like many new things, is confusing yet simple. If a quote for the EUR/USD is 1.23, this simply means that 1 euro is equal to 1.23 U.S. dollars. A quote
for the USD/JPY at 109.50 simply means that 1 U.S. dollar is equal to 109.50 Japanese yen (see Figure 4.10).

73

Figure 4.10

Forex markets move in what are called pips. A pip (price interest point) is the smallest unit of price for any foreign currency.
• EUR/USD trading from 1.2300 to 1.2301 = a gain of 1 pip
• USD/JPY trading from 108.01 to 108.09 = a gain of 8 pips
• GBP/USD trading from 1.8302 to 1.8311 = a gain of 9 pips
• EUR/USD trading from 1.2300 to 1.2401 = a gain of 101 pips
A full one-cent move in the currency is equal to 100 pips.

How Do You Calculate Pip Values?
First, we start with the complicated way pip values are calculated, which is as follows:
• (1 pip, including decimal point/current exchange rate) × (notional amount)
• For the EUR/USD this translates into:

• But we want the pip value in U.S. dollars, not euros, so we go one step further:

What this boils down to is this: any forex contract that ends in USD is worth $10 per pip, or $1,000 for a full 1-cent move (100 pips). The euro, for example, moves
in a range of 80 to 150 pips per day. This $10-per-pip calculation would include the euro (EUR/USD), pound (GBP/USD), and other such contracts. These are the
contracts that most people trade. It gets a little trickier when this is not the case. For example, on M arch 29, 2005, a USD/JPY contract and any additional contracts
that ended in JPY were $9.35 per pip. On this same day, any contract that ended in CHF was $8.29 per pip. The EUR/GBP was $18.70 per pip, and so on, based on
the various exchange rates. Again, most traders seem to focus on currencies that end in USD, so the $10 per pip has become a universal number when talking about
forex. There is also a mini-version of these contracts in which each pip is worth $1.

What Happens to Currencies When Prices Change?
If a quote for the USD/JPY is at 108.00, it means that it takes 1 U.S. dollar to buy 108 Japanese yen. If the price moves to 109.00, this means that the yen has
weakened against the dollar, because it now requires more yen to obtain the same 1 U.S. dollar. If the EUR/USD is trading at 1.20, this means that 1 euro can buy 1.20
U.S. dollars. A move to 1.22 means that the euro has strengthened against the U.S. dollar because it requires more U.S. dollars to obtain the same 1 euro.
74

How Can You Hedge Your Own Life in the Forex Markets?
There are many trade setups for forex that work in smaller time frames, and I talk more about these setups later in the book. However, the fascinating thing about the
forex market is traders’ ability to participate in world events on different scales and essentially “hedge their life.”

Figure 4.11
75

For example, my wife and I visited Spain, France, and Italy from December 18, 2003, through January 14, 2004. (Yes, it’s colder then, but there aren’t any lines.)
Excluding airfare, I added up the estimated costs in euros. On the day we booked this trip, September 30, 2003, the exchange rate was 1.1675. Based on this rate, I
estimated that the trip would cost U.S. $15,000. This cost would fall if the euro fell, but would increase if the price of the euro also increased. I pulled up a chart (see
Figure 4.11).
In this figure, point 2 shows where the market was trading on the day we booked the trip. Point 1 shows the all-time highs at 1.1932 that had been hit on M ay 27,
2003. For our trip, I wanted the euro to fall so that our costs would also fall. However, just because I wanted the euro to fall didn’t mean that it would. If the euro took
off, our trip could get considerably more expensive. Since a regular contract represents $100,000 worth of U.S. currency, it was much too large to use as a hedge. The
minis each represent $10,000 worth of U.S. currency, so this is where I looked to set up a position.
Looking at the chart on this day, I decided to place a buy stop order for two mini EUR/USD contracts at 1.1933, one pip above the all-time highs. This buy stop
order meant that I would get into the market only if the euro traded up and through 1.1933. Instead of getting stopped out of a short position, I would be getting
stopped into a long position, since I was currently flat.
I decided to do this at this higher level, instead of at the immediate price, in case the euro did roll over and fall. If it fell from where it was when we booked our
tickets, it would be a plus for us, as our trip would get cheaper with each decline. However, if the euro broke out to new highs, it could ignite a huge rally and really
inflate our trip budget. One mini-contract represents $10,000, so I was essentially hedging $20,000 in U.S. currency with the two mini-contracts. Since I
underestimated how much the trip would cost, this actually worked out perfectly in the end.
On November 18, almost two months later, my buy stop was hit at point 3. By the time we left for our trip at point 4, the euro had moved more than 500 pips
from my entry. By the time we got home at point 5, I closed out the position at 1.2665, a gain of 732 pips. Two mini-contracts equaled a gain of $1,464, which paid
for the increased exchange rate we had to pay while we were over there. Had the euro hit my buy stop and then sold off to 1.10, I would have lost money on the trade,
but this would have been offset by the money saved during the trip because of the more favorable exchange rate. Had I set this up as a “normal” trade using five
regular-sized contracts, a 732-pip move would have equaled $36,600.
There are many other ways in which people can “hedge their life” in the forex markets. For people who think the value of the U.S. dollar is going to continue to
decline and are worried about the value of their savings deteriorating against other world currencies, they can hedge their savings account by going long the EUR/USD.
If a person has $240,000 in savings, she can buy two regular contracts and four mini-contracts, and have a perfect hedge.

For Traders, Is This All You Need to Know?
The biggest question traders always ask is, “How much money do I need to buy one contract, and what happens after I buy it?” For forex, it can vary based on your
broker, but in general, to buy one regular-sized contract, a trader will need about $1,000, and to buy a mini-contract, a trader will need about $100. This depends on the
leverage that the broker is offering. A typical scenario is that traders will open up a small mini-account with $500 and get 200:1 leverage. They will then buy two mini
EUR/USD contracts, and this will cost them $130. Their $500 account now has $371 in available equity, after the $129 in margin has been deducted. In the worst-case
scenario (which can happen), the trade goes completely wrong. It will have to move 185 pips against the traders (which wipes out their $371 in equity) before their
position is closed out by the dealer—provided they have zero-balance protection. The $130 in margin that was used to establish the position is returned to the
account, bringing the balance down from $500 to $130. If the trade works out, gains 55 pips on two mini-contracts, and is sold, then this $110 profit is put into the
account along with the initial margin, and the total balance then becomes $610, less transaction costs. If a trader is using the big contracts in this scenario, everything is
the same except that it is times 10.
How much does this cost in terms of transaction fees? Well, the spread is typically 3 pips wide in the EUR/USD for most FX dealers, which is what the trader pays
instead of commissions. It’s still a transaction cost—anyone who calls this “commission-free” trading should be hanged. For the minis, it equates to $3 per side, and
for the regular contracts, it’s $30 per side. The spreads will continue to narrow, and this will get cheaper. This isn’t much different from trading the ES. In this case, the
spread is $12.50. Add, say, an $8 round turn cost, and now you are really trading $20.50 a round turn. A trader should always add the spread into his transaction
costs.
I personally spend most of my time watching the following eight currency pairs. For each, I have given their TradeStation (TS) quote symbol, their thinkorswim
(TOS) quote symbol, the corresponding futures contract symbol, and (in parentheses) the nickname that many traders use when referring to the contract.
1. EUR/USD (Euro). TS: EURUSD; TOS: EUR/USD; Futures: EC
2. GBP/USD (Cable). TS: GBPUSD; TOS: GBP/USD; Futures: BP
3. AUD/USD (Aussie). TS: AUDUSD; TOS: AUD/USD; Futures: AD
4. USD/JPY (Dollar Yen). TS: USDJPY; TOS: USD/JPY; Futures: JY
5. USD/CHF (Swissy). TS: USDCHF; TOS: USD/CHF; Futures: SF
6. USD/CAD (Loonie). TS: USDCAD; TOS: USD/CAD; Futures: CD
7. EUR/GBP (Euro Sterling). TS: EURGBP; TOS: EUR/GPB; Futures: RP
8. EUR/JPY (Euro Yen). TS: EURJPY; TOS: EUR/JPY; Futures: RY
Although there are many other minor currency pairs, these eight will provide plenty of trading opportunities, and they all tend to move together. It is also important
to have a chart of the dollar composite index ($DXY on both TradeStation and TOS). In general, if the dollar index is moving higher, then USD/JPY, USD/CHF, and
USD/CAD are also moving higher. This action will push EUR/USD, GBP/USD, and AUD/USD lower. When the financial news networks mention that “Warren
Buffett is short the dollar,” he is really long EUR/USD, GBP/USD, and/or AUD/USD and short USD/CHF, USD/JPY, and/or USD/CAD. If the dollar goes lower, then
76

the first three currency pairs will move in the opposite direction from the dollar and go higher, and the last three currency pairs will move lower with the dollar.
For the futures markets, the price movements on EC, BP, and AD are identical to their cash counterparts in EURUSD, GBPUSD, and AUDUSD. However, the
futures quotes on JY, CD, and SF are inverted. This is because they are quoted based on dollars (just as EURUSD is quoted in dollars). For example, USDJPY may be
trading at 115.12, which tells a trader that 1 U.S. dollar is equal to 115.12 yen. M eanwhile, JY is trading at 0.8692, which tells a trader that 100 yen are worth $0.8692
dollar (or 1,000 yen are worth $8.692 or 10,000 yen are worth $86.92, and so on). The reason for this is that the JY futures chart is based on a pairing of JPYUSD,
whereas the cash market is based on USDJPY. Simple, right? For currency futures, if you want to play a short on the dollar, then you just buy any one of those six
futures contracts. If you want to play a dollar long, then you short any of the six futures contracts. For newer traders who are trying to decide between trading cash
forex and currency futures, I would suggest going into the currency futures markets because of the additional advantages described earlier.
As I’m writing this book, the M F Global mess has been unfolding before my eyes. For those of you who aren’t familiar with this, M F Global was a major global
financial derivatives broker, and many traders, especially hedge funds, traded futures contracts through M F Global. On M onday, October 31, 2011, M F Global
admitted a transfer of $700 million from customer accounts to its U.K. subsidiary to mask liquidity shortfalls at the company that resulted from wrong-way bets on
European debts. Customer accounts were frozen, and M F Global filed the eighth-largest U.S. bankruptcy. As I’m writing this, cleints have received about 75 percent
of their funds back, and are still waiting to see what happened to the rest. (Canadian clients, because of stricter Canadian banking laws, received all of their funds back
in 10 days.)
This incident has put a blemish, to put it lightly, on the futures industry. Hedge funds have gone out of business, careers and businesses have been destroyed.
Individual traders continue to wait for the remaining 25 percent of their funds. I didn’t have any accounts at M F Global (sometimes its better to be lucky than smart)
but I know many traders who did. The questions that keep surfacing are, “Should I keep trading futures? Is my money safe?”
I’m personally still trading futures for the reasons I’ve already described. I of course don’t have all of my assets exposed to futures or sitting in a futures account.
I’ve also re-double-checked the brokers that I use (the ones I’ve listed in this book) to make sure they aren’t making any ridiculous bets on European debt (they
aren’t). Does that mean all is good? Unfortunately, no. This incident raises a ton of issues, and I predict that the CM E Group will need to lead a taskforce to set up
account guarantees, much like what is already in place in the stock industry. In the long run, that would be good for traders, and it would restore confidence in the
futures markets. In the short term, this is an ugly mess that is not going to go away. The net result is that I’m still trading futures and am awaiting the next steps taken
in the industry with keen interest.
For additional information, we’ve set up www.tradethemarkets.com/markets for current updates to the markets we are trading.

77

5
Stock Options:
How Do They Work
and What Is the Best
Way to Trade Them?
Why Is Option Trading Awesome to Some and Scary to Others?
Options trading is the most fascinating type of trading, simply because there are so many different things you can do with options. And when it comes to options,
there are generally two types of retail traders. The first doesn’t know anything about them. The second tried buying an option (most likely an out-of-the-money call),
lost money, and then discovered that a person could also sell options and collect the premium. This type of trader now knows the 300 different ways to collect
premiums (for example, a clipped-wing, four-legged, three-eyed butterfly) and spends a lot of time legging into and out of option positions, making a little money each
month. This tends to work for many months—until it doesn’t, and then it gets very ugly very quickly. In other words, even though these people know everything
there is to know about options, they still can’t make a consistent income trading them. With options, too much knowledge isn’t necessarily a good thing.
I utilize a few basic strategies when it comes to options trading. I like to keep things simple. I focus both on directional plays and on collecting premiums. I’m going
to explain options quickly for newbies, focus on the few key things you need to know, and then discuss my favorite strategies. Then, when we get into Part 2 of this
book, where I discuss setups, this chapter will have laid the foundation for the option strategies that I discuss in that part of the book. Did you forget what a delta is?
Or an implied volatility (IV) crush? Then you can come back to this chapter for a quick reference.

What Would You Pay for a First-Class Plane Ticket to Singapore?
Imagine that you are on a flight from Chicago to Singapore. It’s a mind-numbing 17-hour oxygen-depleted journey. By a stroke of luck, you get upgraded to first class.
Score! You sit down, get comfortable, and get ready to enjoy this 17-hour flight in style. Just before takeoff, a hedge fund manager walks up to you and whispers,
“Hey, I got stuck back in coach. I’d like to give you money to switch seats with me. How much do you want?” Well, this is a new twist. You love your seat. You
don’t want to leave your seat—but how much is this guy willing to give you for it? You go back and forth, and he says he is willing to give you no more than
$1,500.00 for the seat. You tell him it would have cost him $20,000.00 if he had booked it online. “True,” he says. “But you got it for free. The question here is how
much money do you want for it.” You think about it and tell him that $1,500.00 is too low—but if he lets you sit there for the first 5 hours, he can have it for the last
12. “Deal,” he says.
Five hours go by, and he comes back to your seat, ready to switch. He hands you $1,200.00. “Wait a second,” you say. “I thought we agreed on $1,500.00.” He
gives you a funny look and says, “Well, yeah, that was when there was a 17-hour flight in front of us; now it’s only 12 hours. Time is running out.” You tell him you
want to think about it. Disgruntled, he walks off. You unwittingly pass out in your seat. Later, after 9 hours of glorious sleep, you wake up. “Hey buddy,” he says,
looking as if he’s been stuck in coach for 14 hours, “Are you ready to switch seats yet?” Sure, you say. He hands over $300. “Where’s the rest of it?” you ask. He
explains, annoyingly, that you slept for 9 hours, and there are only 3 hours left in the flight. At this point, he might as well sit in coach, but he’s still willing to give
you $300 to have possession of your seat for the last few hours. You think about it, realize that in 3 hours your seat will be worthless (this guy isn’t going to pay
anything after the plane lands), and you take the $300 to switch seats. That is essentially premium decay in action on an “at-the-money” call. The closer you get to the
end of the flight, the lower the price you could get for your first-class seat.
In my first options trade, I bought call options on Intel (INTC), and I hadn’t the foggiest notion what they were or what that meant. Later I found out that a call
option increases in value if the underlying stock moves higher, and a put option increases in value if the underlying stock moves lower. So buying a call is like going
long, and buying a put is like going short. And one option represents 100 shares of stock. So when you see a stock option priced at $4.30, that is per share of stock.
Since each option represents 100 shares of stock, one option at $4.30 costs $430.00. Easy enough?
Then I learned about strike prices, and how options were either in the money, at the money, or out of the money. Great. So if AAPL (Apple) is trading at $399.26
per share, and I’m looking at call options, then the $390 call is in the money (trading below the current stock price, also called ITM for short), the $400 call is at the
money (trading at or near the current price, also called ATM for short), and the $410 call is out of the money (trading above the current price, also called OTM for
short).
The $390 call is “in the money” because it gives the option buyer the right to buy the stock for $390. Simple math shows that if the stock is trading at $399.26, then
the $390 call option is worth $9.26. It works like this. If that option gives me the right to buy the stock at $390.00, and the stock is trading at $399.26, then I can
immediately go out into the open market and sell the stock I acquired for $390.00 for $399.26, thus making a $9.26 profit. This portion of the option price is known as
the real or intrinsic value of the option. But if it were this simple, then wouldn’t both the $400 and the $410 strike be worth nothing, since the stock is actually trading
at $399.26, below both of those levels?

78

Figure 5.1
And that is where premium comes in. Figure 5.1 shows the actual prices of these options. These options have 24 days of life left, at which point they will expire.
When an option expires, it is literally worth only the real value that a person would get if he exchanged it for stock. That is, if it was expiration day and AAPL was at
$400.00 a share, then any call options above that price would be worth zero (expire worthless, since they have no intrinsic value), and any call options below that
price would be worth the price of the actual stock less the strike price. So, in this case, the $390 calls would be worth $10 (if AAPL closed at exactly $400.00). And
the $410 calls, which give the option holder the right to buy AAPL at a price of $410.00, would be worth zero. After all, you can go out in the open market and get it
for $400.00, so why would you pay anybody for the “right” to buy it at $410.00?
And yet when we look at the prices of these options 24 days out from expiration, we notice a very strange thing. The $390.00 calls are not trading at just the
intrinsic value of about $10.00; they are trading at a whopping $22.75, well above the $10.00 they would be worth if this were expiration day. The $410 calls, which
would be worth zero in this example if it were the close of options expiration day, are trading for $12.30 ($1,230.00 per option contract). The $400 calls, which would
also be worth zero in this example if it were the close of expiration day, are trading at $17.00 ($1,700.00 per options contract). What gives?
Just as with that first-class seat, there are people out there who will pay a premium to buy the option, even if it’s trading out of the money. Why? The stock could
have a huge rally, and the option could be worth a lot more in the future. And the further out the expiration date (that is, the longer the flight), the more premium they
are willing to pay. Why not just buy the stock? Because they don’t want to shell out a lot of money to buy the actual stock. Thus they are willing to pay a premium
to own the right to buy the stock and to take advantage of the limited risk and leverage involved in buying the option. Note that while the $390.00 option has some real
value priced in, the $400.00 and $410.00 options are pure premium. The in-the-money call is a mixture of intrinsic value and premium.
On the flip side, someone who owns the stock has to make a similar decision. Does she sell an option against it and collect the premium? She wants to keep the
stock, so her goal is to sell an option against it that will expire worthless. That is, she hopes that the stock price doesn’t close above the strike price by the expiration
date. As a buyer of an option, just like the guy who wanted to buy the right to sit in your first-class seat, you are buying with the expectation of a better experience.
Instead of shelling out $40,000.00 to buy 100 shares of AAPL at $400, you could pay $1,700.00 to buy a $400.00 call option. With each passing day, the premium on
that option erodes a little bit. And the closer that option gets to expiration (that is, the closer the plane gets to the airport), the faster that premium starts to lose value.
Your bet in this case is that AAPL has a fantastic move higher, perhaps to $450.00. If it does, at expiration, your $400 option will be trading at $50.00, and your profit
on the trade will be $3,300.00 (the $5,000.00 sale price less the $1,700.00 purchase price). In other words, you were able to participate in AAPL’s rally without
having to shell out all the money required to buy the stock. In fact, in trading, owning the stock is sort of like sitting in coach.
On the flip side, the woman who sold you the option does not want to see AAPL go to $450. She is hoping that the stock stays near $400 and that the option you
bought for $1,700.00 expires worthless. Where did your $1,700.00 go? To the person who sold you the option. That goes right into her pocket. It’s like the AAPL
stock she owns is a piece of property, and she just charged you $1.700.00 for a month’s rent, thank you very much.
Everything that we’ve just talked about has focused on the “call” side of the options world, but the same story holds true for the put side. In Figure 5.1, where
AAPL is trading at $399.26, we can see that the out-of-the-money put at $390.00 is trading at $12.65, the at-the-money put at $400.00 is trading at $16.95, and the inthe-money” put at $410.00 is trading at $22.25.
