not work out. Once you come to grips with that fact, it will be easier to embrace your losses rather than become emotionally wrangled when they
occur. Hopefully, you can learn from a trader with long-term positive experiences. Good advice will get you ahead more quickly than if you have to
learn everything on your own, and it will help you avoid costly mistakes.
Take my advice: Learn a system, back-test it to see the strengths and weakness of the method, and then trade on these testable signals.

SEASONAL STOCK SYSTEM
Jeff Hirsch and his father, Yale, who publish Stock Trader’s Almanac
(Wiley, 2004, 2005), reveal many top-notch statistical studies based on past

The Sample Analysis

283

historic price action. Many of their strategies are based on seasonal factors
that help stock pickers time the markets. One of the methods they promote
is using a simple MACD developed by Gerald Appel to better time entries
and exits during the best six-month period for stocks, which starts in October. Once a market bottoms out and develops in an uptrend, the MACD
indicator triggers confirmation that a price reversal is underway. The
MACD signals help traders time their entries. However, as we uncovered in
prior chapters, it is a lagging indicator. With that said, I believe what can
make that buying program or system more effective is to add and apply a
weekly and/or monthly pivot point study. This may give a trader an edge by
adding another dimensional element that combines the seasonal factor for
timing with targeting a price level from pivot points. Using this approach
can help light the path to a trading system that a trader can back-test on his
or her own through software such as Genesis.

HISTORY LESSONS
I want to combine the lessons on how to choose the right pivot point support and resistance numbers with how those values relate to the market direction number. This can help you determine if the market has departed
too far from the mean or too far from what I call the “fair value” of the market. Start by examining the past price history. Once you see where the market was and how far the market has moved in a given length of time (pace
of price change), you can possibly determine the realm of reality of where
a target level of support may be located. You can use this information to determine if a market is significantly overbought or, as we will show in this
example, oversold and ripe for a buying opportunity. When a market is significantly oversold, the conditions exist for a consolidation phase and a reversal of trend, especially when we have a seasonal condition. This
concept applies in commodities, stocks, and foreign exchange (forex) markets as well.
Let’s take a look at how the bottom formed in the stock market in October 2005 as we review and expand on the Stock Trader’s Almanac MACD
signal. Figure 11.1 is my sheet from the week ending October 14. We use
this sheet as a quick reference so I can see what the past week’s high, low,
and close were. The pivot point is displayed in the far right column. We see
that in the prior week, the high in Standard & Poor’s (S&P) was 1239. The
pivot point is 1208, and the pivot point moving average is 1220.58 (round
down to 1220.50). The indication is that the market is bearish, so we would
look at the Bearish Target column and see 1155. Here is where back-testing
software may help you determine what the largest price range is in a given

284
FIGURE 11.1
Used with permission of www.nationalfutures.com.

The Sample Analysis

285

week in the S&P on a historic basis. Why is that relevant? Because I want
to know if 1155 is an unrealstic number to hit if the market was at 1239 and
the standard range was 40 points. From the prior week’s high to the projected bearish S-2 target low, that would be an 84.00-point price decline.
Not unheard of but not realistic, at least not in one week’s trading period.
At the very least, we need to see how the market reacts at the S-1 target support number, 1177.50, labeled as the Target Key Number, which is the S-1
pivot number.
On further examination, we see the market closed the week ending
10/07/2005 at 1200. So sometime in the following week, I want to heighten
my awareness or program a system to alert me to when or if the market
reaches that level and if a buy signal exists at or near 1177.50, such as if a
hammer or doji is present within five points above or below that level. After
all, we have a decent sample of statistics that reveal that these two candle
patterns form at or near the lows in e-mini–S&Ps a high percentage of the
time on an intraday 15-minute period.
The low was made on 10/13/2005 at 1172; it closed that day back above
the pivot support at 1178.25. The next session formed a high close doji
(HCD). Using the HCD pattern and trading by the rules, you would have
bought at 1189.75; and your risk was a stop on a close below the doji low,
which was at 1172. The most pressure you took on a futures position trade
was from your entry price to the lowest low on a pull-back was when it
retested the low at 1174, which is 16 points. The stop-close-only order was
the correct risk mechanism for this position trade. Using a seasonal factor
combined with pivot point analysis helped traders pinpoint both the time
and the price of a particular market; and in using historical seasonal information, traders would possibly want to employ a longer-term risk-andreward strategy. Even if you are a one-day or swing trader, seasonal factors
can help identify the side of the market to be on, like in a bullish environment to look to buy breaks. My point is that if you are a position trader,
your risks and reward objectives should be greater than those of a day
trader. Here we have a trading opportunity based on several factors. All we
need to do now is select a strategy.

WHICH STRATEGY TO SELECT?
If buying the futures markets seemed too risky, you at least have a situation
where you can explore longer-term low-risk/high-reward options strategies such as S&P call options. That was my recommendation in my weekly
newsletter. You could apply this analysis to buy Standard & Poor’s Depositary Receipts (SPDRs), Diamonds, Nasdaq QQQs, or options on those

286

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

exchange traded funds. That is one reason why I spent time going over
those products in Chapter 1. Seriously, if you are just a day trader in futures or forex or simply a stock trader, diversification is a trader’s best
friend. Anyone who is after profits and making money can apply these
techniques. To any investment vehicle, a trading system can be programmed to alert you when dojis form near pivots support or resistance
levels. Moving average crossover features using various parameter settings
can also be applied. This form of market analysis is adaptable and very versatile for integrating in a trading system.

WHAT ABOUT THE MACD?
Pivot point analysis enhances what Stock Trader’s Almanac reveals. Looking at the chart again in Figure 11.2, you see how the MACD indicator gave
a buy signal triggered by the zero-line crossover and a moving average
crossover on October 24. This was generated on the close at 1202.25. Not

FIGURE 11.2
Used with permission of esignal.com.

287

The Sample Analysis

knowing the risk you want to take with the MACD seasonal buy signal, if
you bought at that price at that time, the most pressure you took on the
trade was 22 points, slightly more than the high close doji trigger signal.
Also the MACD signal came a bit later. This is why all traders can use pivot
point support and resistance analysis to help time trades better with both
elements, time and price.
I went over how to use the pivot point as a moving average in Chapter
6. In Figure 11.3, I took the liberty of highlighting the pivot point to illustrate
the slope (or direction) of the moving average. Once the market hits the
pivot support, the market moves in a consolidation phase; but the pivot
point average is sloping higher, indicating a bullish bias. Granted, you always want to see immediate results as a trader; but using the seasonal factors identified by Stock Trader’s Almanac combined with pivot point
support targets and a pivot point moving average component gives you a
much better timed entry and method to identify a trend reversal.
One more advantage of incorporating the pivot point average is that as
the market finally blasts off, the moving average component generates a
sell signal and the histogram makes a negative zero-line cross. However,

Pivot point moving average
slopes higher.

Pivot point moving average
slopes higher.

FIGURE 11.3
Used with permission of esignal.com.

288

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

that is the opposite of what prices are showing from the candle patterns, as
we do not see a succession of lower closing lows. In addition, the pivot
point moving average is sloping higher, once again indicating a bullish bias.
From a systems programmer looking for a defined set of rules, when you
develop your own system, it is important to make sure that your set of criteria or the series of conditions that exist all need to be in sync, such as all
must be generating sell signals, before making your entry or exit triggers.
In Figure 11.4, the Genesis Software has my algorithms programmed
with variations of what was covered in this book to show you how you
can develop your own personal “black box” system. As this illustrates,
for my day trading program, I use both the 5-minute and the 15-minute
periods with the e-mini–S&P, the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
mini-Dow, 30-year Treasury bonds, euro currency, and the spot forex
British pound. Except for in this figure, the one chart that is second from
the right is a 5-minute chart on bonds; and under it is a 15-minute chart on
the euro currency.
I use this system to help confirm buy and sell signals, as indicated with
the arrows. When we are at the projected support targets, which the software indicates by green support lines, arrows appear, indicating to go long.
The chart on the left is the e-mini–S&P; the 5-minute is on top and the 15minute is beneath it. See how arrows point up simultaneously, which indicates a buy signal, especially as the market is near support. The chart
second from the left is the mini-Dow with the 5-minute on top and the 15minute beneath it. The 5-minute time period generates a buy signal against
the pivot point support targets simultaneously with the e-mini–S&P. This
corroborates the buy signal, as it has developed in both markets. It is also
confirmed in the 15-minute chart beneath it.

WHAT IS THE BEST DAY TRADING CONFIRMATION
TRIGGER TO PROGRAM?
The most reliable trading signal is when the 5-minute time period triggers
a buy when the 15-minute time period is also in a buy mode; in other words,
the best signals are when the 5-minute period is in sync with the 15-minute
time period in a pivot point moving average crossover system. We see this
occur as it applies to day trading the spot forex British pound as the chart
in Figure 11.4 shows. Look on the right-hand side of the chart; in the upper
right-hand corner is the 5-minute period, and directly below it is the 15minute chart. See how the 5-minute generates the sell signal first, as it is
against the projected pivot point resistance targets; and the 15-minute chart
beneath it confirms that sell signal. This is exactly what we want to see—a

289

FIGURE 11.4
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

290

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

sell signal triggered against resistance; and the higher time period, such as
the 15-minute component to the 5-minute sell signal, confirming that action.

SHOW ME THE PROOF
As a systems trader, once you have set your variables or your best selected
set of rules or criteria and have defined the parameters such as time periods, then you can go and back-test the method. I want to show you that any
system worth following needs to show sizable profits with reasonable risks.
No system is 100 percent accurate, at least none that I know of in reality. If
one existed, I would believe through the laws of probabilities that it was
due for a breakdown. There are several categories on which you want to
focus that will enlighten you as to the true validity of the methods. In
essence, back-testing allows you to closely examine your system’s inefficiencies so you can correct the flaws. Looking at the back-test results will
also help you understand when to increase position sizes, when to avoid
trading, and how to facilitate improvements.
You want to see if the reasons you make decisions to execute a trade
consistently generate more profits when you are right than losses when the
system or trade fails. If less than 70 percent of trades result in winning
trades, you want the winners to outgain the losses. It makes no sense to
have a 70 percent winning system that generates more losses than winners
and longer holding periods. Imagine what that will do to your psyche, not to
mention your trading account.
It is important that you understand what elements trigger a trade when
the transaction is entered or exited. This helps in determining another way
to account for slippage. For example, if the system generates buy and sell
signals on the close or on the next open, if this is a day trading program,
then there may be less chance for price gaps. However, if the system executes based on the closing price or on the next open, such as what we have
disclosed in the high close doji pattern or the low close doji pattern, then on
overnight positions you may experience poor entry or exits. With that
knowledge, you can change your program to include the next available
open, which would include night sessions.
Let me clarify what the night session is for various trading vehicles. As
we know, there is no official close in spot foreign currencies. Therefore,
you need to assign a daily close and then an open. In Chapter 1, I revealed
that I use the New York Bank settlement of 5 P.M. (ET) and use the open as
the next five-minute interval. As for futures, different exchanges on which
various markets trade have specific official closes and reopens for their
after-hours trading markets. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) has

291

The Sample Analysis

GLOBEX, the CBOT has the e-CBOT, and the New Mercantile Exchange
(NYMEX) started using the CME’s electronic trading platform in June 2006.
The partnership between the CME and the NYMEX begins a 10-year deal
that allows the NYMEX to use the CME’s GLOBEX platform to electronically trade both energy and metal futures and options. This promises to give
better access to traders worldwide for those specific markets.
If you are reading this book, I assume that you already know the various market hours; but if not, visit www.nationalfutures.com, where they
are listed under Trading Tools, which has the current margin requirements,
contract specifications, and trading hours listed. In Table 11.1, I have a description of the categories that are important in helping to determine a system’s validity.
In Table 11.2, we have results from a pivot point moving average
system I developed with the help of Pete Kilman at Genesis. It is what I
call the “Defcon” day traders’ program system. As I stated before, this is
not 100 percent accurate. I do not know of any system that is; but it is a

TABLE 11.1

Determining a System’s Validity

Total net profit
Payout ratio
Avgerage number of
bars for winners
Win percent
Kelly ratio

Largest win

Largest loss

Average win trade
Average losing trade
Return percent

This number tells you how much the system made
after slippage, commissions, fees, and losses.
This tells you based on a profit/loss the percent that
winners outpace losers.
This category shows what the average time period was
before the trade was offset in order to establish a
profit.
This figure shows how many winners versus losers
were generated.
A math calculation used to derive the number of
contracts to trade in relation to the ratio of winning
trades to losing trades.
This figure shows the largest single winning trade. We
look at this number to see if profits on a single trade
are larger than 20 percent of the overall net profit. If it
is, it indicates the trade signals may be invalid.
This category helps traders identify if single losses are
bigger than winners so they can implement a better
risk management approach.
This shows what to expect on the average-size
winning trade.
This shows what the average-size loss is.
This is the percent of profit on the initial size starting
account.

292
TABLE 11.2

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

E-mini–S&P All Trades, from 01/08/2003 to 01/10/2006

Total net profit:
Total trades:
Average trade:
Average # of bars in trade:
Average # of trades per year:
Max closed-out drawdown:
Account size required:
Open equity:
Total winners:
Gross profit:
Average win:
Largest win:
Largest drawdown in win:
Average drawdown in win:
Average run-up in win:
Average run-down in win:
Most consecutive wins:
Average number of
consecutive wins:
Average number of bars in wins:

$39,538
258
$153
78.89
85.7
–$4,063
$7,913
$100
164
$76,963
$469
$2,100
–$1,663
–$271
$708
–$271
9
2.60
76.68

Profit factor ($wins/$losses):
Winning percentage:
Payout ratio (average win/loss):
Z–score (W/L predictability):
Percent in the market:
Maximum intraday drawdown:
Return percent:
Kelly ratio:
Total losers:
Gross loss:
Average loss:
Largest loss:
Largest peak in loss:
Average peak in loss:
Average run-up in loss:
Average run-down in loss:
Most consecutive losses:
Average number of
consecutive losses:
Average number of bars in losses:

2.06
63.6%
1.18
0.8
74.4%
–$4,350
499.7%
0.3266
94
–$37,425
–$398
–$1,825
$1,938
$276
$276
–$716
7
1.49
82.73

fairly reliable and robust system with a 63.6 percent overall win ratio in
the e-mini–S&P 500 futures. The sample testing period was conducted
during open outcry session only, from 9:30 A.M. (ET) until 4:15 P.M. (ET).
There were no stops or loss parameters; this was simply a reversal system,
which means we were always in the market and out on the close of business. The trades were all done on just one single contract; so we did not
have a money management position scale-up program designed, which
means we did not increase lot size as profits accrued. This system is based
on pivot point analysis and the principles outlined in this book; the trading
signals were based on a 15-minute time period, and the testing period was
three years.
All trade signals were taken from 01/08/2003 to 01/10/2006. This time
period was one of the most active trading times in recent decates, so I feel
this was a good sample period to back-test. A starting account was set up
with $10,000, taking one contract per signal. A $50 commission and slippage
were assigned per trade. Generally, the electronic commission rates are as
low as 3.50 and as high as 25, depending on which brokerage firm was used;
so again this was an adequate figure to use. With those variables, the system
generated close to a 500 percent return. As we examine the system closer,
we see it generated 258 trades, of which only 164 were winners. That means
we must have bigger winners than losers, and we do. The average win is
$469, compared to $398 per loss on average. The neat feature in this system

The Sample Analysis

293

or with this sample back-test model is that the largest drawdown in wins is
1,663. This is the kind of information that will give you a statistical edge in
trading. You now know that you have a system that generates buy and sell
signals with a 64 percent win ratio. This information should help you stay
emotionally grounded by achieving two things: (1) not getting too upset
when losses occur; (2) not overpositioning yourself in trades if and when
you have a win streak with more than eight or nine consecutive trades.
Most people lose big as they see their systems or methods generate huge
profits many times in a row. They get this feeling that their trading is invincible or impervious to losers. And then, wham, that’s when a drawdown period occurs! Generally, it is at this point that a trader goes from trading 10
contracts to 50 contracts. All it takes is one bad trade, and you have wiped
away your trading profits or, worse, your entire trading account.

MONEY MANAGEMENT IS THE KEY TO SUCCESS
Using the Defcon trading system, we started with a trading account balance
of $10,000. The overnight initial speculative margin for the CME’s emini–S&P, as of 2/15/2006 was $3,938 per contract. Therefore, with trading
just one contract, we had committed 39 percent of our trading capital at any
one time. Since our account starts with $10,000 and the system only generates less than two trades per week, we need to define when it is apropriate
to increase our lot sizes. Aha! This is a novel idea and is what truly helps
traders get wealthy—knowing when to fold, hold, or add on.
If you look at Figure 11.5, you see a chart with an equity curve showing
some pretty good gains with an occasional bump in the road. Recoverable
as it is, a drawdown in profits occurs. Using system analysis can help you
determine most consecutive wins and losses and what the largest loss is.
Armed with that information, you can now go on to trading like a true
megastar professional fund manager—or simply a downright happy
camper. Why? Because that information will help you determine the next
level of profits you have to build in order to increase your lot size. If you do
not manage your money properly and double or quadruple your position
size before doubling your account size, you could be in for a rude awakening. As you can see, the maximum drawdown experienced is –4,062.50 on
11/10/2004. If that was the day you decided to mistakenly increase your lot
size, it may have potentially wiped your account out.
In Table 11.2, observe that the largest loss is $1,825. By increasing your
lot size prematurely or or by having an imbalance to largest loss in relationship to account balance, such as having four or more contracts on at
any one time, you could wipe out not only your gains but also the majority
of your account. Using statistics and mathematical formulas is what will

294

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 11.5
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

give you an edge in the markets, from both a business stance and an emotional stance. You will be better prepared, and that should help make you a
better trader.
In conclusion, one of the greatest values of data derived from back-testing a system is that it will reveal hidden intricacies about the system. Simply having a rudimentary knowledge of placing stop-loss orders is not the
definition of knowing sound money management techniques. You must expand your knowledge in managing your money properly by either under- or
overleveraging your trading capital. We went over a seasonal trading strategy that Stock Trader’s Almanac uses in the equity markets using the
MACD indicator. I showed you how you can optimize that method by introducing the use of pivot point analysis. With the ability of back-testing a
strategy, we can back-test this theory on our own; and more important, we
can learn if our system or trading method has a seasonal factor that performs best or worst at certain times of the year. Then, you can also determine, based on your equity size, the number of positions you should have
on while maintaining a proper risk/reward ratio.
