
Using Market Information
The market is constantly sending information to market participants. What
will you do with that information? Will you take market data and use it
to adjust your entry strategy? Will market information help you to manage
your exits?
For example, if you’re looking at taking a bullish kangaroo tail, you
may decide to place your buy stop above the high of the kangaroo tail. But
what if the market trades down to the stop loss level before the buy stop
entry is triggered? Does this mean that you will disregard this trade and
remove your pending buy stop order? See Figure 13.1 for an example of
this scenario on a one-hour GBP/USD kangaroo tail set-up.
If the market pushes through where the stop loss would be, it may
make sense to cancel the trade. This is using market information to manage
your trades, even before they occur. You may also use market information
to manage your exits.
If you are in a trade and the market prints a reversal signal, how will
you react? If you are in a sell trade and the market prints a buy signal, will
you exit a trade? Will it depend on where the reversal signal prints? Some
naked traders will only close a trade if the market prints a reversal signal
on a zone. Other naked traders will simply close a trade as soon as price
action offers a counter signal, a signal in the opposite direction of the trade.
Decide how you will manage a reversal signal. If you are in a buy trade and
the market gives a sell signal, will you exit?
Take a look at the daily NZD/USD chart in Figure 13.2. This is a sell
signal, a bearish kangaroo tail on the 0.7590 zone. The market triggers the

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

221

Creating Your Trading System

1.64805
1.64665
1.64520
1.64380
1.64240
1.64095
1.63955
1.63810
1.63670
1.63530
1.63385
1.63245
1.63100
1.62960
1.62820
1.62700
1.62535
1.62390
1.62250
1.62110
1.61965
1.61825

8 Aug 23:00

9 Aug 03:00

9 Aug 07:00

9 Aug 11:00

9 Aug 15:00

9 Aug 19:00

9 Aug 23:00

1.61685
10 Aug 03:00 10 Aug 07:00 10 Aug 11:00

FIGURE 13.1 The GBP/USD prints a kangaroo tail on the one-hour chart. However, instead of pushing through the buy stop order, the market falls lower than
where the stop loss would be. Most naked traders will cancel the buy stop in this
situation.
© 2000–2011, MetaQuotes Software Corp.

trade and falls, as expected. However, once the market reaches the zone
at 0.7430, an interesting candlestick prints. This is not a bullish kangaroo
tail because the open is not inside of the previous candlestick’s range. Nevertheless, the candlestick does suggest that the market has found support
down here at 0.7430, and thus the naked trader may decide to close out the
position.
Decide how you will use market information. If you are very comfortable interpreting price action, perhaps you will use market information to
adjust your trade as the candlestick prints on the chart. For many traders
and those new to naked trading, it may be easier to simply stick with your
trading plan and let your trade reach the profit target or the stop loss.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

222

NAKED FOREX

0.76760
0.76330
0.75900
0.75470
0.75040
0.74610
0.74300
0.74180
0.73750
0.73320
0.72890
0.72460
0.72030
0.71600
0.71170
0.70740
0.70310
0.69880
0.69450
0.69020
0.68590
0.68160

Sep 2010

15 Sep 2010

21 Sep 2010

27 Sep 2010

1 Oct 2010

7 Oct 2010

13 Oct 2010

19 Oct 2010

25 Oct 2010

0.67730
29 Oct 2010

FIGURE 13.2 The daily NZD/USD chart prints a bearish kangaroo tail, suggesting
the market may fall. The market does fall, but once it reaches the next zone at
0.7430, a bullish “almost kangaroo tail” prints, suggesting the market may move
higher.
© 2000–2011, MetaQuotes Software Corp.

KNOWING YOUR TRADING PERSONALITY
The most important factor in determining how you will trade is your trading
personality. What is your trading personality? How do you know what you
do best, and how do you know what is uncomfortable for you? The basic
distinction among traders is the one that distinguishes short-term scalpers
from longer-term swing traders. You probably already know which camp
you belong to. If you find it difficult to go to sleep or walk away from your
charts knowing that you have money at risk, then you either (1) have too
much at risk for your trade or (2) you are not fit for trading longer-term

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Creating Your Trading System

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

223

charts. Likewise, if you find it nearly impossible to sit through a trade on
the five-minute charts, watching your equity seesaw back and forth, you
are probably best suited to the longer-timeframe charts. What makes sense
to you?
Do you like to take trades with the flow of the market, or do you like to
find reversal points? Take the Trading Personality Quiz to find out which
trading systems fit your view of the markets at www.fxjake.com/book.
Typically traders fall into one of two categories: (1) “go with the flow”
trend traders and (2) reversal traders. The trend traders are drawn to the
runners’ exits in Chapter 11, and the reversal traders often enjoy trading
for profit targets. You may remember this group from Chapter 11—the gunners. Remember that you may not have the patience to stick with the trade
and ride out a long-lasting trend if you are a reversal trader, quick profit
targets may be more your style. If you are a trend trader you will have to
learn to deal with those trades that fall back and end up as breakeven or
losing trades, even after they start out in profit.
Trade what makes sense to you. If you think it is easier to find turning
points, trade reversals. If you think it is easier to ride the trend, make sure
you get good at identifying and riding strong trends.

Your Life, Your Trading
How often you trade is an absolutely critical decision, Trading can deplete your psychological and physiological energy. If you don’t believe this,
then consider this: The next time you have an exceptional trade, a trade
that bags several hundred pips, once you close the trade try to immediately make another trade. Will you find it easy to make another trade? Of
course not! The reason is that trading is draining, and you must take care of
yourself.
As a trader, you must be physically fit. A healthy body equals a healthy
mind. To stay healthy, you must get more than adequate sleep, you must
take good care of your body. You must try to limit your time in front of
a computer screen. If you fail to do these things, your trading will suffer.
You can even make a game out of it. Perhaps you decide that you are only
able to trade if you do some exercise that day. Or, perhaps you decide that
if you do not get at least seven hours of sleep, you are not allowed to trade
the following day. The idea here is to set goals to encourage good habits.
One habit to avoid as a trader is drinking and trading. It may seem like
an obvious pitfall, but if you do drink, avoid trading under the influence.
Just as you would not want to drink alcohol and go for a drive, you certainly
do not want to drink a bottle of wine and then decide to scalp the GBP/USD
for a few hours. As a forex trader, you are well aware of the fact that the
market is nearly always open. For many traders it can be tempting to trade

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

224

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

into the wee hours of the night. If you are under the influence, it is best to
avoid making any trading decisions.
Good habits should extend into the psychological realm. If you enjoy
self- hypnosis or meditation, you may find that your trading improves drastically when you consistently find time each day to practice self-hypnosis or
meditation. (There are more resources for you at www.fxjake.com/book if
you would like to learn more about meditation or self-hypnosis.) Perhaps
you decide to take some time each day to mentally recharge before you
make your trading decisions, before you sit down and analyze the charts.
If you are thinking right now “I do not need to spend any time being
quiet; I just do not have time for that,” please at least consider a new approach to your trading. For one month try using self-hypnosis, meditation,
or just some simple quiet time alone before you jump into your trading
routine. You may find your trading results improve. Something as simple
as some quiet time alone can recharge your psychological batteries, and
better batteries will mean better trading results.
Trading will suck the psychological energy from you if you allow it to
happen, so be careful. Trading six plus hours per day is possible, but probably only for those people who are full-time traders. If you are trying to work
a job and trade six plus hours each day, you are probably going to be an
inefficient trader. You may make mistakes, find it difficult to concentrate,
and find it difficult to stay consistently profitable if you are working a fulltime job and working as a trader full-time. It may seem as though trading is
a wonderful, carefree life, but it is work.

How Subjective Is Your Trading?
The last important facet of your trading system is how much room for interpretation you are allowing in your trading system. Do you decide to take
only those trade set-ups that look right? Or do you take only those trades
that are strictly defined by your trading system?
Each trader takes a different approach to the application of the
trading system. For example, perhaps trader Elliott decides to trade the
big-shadow set-ups on the daily charts. Elliott will only take those bigshadow set-ups that look to be very high-probability set-ups. The bearish
big-shadow set-ups must have a close down near the low, and the bullish
big-shadow set-ups must have a close near the high. The big-shadow
candlesticks must be very large and Elliott decides to only take those bigshadow set-ups that trigger the entry price on the next candlestick, and he
takes profit at the nearest zone. Elliott may believe that he is using a very
strict, well-defined trading system, but if you ask Molly, she might disagree.
Trader Molly decides to also trade only daily big-shadow trades. Trader
Molly takes a different approach. Trader Molly will only take big shadows

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Creating Your Trading System

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

225

that are larger than the previous five candlesticks by at least 15 percent.
Trader Molly also decides to only take those big shadows with the closing
price within 15 pips of the low (for bearish big shadows) or the high (for
bullish big shadows). Molly consistently applies the three-bar exit to her
strategy, knowing that she may have some losing trades and small winners,
but she will also have a few large winners.
Where do you fall on the continuum? Are you more like Elliott? Do you
prefer to trade with a little bit of subjective analysis? Or are you more like
Molly? Perhaps you share her desire to have clear concrete trading rules
so it is very clear what you should be doing when following your trading
system.

Choosing Your Playing Field
In many ways, the timeframe you choose to trade is determined by your
lifestyle. If you don’t have four or five hours a day to sit down and watch
the charts, it will be difficult for you to be a five-minute chart scalper. Unless you have an automated exit for your shorter-timeframe trading, it is
unlikely that you will be able to trade the shorter-timeframe charts without
several hours of screentime. Even if you do have an extra four or five hours
each day, you may be better off avoiding trading the shorter-timeframe
charts. Many traders have found it is much easier to simply take a look
at the charts once a day, put in your trading orders, and then walk away.
Sometimes, after a few years of this sort of trading, successful traders will
move down to shorter timeframes. A general rule of thumb is this: Trading
shorter timeframes means a smaller margin for error.
Trading the shorter timeframe means that you must be precise and
decisive when executing your trades. An example will best illustrate why
this is the case. If you decide to trade the five-minute EUR/USD chart in the
hopes of pulling 10 pips of profit from the markets, then you are paying a
high price to trade. The spread (the difference between the price for buying
the EUR/USD and the price for selling the EUR/USD) on the EUR/USD is
likely to be quite tight, perhaps two pips, so you must make 12 pips to bag
10 pips of profit. This is a commission of 16 percent (2 pips divided by
12 pips = 16 percent). This is a hefty commission.
If, instead, you are trading the daily EUR/USD chart, you may be looking to gain 100 pips and will need to capture 102 pips to cover the spread,
so this is an overall commission of 1.9 percent—a significant reduction in
the commission cost. Longer-term trading is not only cheaper, it is easier
to execute successfully. If you initiate a daily chart trade and enter your
trade at a poor price, perhaps you miss your entry price by 3 pips, you
may, instead, make 97 pips, rather than the full 100 pips. This is a reduction of profits by 3 percent; not great, but certainly something your trading

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:15

226

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

account can probably withstand. If this same type of poor execution is associated with a short-term trade, a 3 pip slip up becomes a reduction in
profits by 30 percent (3 pips out of 10 is 30 percent). A consistent reduction in profits by 30 percent may tip the trading system over into the abyss
of unprofitable systems.
It is your choice, you must decide if you have the trading experience, the time, and the mental toughness to consistently execute shorttimeframe trades. If you do not have all three, it may be best to stick to the
longer-timeframe charts.

Your Trading Lifestyle
As you can see, there is much more to your trading system that simply deciding on whether you prefer to trade the last kiss or trendy kangaroos,
whether you like to trade the one-hour chart or the weekly chart. It is important for you to decide not only what you will trade, but also how you will
trade it, and to define the precise rules you will use to trade your system.
Defining all these variables for your system up front will help you down the
track when you have to endure difficult times. Drawdowns, losing streaks,
and bad luck are all more manageable when you have a well-defined trading system in front of you.
One last note should be made about your successes. When thinking
about your trading system, much of your planning may involve reducing
exposure to risk. However, you should also think about your successes.
What will you do when you have an exceptional run? Will you take time off
to celebrate? Will you pull some of your profits out to buy something nice
for yourself? Remember to celebrate your wins.

DEFINING YOUR TRADING SYSTEM
In summary, creating your trading system involves several aspects. The
following list will help you to refine your trading system and define the
rules so that you are ready for any situation before it arises. If your trading
system answers all these questions, you have done well, and you have a
true trading system.

r Are you a market specialist or a trade specialist?
r How many hours of daily screen time do you allow yourself?
r Which trading session (European, Asian, or North American) do you
trade?

r Which timeframes will you trade?

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

Creating Your Trading System

r Which trading set-ups do you trade?
r Which exit strategies do you use?
r How much interpretation do you have when placing trades?
r How much interpretation do you have when exiting trades?
r What is your maximum risk per trade?
r What is your maximum weekly drawdown?
r What is you maximum monthly drawdown?
r How do you deal with drawdowns?
r How will you regain confidence after a maximum drawdown?
r What will you do to ensure you are physically fit to trade?
r What will you do to ensure you are psychologically fit to trade?

227

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

228

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

CHAPTER 14

Becoming an
Expert

Far too many people—especially people with great
expertise in one area—are contemptuous of knowledge in other areas or believe that being bright is a
substitute for knowledge.
—Peter Drucker

orex traders around the world are making money every day. These
traders have one thing in common—a secret. This secret may surprise you. If you are like me, when you first started learning about
trading you thought all the traders who were making money were computer
science, mathematics, or physics wizards with lightning-fast computers deploying secret algorithms. Trading was the domain of the well educated
that had the computing power to crack the market code. I was convinced
that only by duplicating these efforts would I be able to consistently rack
up profits. I knew that trading had to be complex, and perhaps you feel
think same way.
This is not true.
Some of the very best traders in the world share a simple secret: They
use extremely simple and yet powerful, trading systems. The best traders
in the world—hedge fund traders, bank traders, private millionaire traders
you will never hear from—all have one thing in common: These people are
experts. They do one thing.

F

229

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

230

22:32

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

WHY DO YOU WANT TO TRADE?
This may seem like a funny question, but why do you want to trade? If
you want to trade because you want to make money, perhaps trading is
for you. If, however, you want to trade because you want excitement, or
you want to be able to tell people that you are a trader, or because you
love the excitement of having money at risk, then perhaps trading is not
for you. If you want excitement try skydiving, or hunting wild boars. If you
want to tell people that you are a trader, you can do that, but if you are
not quite consistent with your trading, just trade a very small account, that
way you can get the recognition of being a trader for a small fee. If you love
the excitement of having money at risk, you should try gambling. Gamblers
are honest. They risk their money, and they recognize the inherent risk in
their occupation, they are up front about it. This is an honorable approach
to gambling because gamblers admit that their money is at risk and admit
that luck will guide their winnings. Traders can be gamblers in disguise if
they are trading for the wrong reasons.
You probably know a gambler or two disguised as a trader. This is the
difference between a trader and a gambler: A gambler has no risk management, and a gambler is willing to lose large amounts of money quickly. A
trader treats each trade as a calculated risk and manages each trade according to his system rules. Gamblers can lose all the money at once, and
traders lose only as much money as their system will allow. The distinguishing factor is that a gambler does not follow risk management rules,
whereas a trader follows strict risk management controls.
Expert traders do more than simply follow strict risk management controls; they also concentrate on one trading technique. This is the real secret
of expert traders: They focus on one market, one trading system, one edge,
and they use this edge in their trading repeatedly. Profitable trading is boring. Profitable traders are experts, and these expert traders do one thing
over and over again.

THE SECRET OF THE EXPERTS
Why do profitable traders limit themselves? The answer is simple: Profitable traders know what makes money. Profitable traders trade to make
money. If you would like to make money as a trader, do what the experts
do. Become good at trading one system. You know how to do this now.
All you need is in this book. You simply need to put the work in, practice,
and become an expert with a trading system that makes sense to you, and

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c14

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

22:32

Becoming an Expert

Printer: Courier Westford

231

then trade that trading system. Trade your system over and over again until
trading becomes boring (and very profitable).
All the very successful traders are doing one thing. This may seem unbelievable, but entire hedge funds are built on one idea. Hedge-fund traders
often have one edge, and they use this edge in their trading. Now, some
hedge funds may have several traders, each with his own edge, but to be a
successful trader you simply have to have one thing that you are very good
at, and then you do this one thing over and over again.
The most successful traders I know follow this rule. The traders that
struggle, the traders who have difficulty finding consistent profits, are the
ones who repeatedly change their systems, reanalyzing and reorganizing
their trading rules. In other words, they are still stuck in the cycle of doom.
The key to breaking the cycle of doom is to decide what makes sense to
you, which of the trading systems in this book resonate with you. Once
you have chosen one, you simply need to test it over and over again. Then
apply this system, concentrate on following your system rules, and watch
your confidence grow.
You can do the same thing hedge fund traders do. You can be just like
a bank trader. You can be a professional trader. But before you go pro, you
must decide how you will make your money in the markets. What is your
expertise? Which trading system fits your beliefs? Once you align your beliefs with a trading system, you simply need to gain experience and confidence in the trading system, and you will never look back. Your exciting
journey is ahead of you; soon you will become an expert trader.

SIX STEPS TO BECOMING AN EXPERT
Although it may seem that becoming an expert is a very difficult thing to
do, it is really rather simple. As with many things in life, if you put the work
into it, you will be able to reap the rewards. Here are six steps to becoming
an expert.

Step One: Get in the Comfort Zone
The first step is to become comfortable drawing zones on your chart. Zones
are the basis for your trading decisions. As a naked trader, all your trading
decisions will be based on zones, so it is very important that you have these
zones drawn correctly on the chart. It is much easier to draw fewer zones,
provided those zones are very strong and well defined, than it is to draw
