
A great example is Pfizer, which holds patents on some of the top-selling
drugs in the world. These patents allow the company to charge high prices
for new drugs for years after they hit the market. Competition during the life
of the patent is usually limited, so profits and cash flows are huge. That’s one
reason Pfizer's average return on equity over the past decade has been greater
than 30 percent and its net profit margins are currently north of 25 percent
(compared with around 6 percent for the average S&P 500 company). That’s
also why it’s been a great stock to own over the long haul. In fact, many of the

31


32;

ECONOMIC MOATS

major pharmaceutical players have outperformed the market over the past 10
years because of the economic moats inherent in this industry.

However, although patents and licenses can do a great job of keeping
competitors at bay and maintaining high profit margins, they can also be
ephemeral. If you're investigating a firm whose economic moat depends solely
on a single patent or other regulatory approval, don’t forget to investigate the
likelihood of that approval disappearing unexpectedly. This will likely involve
a detailed reading of the legal proceedings section of the firm’s 10-K filing.
(You can find financial filings through most firms’ Web sites, as well as di-
rectly from the SEC’s Web site.)

A much more durable strategy for locking out competitors is to take ad-
vantage of the network effect. A strong network becomes more valuable as the
number of users increases—much like a telephone network, which wouldn't
be worth much if you could call only a dozen people, but which has immense
value given the enormous number of users. Companies that have a network
protecting their competitive positions often have very wide economic moats.

In general, markets tend to have strong network effects—the more buyers
and sellers that transact in a particular market, the greater the value of that
market to participants. As a publicly listed auction market, eBay is the purest
example of this idea: The firm has held its own against much larger com-
panies, and it seems unlikely that another competitor will emerge soon.

It should be easy to see why eBay has a near-monopoly in online auctions
in most of the world. Because eBay was the first major firm to connect indi-
vidual buyers and sellers over the Internet in an auction format, the number
of buyers and sellers grew very quickly. As more rare baseball cards and vin-
tage posters came up for auction on eBay, more buyers were attracted to the
site to bid on those items. Those extra bidders attracted still more sellers—
the sellers wanted to go where the buyers were, and the buyers wanted to go
where the sellers were.

By the time competitors such as Yahoo! and Amazon.com tried to get
into the auction game, it was too late. There were already too many bidders
on eBay for sellers to want to switch to a new, smaller auction service—theyd
probably get a lower price for their wares because there were fewer bidders on

each item. Meanwhile, the bidders weren't interested in going anywhere


HOW LONG WILL IT LAST?

either because eBay had by far the most items for sale. Thus, eBay gained crit-
ical mass and, today, a near-monopoly position in the online-auction market.

Another great example is money-transfer concern Western Union, which
is owned by First Data. With more than 170,000 locations worldwide, odds
are pretty good that Western Union can get your money wherever you need
it to go, and the value of the firm’s agent network only grows larger as it adds
locations. The central characteristic of a classic network effect is a virtuous

circle—more users attract more users.

How Long Will It Last?
Our next topic is assessing the longevity of an economic moat, so we know
how long a firm is likely to keep its competitors at bay.

Think about an economic moat in two dimensions. There’s depth—how
much money the firm can make—and there’s width—how long the firm can
sustain above-average profits. Technology firms often have very deep but very
narrow moats, so they're incredibly profitable for a relatively short period of
time until a competitor builds a better product. A niche firm such as WD-40
is just the opposite. It’s never going to make an enormous amount of money
in any one year by selling cans of household lubricant, but it has such a solid
franchise that its excess returns are likely to persist for quite some time.

Estimating how long a moat will last is tough stuff, but you need to at
least give it some thought, even if you cant come up with a precise answer.
Just being able to separate firms into three buckets—a few years, several years,
and many years—is very useful.

In general, any competitive advantage based on technological superiority—
real product differentiation—is likely to be fairly short. Successful software
firms, for example, can generate huge excess returns because they have high
profit margins and they don’t need to spend much money on fixed costs such as
machinery. However, the duration of those returns is typically very short be-
cause of the rapid pace of technological change. In other words, today’s leader
can quickly become tomorrow’s loser because the barriers to entry are so low
and the potential rewards so high.

Cost leadership, brands (perceived product differentiation), customer

lock-ins, and competitor lockouts can each confer competitive advantage

33


34

ECONOMIC MOATS

periods of varying lengths—there’s no good rule of thumb, unfortunately. To
give you some guidance in what separates a wide moat from a narrow moat
and what kinds of companies have no moat at all, P’ve listed 27 well-known
large-cap companies in Figures 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 and included an explanation
as to why each firm’s moat is wide, narrow, or does not exist. Having these ex-

amples will, I hope, help you analyze economic moats when doing your own

Dell Classic low-cost producer: lean operating structure and direct
Internet-based sales allow the company to run circles around its rivals.

eBay Network effect: The mare buyers and sellers the netwark has, the
more attractive it becames to prospective users and the tougher it
becames for competitors ta contend with.

PepsiCo By far the market share leader in salty snacks and sports drinks,
the diversified food company boasts a stable full of strong brands,
innovative new products, and an impressive distribution network.

Comcast Contrals roughly one-third of cable hausehalds in the U.S. This gives it
unparalleled leverage with cantent providers and equipment suppliers.

Intel Chipmaker’s daminant pasition gives it significant econamies of scale.
Brand name and patents are alsa significant intangible assets.

H&R Block Dominates the U.S. tax preparation market. One in every seven tax
returns filed is prepared by Black,

Wal-Mart Largest retail company in the world is alsa the preeminent low-cast
provider. The firm flexes its muscles with suppliers in negotiating
prices and passes the savings dawn ta consumers.

United Technologies Operates ina selection of concentrated industries. Buyers of elevatars,
cooling systems, and helicopters dan't switch brands often.

Adobe High customer switching costs: graphic designers are trained early
in their careers to use the company’s software and can't do their jab
without it.

Paychex Vast sales network provides access to new accounts and scale

gives it a cast advantage. Plus, it has pricing power over its diverse
and unorganized client base.

Figure 3.1 Some examples of companies with wide economic moats. Source: Marningstar, Inc.


HOW LONG WILL IT LAST? 35

Federal Express

Nokia

Kraft

Waste Management

Disney

ExxonMobil

Target

Best Buy

AOL Time Warner

SBC Communications

Sure, it practically invented overnight delivery, but behind the
scenes, FedEx is a cargo airline, and airline margins are thin.

Although the Nokia brand is strong, cell phones are
becoming cammodities.

Despite a portfolio of familiar consumer brands, there isn’t much
breathing space between Kraft and its competitors, which has made it
difficult for the firm ta exert any pricing pawer.

Netwark of 300 landfills creates a wide-moat disposal business,
but lack of brand loyalty in its collection business—where customers
flack to the lawest price—earns this company a narraw moat.

Owns same of the most valuable intellectual property in the world,
but increasing competition and an absence of creativity have eraded
some of the brand's appeal.

Enjoys enormous ecanamies of scale, but still operates ina
commadity industry.

"Cheap chic” strategy has helped it carve out a moat and differentiate
itself from Wal-Mart. However, Target's strategy depends partially an
accurately guessing fashion trends, which Is mare difficult than merely
being the low-cost provider of everyday items.

Dominates home-electranics and entertainment-saftware retailing,
but operates In a very ecanamically sensitive industry.

Still has same great media properties, but bungled attempts
at formulating a successful broadband strategy have left the AOL
business vulnerable.

Farmer manopaly aver local phone service is facing campetition fram
wireless carriers, cable companies, and long-distance firms that can
buy access ta its lacal netwark,

Figure 3.2 Some examples of companies with narrow economic moats. Source: Morningstar, Inc.


36

ECONOMIC MOATS

General Motors Operates in deeply cyclical industry. Legacy costs and reputation for
mediocre quality puts it at a competitive disadvantage relative ta
most peers.

Micron Memary chips are essentially commodities, which leads to product

price volatility and lots of competition.

Circuit City Main campetitar Best Buy has higher profit margins, better
inventory turnaver, and twice the per-stare sales numbers.

Staples A saturated industry, lack of product differentiation, and intense price
sensitivity prevent this campany fram digging a moat.

Maytag Low-cost Asian producers have farced the company to focus onthe
premium appliance market, where competition Is fierce and product
differentiation is difficult to achieve.

Delta Not the low-cost provider and doesn’t offer a differentiated product.
In a commodity industry where competition revalves largely around
price, its business model is unsustainable.

Figure 3.3 Some examples of companies with no economic moats. Source: Morningstar, Inc.

research. I’ve also included at the end of the book a list of all the companies
Morningstar follows that we consider to have wide economic moats.

Industry Analysis

Our last step is to investigate the industry in which the firm operates. Let’s
face it: It’s just plain easier to make money in some industries than it is in
others. (Ask the CEO of any airline company.) Although the attractiveness of
an industry doesn’t tell the whole story—after all, Southwest Airlines has
made plenty of money for shareholders—it’s important to have a feel for the
competitive landscape.

First, get a rough sense of the industry so you can classify it. Are sales for
firms in the industry generally increasing or shrinking? Are firms consistently
profitable or does the industry go through periodic cycles when most firms
lose money? Is the industry dominated by a few large players, or is it full of
firms that are roughly the same size? How profitable is the average firm—are
operating margins fairly high (more than 25 percent) or fairly low (less than


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

15 percent)? (An operating margin is income from operations as a percentage
of sales. I discuss such financial ratios in more detail in Chapter 6.)

You can answer some of these questions by looking at aggregate statistics—
average growth rates, average margins, and so on. However, averages can’t tell
you everything, so be sure that you examine a number of individual com-
panies. An easy way to do this is to look at a list of companies in the industry
you're researching sorted by sales or market cap, and examine a dozen or so to
get a feel for the industry.

You don't need to do detailed analysis at this point—just glance over sales
and earnings growth rates and margins. The most important thing is to look
at a variety of firms over a reasonably long time frame—at least 5 years and,

preferably, 10.

Investor's Checklist: Economic Moats

> Because success attracts competition as surely as night follows day, the
most highly profitable companies tend to become less profitable over time.
That’s why economic moats are so important: They help great companies
stay that way.

> For concrete evidence of an economic moat, look for firms that consis-
tently earn high profits. Focus on free cash flow, net margins, return on
equity, and return on assets.

» After you've looked at these specific measures, try to identify the source of
the company’s economic moat. Companies generally build sustainable
competitive advantages through product differentiation (real or perceived),
driving costs down, locking in customers with high switching costs, or
locking out competitors through high barriers to entry.

> Think about economic moats in two dimensions: depth (how much
money the company can make) and width (how long it can sustain
above-average profits). In general, any economic moat based on techno-
logical innovation is likely to be short-lived.

> Although the attractiveness of an industry doesn’t tell the whole story, it’s
important to get a feel for the competitive landscape. Some industries are

just easier to make money in than others.

37




The Language of Investing

IN THE NEXT three chapters, my goal is to help you understand how finan-
cial statements fit together and how you can use them to identify solid com-
panies. First, we'll look at how the three main financial statements fit together
by describing what’s in them and by following a dollar through a business.
Then, we'll build a hot dog stand to see how the operations of a very simple
business are represented in financial statements.

In Chapter 5, we'll tour all three statements in detail by looking at the
books of a real, complicated company. (Note to readers with some account-
ing background: You can skip to Chapter 6—Analyzing a Company—unless
you want a review of the basics.) In Chapter 11, we'll apply our newfound ac-
counting knowledge to the analytical process by looking at two real-world

companies.

The Basics

As an investor, youre mainly going to be interested in the balance sheet, the
income statement, and the statement of cash flows. These three tables are
your windows into corporate performance, and they're the place to start

when you're analyzing a company.


40

THE LANGUAGE OF INVESTING

All three of these statements can be found in the three major types of
financial filings: an annual report, a 10-K filing, and a 10-Q filing. You're
probably familiar with annual reports—those glossy booklets with smiling em-
ployees that firms mail out every year—but to really understand a firm, you'll
need to look up 10-Ks and 10-Qs. These are dense, detailed sets of financial in-
formation that companies file with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) every year (the 10-K) and every quarter (the 10-Q). You can access these
reports at http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml or http://www.freeedgar.com. The
latter is a bit easier to use.

Think of the three statements like this: The balance sheet is like a com-
pany’s credit report because it tells you how much the company owns (assets)
relative to what it owes (liabilities) at a specific point in time. It tells you how
strong the framework and foundation of the business is.

The income statement, meanwhile, tells how much the company made
or lost in accounting profits during a year or a quarter. Unlike the balance
sheet, which is a snapshot of the company’s financial health at a precise mo-
ment, the income statement records revenues and expenses over a set period,
such as a fiscal year.

Finally, there’s the statement of cash flows, which records all the cash that
comes into a company and all of the cash that goes out. The statement of
cash flows ties the income statement and balance sheet together.

Right now, you're probably wondering why we need an income statement
and a cash flow statement—afier all, if a company makes money, it makes
money, right? The difference lies in a confusing concept called acarual account-
ing. Here’s how it works. Companies record sales (or revenue) when a service or
a good is provided to the buyer, regardless of when the buyer pays. As long as
the company is reasonably certain that the buyer will eventually pay the bill, the
company can post the sale to its income statement.

The cash flow statement, on the other hand, is concerned only with when
cash is received and when it goes out the door. I'll go over the cash flow state-
ment in detail later in this chapter, but here’s a quick example.

Let's say that Colgate sells a few cases of toothpaste to Joe's Corner Store
for $1,000 on February 15 but gives Joe 60 days to pay because he’s a regular
customer and has a good track record of paying his bills on time. March 31 rolls

around, Joe hasn't paid yet, and Colgate closes its books for the quarter.


WHERE THE MONEY GOES

Colgate shows $1,000 in sales on its income statement because it shipped the
toothpaste to Joe—according to the income statement, the sale is complete, re-
gardless of whether Colgate has received payment. But because Joe hasn't
ponied up the grand yet, Colgate will post an entry on its balance sheet to
show that Joe owes Colgate $1,000. (The entry goes into the accounts receiv-
able line—more on this later in the chapter.)

As you can see, a company can show rip-roaring sales growth without re-
ceiving a cent of cash. In fact, if Colgate produces and sells toothpaste faster
than its customers pay for the toothpaste, sales growth would look fantastic
even though cash is flowing out the door—which is why we need a statement

of cash flows.

Where the Money Goes
Figure 4.1 illustrates how money moves from investors, through the com-
pany, to consumers, and back to the company.

This isn’t nearly as bad as it looks. Let’s follow some money through the
company to show you what I mean.

A group of investors and bondholders (1) provide capital to a firm, either by
buying shares in the company (stockholders) or by buying the company’s bonds
(bondholders). The company takes the money and buys fixed assets (2) such as
machinery and buildings—and uses those assets to produce inventory (3). Some
of the inventory is sold for cash (4), and some is sold on credit (5).

The credit sales are posted to “accounts receivable’—a fancy name for
1OU—uantil the customer pays the firm (6). Once the firm has cash in hand,
it can spend it in all sorts of ways. Some of it goes back into production
(7), which means buying replacement raw materials to create more inventory,
and some of it goes into investment (8), which means buying more machin-
ery or building another factory. (In accounting lingo, you'll usually see any
investment that purchases a tangible long-term asset such as a building or
factory called “capital expenditure,” or simply “capex.”)

Another chunk of cash goes to Uncle Sam as taxes (9), and some may
flow out as dividends to stockholders if the firm pays a dividend or as interest
to bondholders (10) if the firm has debt.

That’s really all there is to it. Cash flows in, and (you hope) cash flows
out. Let’s walk through a simplified company—Mike’s Hot Dog Stand—to

41


42

THE LANGUAGE OF INVESTING

——
Pay
Dividends
Pay ° and
Taxes Interest
<o— | __
———
Collection
Cash
o Sales
—
Credit
9 Sales
—__—_—_
© Production

Shareholders and Bondholders
Provide Capital

v

Cash Deposits

Accounts Receivable

Product Inventory

Fixed Assets

Reinvest in
Production

Investment
of Capital @

cxK«

Reinvest

in Assets t

Figure 4.1 Haw maney flows through a company. Source: Morningstar, Inc.

illustrate how all of this comes together. We'll use Mike’s to introduce many

of the specific line items in financial statements that tell us how well a com-

any is doing its core job, which is investing shareholders’ money to generate
pany is doing it job, which is investing sharehold y to g

a solid return.

Practical Financials—The Statements in Use
It’s the Fourth of July, and Mike thinks he can make a few bucks by setting
up a hot dog stand near the parade route. Mike has $100 to start his hot

dog-selling operation, with the money provided by the First National Bank

of Mom.


PRACTICAL FINANCIALS—-THE STATEMENTS IN USE

I. Borrows $100 from First National Bank of Mom

ASSETS Before Change After
Cash ° +100 100
LIABILITIES

Long-term debt ° +100 100

Mike spends $70 for lumber, nails, and paint to assemble the stand as
well as tongs for turning the dogs on the grill. (He's borrowing Dad’s grill to
cook the dogs.) Then he buys $20 worth of hot dogs, buns, ketchup, and
mustard, and some charcoal and lighter fluid for the grill. He keeps the re-

maining $10 for making change and such.

Il. Buys property, plant, and equipment (PP&E)

and inventory

ASSETS Before Change After
Cash 100 -90 10
Inventory ° +20 20
PP&E ° +70 rs,

He’s spent $90 ($70 for the stand and $20 for ingredients), but that money
hasn’t disappeared—it’s turned into assets and inventory. As shown in the
chart, the $70 he spent on the hot dog stand and the tongs is “property, plant,
and equipment,” while the $20 in buns and such has become “inventory,” and
the $10 in cash is just that. Look at the simplified balance sheet in Figure 4.2
to see how this would look if Mike had to file an annual report. (Don’t worry
if you see an unfamiliar line item—we'll cover it later in the chapter.)

Mike opens for business while the crowd is gathering for the parade and
sells 30 hot dogs at $1 apiece. By noon, half the hot dogs, buns, condiments,
and charcoal are gone, so Mike’s “cost of goods sold” is $10, or half of the $20
he spent to buy supplies. Seven people didn’t have any cash on them, so Mike
let them buy their dogs on credit—which means we need to record $7 in ac-

counts receivable, which is the money that folks owe to Mike.
