
THE EPIDEMIC OF WEIRD BELIEFS
A voracious but indiscriminate appetite for knowledge inevitably leads to
weird beliefs. Our susceptibility to the adoption of false beliefs was evidenced dramatically in a 1990 Gallup survey of 1,236 adult Americans. The
proportion of people believing in all manner of nonsense including the
paranormal is frightening. 14 These are statistics presented by Shermer. 15
Astrology 52 percent
Extrasensory perception 46 percent
Witches 19 percent
Aliens from space landing on earth 22 percent
A previously existing continent called Atlantis 33 percent
Humans and dinosaurs living at the same time 41 percent
Communicating with the spirits of the dead 42 percent
Ghosts 35 percent
Personal psychic experiences 67 percent
Astronomer Carl Sagan 16 lamented that more people believe in astrology than the theory of evolution. He attributed this widespread irrationality and superstition to a high rate of scientific illiteracy, which surveys
estimate to be over 95 percent. "In such an atmosphere, pseudo science
thrives. Strange beliefs, such as New-Age health practices, are supported
in ways that purport to be scientific but really are not. The evidence offered is insufficient, and facts that point in other directions are given short
shrift. However, the ideas they offer survive and thrive because they speak

The JIIusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

41

to powerful emotional needs that science often leaves unfulfilled."17 As
Sagan said, it's no fun to be skeptical. It is a burdensome attitude that
leaves our need to believe in fun and comforting ideas, like the tooth fairy
and Santa Claus, unsatisfied.

COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY: HEURISTICS, BIASES,
AND ILLUSIONS
Cognitive psychology is concerned with how we process information,
draw conclusions, and make decisions. It studies the mental processes by
which sensory input is transformed, reduced, elaborated, stored, and recovered. I8
Over the last 30 years cognitive psychologies have been investigating
the origins of unreliable knowledge. The good news is that common sense
and intuitive interpretations of experience are mostly correct. The bad
news is that human intelligence is maladapted to making accurate judgments in situations characterized by uncertainty. Under conditions of uncertainty, intuitive judgments and informally acquired knowledge are
often wrong. Because financial market behavior is highly uncertain, erroneous knowledge in this domain is to be expected.
The pioneering research of Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos
Tversky showed that illusory knowledge 19 originates in two ways. First,
people are plagued by various cognitive biases and illusions that distort
what we experience and how we learn from that experience. Second, to
compensate for the mind's limited abilities to process information, human
intelligence has evolved various mental shortcuts called judgment heuristics. These rules of thought, which operate quite automatically beneath
our conscious awareness, are the basis of our intuitive judgments and
probability assessments. They are a mark of human intelligence crucial to
everyday living. Though these quick and dirty rules of thinking are generally successful, in certain kinds of situation they cause us to make biased
decisions and acquire erroneous knowledge.
Erroneous knowledge is especially problematic because of its resilience. Studies have shown that once a belief has been adopted, it can
survive the assault of new evidence contradicting it or even a complete
discrediting of the original evidence that led to the belief's formation.
The sections that follow will discuss a variety of cognitive errors responsible for erroneous knowledge. For purposes of presentation, each
will be discussed separately. In actuality, however, they operate conjointly, feeding into and off one another, creating an illusion of validity for
subjective TA. This is illustrated in Figure 2.3.

42

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Overconfidence,
Optimism,
Bias

Self-Attribution
Bias

Hindsight
Bias

Knowledge
Illusion
Illusion
of
Control

Biased
Secondhand
Knowledge

Illusory
Correlation

Illusory
Trends
&
Patterns

Sample
Size
Neglect

Representativeness
Heuristic Bias
FIGURE 2.3 Illusion of validity.

HUMAN INFORMATION PRO~ESSING LIMI1f\TIONS
Despite its awesome power, the information-processing capabilities of the
human brain are limited. Nobel Laureate Herbert Simon called this the
principle of bounded rationality. "The capacity of the human mind for formulating and solving complex problems is very small compared with size
of the problems whose solution is required."20 Consequently, we attend to
only a small fraction of the torrent of information the world presents and
process it in simplistic ways.
The number of separate chunks of information that can be held in
conscious memory at a given time is estimated to be seven, plus or minus
twO. 21 Even more limited is the mind's ability to handle problems requiring
configural thinking. A configural-thinking problem requires that a multitude of factors (variables) be considered simultaneously as an inseparable
configuration. Research indicates that the mind is only able to handle a
maximum of three factors when they must be evaluated in a configural

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

43

fashion. 22 Medical diagnosis is typically a configural-thinking problem. A
set of symptoms and lab results, if considered conjointly, can distinguish
one disease from another, but taken in isolation they may be nothing more
than a set of disconnected uninformative facts.
Configural thinking is a more demanding mode of thought than sequential or linear thinking. In a sequential/linear problem, the relevant
variables can be analyzed independently, so even though there may be a
multitude of variables, the message conveyed by each variable is unaffected by what others variables are saying. Therefore, once each variable
has been interpreted on its own, the set of individual messages can be
combined in a linear fashion (i.e., added algebraically23), to derive their
collective meaning. Suppose, for example that a sequential problem involves seven variables, each of which can assume a value of either + 1 or
-1. Further, assume that five of the variables have the value +1 and two
have the value -1. The linear or additive combination24 would be equal to
+3 or [(+5) + (-2)]. Research has shown that, when experts make multifactored decisions in a subjective fashion, they primarily rely on a linear
combining rule,25 though they do it less effectively than formal linear regression models. 26 These studies have shown that human experts are less
effective than linear regression models because they fail to combine the
information in the consistent manner of a formal mathematical model.
The combining of infonnation in a linear fashion that satisfies the requirements of a sequential-thinking problem falls short when the problem
demands a configural solution. In a configural problem, the relevant information is contained in the web of relationships (interactions) between the
variables. This means that the variables cannot be evaluated in isolation
as they can in a sequential/linear problem. To clarify what is meant by interactions, imagine a configural problem involving only three variables, A,
B, and C. Further suppose that each variable can assume only two readings, high or low (i.e., the variables are binary). In a configural problem, a
high reading on factor A may mean one thing when B is low and C is high,
whereas a high reading on A can mean something entirely different when
B is high and C is low. In a sequential/linear problem, a high reading on
factor A carries the same message irrespective of the readings on B and C.
The difference between the two configurations-Configuration 1 (Ahigh, B-Iow, C-high) and Configuration 2 (A-high, B-high, C-Iow)-are illustrated in the Figures 2.4 and 2.5. The eight cells of the three-dimensional
space show that there are eight distinctly different possible configurations
of three binary variables. However, a linear combination of three binary
variables can only assume four 7 distinct values.
The type of thinking problem faced by a subjective market analyst attempting to make a forecast by combining the readings on five indicators
(variables), a relatively modest nun1ber, is likely to be configural rather

44

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

A-High, B-Low, (-High

High

C I'---+-+-Low

Low

A

High

FIGURE 2.4 Configuration 1.

than sequential. 28 Simply determining which of the five indicators should
be combined (some may be redundant or irrelevant) to produce an
informative prediction is a huge configural problem in itself. With only five
indicators, the predictive power of 26 possible combinations must be evaluated (10 pairs, 10 triplets, 5 quadruplets, and 1 quintuplet). Then, once a
good combination has been identified, applying the multi-indicator rule
would also entail configural thinking. As seen earlier, even if the indicators are binary, the simplest possible, 3 binary variables can have eight
distinct configurations. Four binaries have 16 possible distinct configurations and 5 binary variables have 32. Subjective analysts who believe they

A-High, B-High, (-Low

High

Ct<--+-+---JL---a__- y
Low

Low

FIGURE 2.5 Configuration 2.

A

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

45

can perform such a feat are too confident-way too confident! This is not
surprising. It is merely one example of the overconfidence bias.

TOO DANG CERTAIN: THE OVERCONFIDENCE BIAS
In general people are too confident. The overconfidence bias is the docu-

mented 29 tendency for people's self-assessments to err on the high side of
the truth. They tend to view their personal attributes and abilities as better than objective evidence would indicate. People view themselves as
above average in many ways, including how much they lrnow and how accurately they lrnow it. In other words people tend to be arrogant about
their lrnowledge.
The tendency is so pervasive that psychologists think overconfidence
is inborn, and they are quite confident about that. Biologists have speculated that high confidence is a feature of successful mating strategies, so
we are most likely the offspring of swaggering parents. High confidence
confers benefits on humanity as a whole, even if the daring individual trying something new and dangerous dies. After enough attempts, someone
succeeds, and we all benefit. In addition, overconfidence is reinforced by
yet other cognitive biases that distort what is learned from experience, including the self-attribution bias, the confirmation bias, and the hindsight
bias, which are discussed later.
Columbia University psychologist Janet Metcalfe summed up research on human overconfidence with these humbling words: 30

People think they will be able to solve problems when they won't;
they are highly confident that they are on the verge ofproducing the
correct answer when they are, in fact, about to produce a mistake;
they think they have solved problems when they haven't; they think
they know answers to information questions when they don't; they
have the answer on the tip of their tongue when there is no answer;
they think they produced the correct answer when they didn't, and
furthermore, they say they knew it all along; they believe they have
mastered learning material when they haven't; they think they have
understood, even though demonstrably they are still in the dark. ''31
Some specific findings about overconfidence:
• Overconfidence is most extreme for difficult or impossible tasks. 32 Studies have shown extreme overconfidence in tasks such as predicting the
outcome of horse races,33 distinguishing European from American

46

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

handwriting, and predicting rising versus falling stock prices. In the
domain of TA, the analogous task would be that of combining a multitude of indicator readings into a market forecast by subjective configural reasoning.
• Overconfidence is related to an inability to properly assess the difficulty of various tasks and is more pronounced the more difficult the
task. TA analysts may not be aware of the configural reasoning demanded by subjective data analysis.
• Confidence increases as the number of pieces of information are increased, though prediction accuracy does not. 34 Increased confidence
would only be justified if the individual bits of information were
nonredundant, were useful, and could be successfully integrated.
• Confidence increases as the level of agreement among multiple inputs
increases. When inputs are independent (uncorrelated) and have predictive information, increased confidence may be justified. When inputs are redundant, it is not. Many TA indicators that appear to be
distinct because of naming conventions and specific calculations actually measure similar market attributes. This can encourage unwarranted confidence.
• Doctors who were 88 percent confident they had correctly diagnosed
pneumonia were correct in only 20 percent of the cases. 35 Physicians
were similarly overconfident in diagnosing skull fractures. 36
• Many other professionals were overconfident about their specific
areas of expertise. For example, when managers of a chemical company were 90 percent confident about company facts (i.e., they expected to be wrong only 10 percent of the time) they were right
only 50 percent of the time. 37 Executives of a computer company
were 95 percent confident about general business facts but were
correct 80 percent of the time. With respect to specifics about their
own company, they were 95 percent confident but correct only 58
percent of the time. 38
• The overconfidence of Wall Street's analysts with respect to their ability to forecast quarterly earnings is attested to by the frequency of
earnings surprises. According to one study, average forecast error
was 44 percent. This statistic was based on over 500,000 individual
earnings predictions. 39 People are surprised when outcomes fall outside of predicted ranges, and setting ranges too narrowly is a sign of
overconfidence.
• Individual investors are overconfident in their ability to predict shortterm market trends and pick stocks that will do better than the market, as evidenced by the level of their trading activity.40
• Wall Street strategists exhibit overconfidence in the forecasts for the
general stock market and are frequently surprised by actual out-

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

47

comes. However, they maintain their confidence in spite of these mistakes. 41 If strategists were indeed learning to curb their confidence,
they would make subsequent predictions with wider bands of uncertainty, and outcomes would be less likely to fall outside of those
bands. They do not appear to do this.
Given the pervasiveness of overconfidence, it is likely that practitioners of subjective TA would be afflicted with it as well. It seems likely that
their overconfidence would manifest with respect to three areas; (1) the
predictive power of specific methods, (2) the efficacy of subjective data
analysis and informal inference as a means of knowledge discovery, and
(3) the ability to perform configural reasoning as in synthesizing a market
forecast from a multitude of indicator reading and patterns. Both the complexity of the financial markets and the known limits of unaided human
intelligence suggest that high confidence with respect to any of these
areas is unwarranted.
According to one study, there are two forecasting professions that
have managed to avoid overconfidence: meteorologists and horse-race
handicappers. Their estimates of their predictive abilities are well calibrated because: "They face similar problems every day; they make explicit
(falsifiable) probabilistic predictions; and they obtain swift and precise
feedback on outcomes. When these conditions are not satisfied, overconfidence should be expected for both experts and non-experts. "42
It is impossible for subjective TA practitioners to obtain accurate
feedback in the context of historical research simply because their
methods for generating forecasts and evaluating forecast accuracy are
not well defined. Feedback is only possible with objective methods.
However, in the context of real-time forecasting, subjective practitioners
could obtain feedback if they were willing to make falsifiable forecasts.
A falsifiable forecast is one that has cognitive content. That is to say, it
sets up a clearly discernable difference between the outcomes that
would indicate the forecast had been correct and outcomes that would
indicate the forecast has been in error. Consider the following as an example of a falsifiable forecast:

The S&P 500 will be higher twelve months from today, and will not
decline more than 20 percent from current levels within that time.
If the market is not higher 12 months hence or if it drops more than 20
percent from the current level within the next 12 months, it is clear that
the forecast was in error. Unfortunately, falsifiable forecasts are rarely
given by subjective practitioners, thereby preventing feedback for them
and their customers. Overconfidence persists.

48

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

It's Going to Be Great: Optimism Bias
The optimism basis is overconfidence that extends to a generalized and
unwarranted hopefulness about the future. 43 As a consequence, most people think their lives will be sprinkled with more favorable and fewer unfavorable events than the lives of their peers.
The optimism bias suggests that TA analysts' beliefs about their predictive prowess will persist even if their prior predictions have not
worked out well. This is borne out by data provided by the Hulbert Digest,44 a newsletter that tracks the performance of market forecasters by
translating their recommendations into a portfolio whose value can be
tracked. Some newsletter writers have attempted to explain away their
poor performance ratings by claiming that Hulbert's evaluation methods
are flawed. According to HUlbert, these claims are leveled primarily at the
assumptions he is required to make to turn a newsletter's vague recommendations into specific recommendations whose performance can be
measured. Many newsletters tracked by Hulbert give clear advice, making
such assumptions unnecessary.
Despite their dismal long-term performance, newsletter writers continue to make confident predictions, and subscribers continue to believe
they will be helpful. Both groups are optimistically biased. If subscribers
were realistic, they would cancel their subscriptions and the writers
could not continue in business. Obviously, something other than predictive success keeps faith alive. One possible explanation is that both subscribers and newsletter authors have bought into a story that explains
why the underlying method should work, even if it does not work in
practice. As is explained later, a compelling story can overcome statistical evidence because the mind has evolved a greater taste for stories
than abstract facts. (See the secondhand information bias and the power
of narratives.)

Self-Attribution Bias: Rationalizing Failure
The tendency toward overconfidence is amplified by other biases that distort what we learn from experience. The self-attribution bias refers to the
tendency to interpret past successes and failure in a biased and self-serving manner. "Numerous studies across a wide range of situations have
found that people attribute positive outcomes to their abilities while attributing failures to external circumstances."45 As a result, we come away
with a falsely optimistic assessment of our strategies and abilities.
Whereas the feedback of past failures might motivate change and improved performance, self-serving interpretations short-circuit such learning. This may explain how newsletter writers can maintain confidence in

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

49

the face of performance that, by any objective standard, would be regarded as negative.
In addition to making us feel good, self-serving explanations make
intuitive sense. When we exert ourselves and succeed, the causal chainlinking effort to a good outcome is easy to understand and has the ring of
truth. Attributing success to good luck or some other factor not under our
control not only has less emotional appeal, it also seems less plausible. We
all prefer the plausible. However, a failure despite our best efforts seems
more likely to be attributable to bad luck. Common sense tends to overlook the role of luck (randomness) in favorable outcomes. That's the job
of the statistician.
Studies of the self-attribution bias among gamblers are revealing. 46 By
evaluating past losses in a biased manner, they are able to maintain a faith
in their abilities in the face of growing losses. Surprisingly, past losses are
not ignored. Actually the gamblers devote a great deal of cognitive energy
to failures thereby recasting them in a more favorable light. Losses are
treated as near wins or attributed to bad luck. Wins, on the other hand, are
credited to genuine betting skill.47 In the end, both wins and losses wind
up feeding the gambler's sense of competence.
As a trader I frequently heard self-serving rationalizations. I was guilty
of it myself until I started keeping a trading log early in my trading career
with predefined exit points where I was forced to admit my earlier forecast was in error. Even though my forecasts were based on subjective TA,
my evaluation criteria were objectively defined in advance. I did not start
to question my abilities until a considerable amount of negative feedback
jarred my faith.
Sure, I Know That!: The Knowledge Illusion

The knowledge illusion is a false confidence in what we know-both in
terms of quantity and quality. It is based on the false premise that more information should translate into more knowledge. 48 When horse-race handicappers were given more items of information, they grew more confident
in their forecasts, but their actual accuracy did not improve. 49 The additional facts created the illusion of more knowledge.
The knowledge illusion is relevant to TA because it is most likely to
occur in situations characterized by large amounts of data. Not only do financial markets generate a torrent of individual time series, but each one
can be transformed into a far greater number of derivative time series
called technical indicators. This provides ample opportunity for TA practitioners to see themselves as more knowledgeable than they really are.
The knowledge illusion stems in part from an overconfidence in
the mind's ability to perform configural reasoning, the simultaneous
