
Index, Stochastic, Rate of Change, Momentum, the Relative Strength Index,
Elder-ray, Williams %R, and others. Oscillators are leading or coincident indicators
that often turn ahead of prices.

74

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

Miscellaneous indicators provide insights into the intensity of bullish or bearish

camps. They include the New High–New Low Index, the Put-Call Ratio, Bullish
Consensus, Commitments of Traders, and others. They can be leading or coincident
indicators.
It pays to combine several indicators from different groups so that their negative
features cancel each other out, while their positive features remain undisturbed. This
is the aim of the Triple Screen trading system (see Chapter 39).
As we begin to explore indicators, a few words of caution. Sometimes their signals are very clear, while at other times they are quite vague. I’ve learned long ago
to enter trades only when indicator signals “grab me by the face.” If I find myself
squinting at a chart while trying to understand its signals, I flip the page and move
to the next stock.
If you look at a familiar indicator but can’t understand its message, it is most likely
because the stock you’re trying to analyze is in a chaotic stage (see Chapter 17). If
indicator signals aren’t clear, don’t start massaging them or piling on more indicators, but simply leave that stock alone for the time being and look for another one.
One of the great luxuries of private traders is that no one pushes us to trade—we
can wait for the best and clearest signals.
As you read about the signals of different indicators, remember that you cannot
base trading decisions on a single indicator. We need to select several indicators we
understand and trust and combine them into a trading system. In the following chapters, we’ll be exploring indicators, while later in the book we’ll see how to build
your own system from them.

■■22. Moving Averages
Wall Street old-timers say that moving averages were brought to the financial markets
after World War II. Antiaircraft gunners used moving averages to site guns on enemy
planes and after the war, applied this method to moving prices. The two early experts
on moving averages were Richard Donchian and J. M. Hurst—neither apparently a
gunner. Donchian was a Merrill Lynch employee who developed trading methods
based on moving average crossovers. Hurst was an engineer who applied moving averages to stocks in his classic book, The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing.
A moving average (MA) reflects the average value of data in its time window.
A 5-day MA shows the average price for the past 5 days, a 20-day MA for the past
20 days, and so on. Connecting each day’s MA value gives you a moving average line.
Simple MA =

P1 + P2 + … + PN
N

where P is the price being averaged
N is the number of days in the moving average (selected by the trader)
The level of a moving average reflects values that are being averaged and depends
on the width of the MA window. Suppose you want to calculate a 3-day simple
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

22. MOVING AVERAGES

75

moving average of a stock. If it closes at 19, 21, and 20 on three consecutive days,
then a 3-day simple MA of closing prices is 20 (19 + 21 + 20, divided by 3). Suppose
that on the fourth day the stock closes at 22. It makes its 3-day MA rise to 21—the
average of the last three days (21 + 20 + 22), divided by 3.
There are three main types of moving averages: simple, exponential, and weighted.
Simple MAs used to be popular because they were easy to calculate in precomputer
days, and both Donchian and Hurst used them. Simple MAs, however, have a fatal
flaw—they change twice in response to each price.

Twice as Much Bark
First, a simple MA changes when a new piece of data comes in. That’s good—we
want our MA to reflect the latest prices. The bad thing is that MA changes again
when an old price is dropped off at the end of its window. When a high price is
dropped, a simple MA ticks down. When a low price is dropped, a simple MA rises.
Those changes have nothing to do with the current reality of the market.
Imagine that a stock hovers between 80 and 90, and its 10-day simple MA stands
at 85 but includes one day when the stock reached 105. When that high number is
dropped at the end of the 10-day window, the MA will dive, as if in a downtrend.
That meaningless dive has nothing to do with the current trend.
When an old piece of data gets dropped off, a simple moving average jumps. This
problem is worse with short MAs but not so bad with long MAs. If you use a 10-day
MA, those drop-offs can really shake it because each day constitutes 10% of the total
value. On the other hand, if you use a 200-day MA, where each day is responsible for
only 0.5%, dropping off a day isn’t going to influence it a lot.
Still, a simple MA is like a guard dog that barks twice—once when someone approaches the house, and once again when someone walks away from it. After a while,
you don’t know when to believe that dog.This is why a modern computerized trader is
better off using exponential moving averages, which we’ll discuss later in this chapter.

Market Psychology
Each price is a snapshot of the current consensus of value among all market participants (see Chapter 11). Still, a single price doesn’t tell you whether the crowd is
becoming more bullish or bearish, just as you can’t tell from a single photo whether
a person is an optimist or a pessimist. If, on the other hand, you take a daily photo of
a person for ten days, bring them to a lab, and order a composite picture, it’ll reveal
that person’s typical features. You can monitor trends in that person’s mood by updating that composite photo each day.
A moving average is a composite photograph of the market—it combines prices
for several days. The market consists of huge crowds, and the MA slope identifies
the direction of mass inertia. A moving average represents an average consensus of value for the period of time in its window.
The most important message of a moving average is the direction of its slope.
When it rises, it shows that the crowd is becoming more optimistic—bullish. When

76

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

it falls, it shows that the crowd is becoming more pessimistic—bearish. When prices
rise above a moving average, the crowd is more bullish than before. When prices fall
below a moving average, the crowd is more bearish than before.

Exponential Moving Averages
An exponential moving average (EMA) is a better trend-following tool because it
gives greater weight to the latest data and responds to changes faster than a simple
MA. At the same time, an EMA doesn’t jump in response to dropping old data. This
guard dog has better ears, and it barks only when someone approaches the house.
EMA = Ptod • K + EMAyest • (1 − K )
2
where K = +
N 1
N = the number of days in the EMA (chosen by the trader).
Ptod = today’s price.
EMAyest = the EMA of yesterday.
Technical analysis software allows you to select EMA length. An EMA has two
major advantages over a simple MA. First, it assigns greater weight to the last trading
day. The latest mood of the crowd is more important. In a 10-day EMA, the last closing price is responsible for 18 percent of EMA value, while in a simple MA all days
are equal. Second, EMA does not drop old data the way a simple MA does. Old data
slowly fades away, like a mood of the past lingering in a composite photo.

Choosing the Length of a Moving Average
It pays to monitor your EMA slope because a rising line reflects bullishness and a
declining one bearishness. A relatively narrow window makes an EMA more sensitive to price changes. It catches new trends sooner, but leads to more whipsaws. A
whipsaw is a rapid reversal of a trading signal. An EMA with a wider time window
produces fewer whipsaws but misses turning points by a wider margin.
You can take several approaches to deciding how long to make your moving average or any other indicator. It would be nice to tie EMA length to a price cycle if you
can find it. A moving average should be half the length of the dominant market cycle.
If you find a 22-day cycle, use an 11-day moving average. If the cycle is 34 days long,
then use a 17-day moving average. Trouble is, cycles keep changing and disappearing.
There is no single magic “best” number for the EMA window. Good indicators
are robust—not too sensitive to small changes in their parameters. When trying to
catch longer trends, use a longer moving average. You need a bigger fishing rod
to catch a bigger fish. A 200-day moving average works for long-term stock investors
who want to ride major trends.
Most traders can use an EMA between 10 and 30 days. A moving average should
not be shorter than 8 days to avoid defeating its purpose as a trend-following tool.
Among the numbers I like are 22 because there are approximately 22 trading days in
a month and 26—half of the number of trading weeks in a year.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

22. MOVING AVERAGES

77

Creating individualized parameters for every trading vehicle is practical only if you
track a tiny handful of stocks or futures. Once their number reaches double digits, individualized parameters create confusion. It is better to have a yardstick that’s one yard
long and use the same parameters for all your moving averages in the same timeframe.
Don’t change indicator parameters while looking for trades. Fiddling with parameters to obtain signals you’d like to see robs your indicators of their most valuable
feature—their objectivity. It is better to set your parameters and live with them.

Trading Rules
Beginning traders try to forecast the future. Professionals don’t forecast; they measure
the relative power of bulls and bears, monitor the trend, and manage their positions.
Moving averages help us trade in the direction of the trend. The single most important message of a moving average comes from the direction of its slope (Figure
22.1). It reflects the market’s inertia. When an EMA rises, it is best to trade the market from the long side, and when it falls, it pays to trade from the short side.
1. When an EMA rises, trade that market from the long side. Buy when prices
dip near the moving average. Once you are long, place a protective stop below the latest minor low, and move it to the break-even point as soon as prices
close higher.
2. When the EMA falls, trade that market from the short side. Sell short when
prices rally toward the EMA and place a protective stop above the latest minor
high. Lower your stop to breakeven as prices drop.
3. When the EMA goes flat and only wiggles a little, it identifies an aimless, trendless market. Do not trade using a trend-following method.

FIGURE 22.1â•… DIS daily 22-day EMA. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

An Exponential Moving Average (EMA)
The direction of the slope of a moving average helps identify trends of trading vehicles,
such as the Walt Disney Company (DIS).

78

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

Old traders used to follow fast and slow MA crossovers. The favorite approach
of Donchian, one of the originators of trading with moving averages, was to use
crossovers of 4-, 9-, and 18-day MAs. Trading signals were given when all three MAs
turned in the same direction. His method, like other mechanical trading methods,
only worked during strongly trending markets.
Trying to filter out whipsaws with mechanical rules is self-defeating—filters reduce profits as much as losses. An example of a filter is a rule that requires prices to
close on the other side of MA not once, but twice, or to penetrate MA by a certain
margin. Mechanical filters reduce losses, but they also diminish the best feature of a
moving average—its ability to lock onto a trend at an early stage.
A trader must accept that an EMA, like any other trading tool, has good and bad
sides. Moving averages help you identify and follow trends, but they lead to whipsaws in trading ranges. We will look for an answer to this dilemma in the chapter on
the Triple Screen trading system.

More on Moving Averages
Moving averages often serve as support and resistance. A rising MA tends to
serve as a floor below prices, and a falling MA serves as a ceiling above them. That’s
why it pays to buy near a rising MA, and sell short near a falling MA.
Moving averages can be applied to indicators as well as prices. For example,
some traders use a 5-day moving average of volume. When volume falls below its
5-day MA, it shows reduced public interest in the minor trend and indicates that it
is likely to reverse. When volume overshoots its MA, it shows strong public interest
and confirms the price trend. We’ll be using moving averages of an indicator when
we work with Force Index (Chapter 30)
The proper way to plot a simple moving average is to lag it behind prices by half
its length. For example, a 10-day simple MA properly belongs in the middle of a
10-day period and it should be plotted underneath the 5th or 6th day. An exponential
moving average is more heavily weighted toward the latest data, and a 10-day EMA
should be lagged by two or three days. Most software packages allow you to lag a
moving average.
Moving averages can be based not only on closing prices but also on the mean
between the high and the low, which can be useful for day traders.
An exponential moving average assigns greater weight to the latest day of trading,
but a weighted moving average (WMA) allows you to assign any weight to any
day, depending on what you deem important. WMAs are so complicated that traders
are better off using EMAs.

Dual EMAs
Whenever I analyze charts, I like to use not one but two exponential moving averages. The longer EMA shows a longer-term consensus of value. The shorter-term
EMA shows a shorter-term consensus of value.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

22. MOVING AVERAGES

79

I keep the ratio between them at approximately two to one. For example, I may
use a 26-week and a 13-week EMA on a weekly chart, or a 22-day and an 11-day
EMA on a daily chart. Please understand there is no magic set of numbers.You should
feel free to play with these values, selecting a set that will be unique to you. Just keep
in mind to keep the difference between the two EMAs near 2:1. It might be simpler
and more efficient to use the same set of values (for example 26/13 or 22/11) in all
timeframes: weekly, daily, and even intraday.
Since the shorter EMA represents the short-term consensus of value and the
longer-term EMA the long-term consensus, I believe that value “lives” between
these two lines. I call the space between the two EMAs the value zone.

Moving Averages and Channels
A channel consists of two lines drawn parallel to a moving average. Oddly enough,
the distance between the upper and the lower channel lines is sometimes described
as “height” and at other times as “width” of the channel, even though both refer to the
same measurement.
A well-drawn channel should contain approximately 95% of all prices that occurred during the past 100 bars. Longer-term markets have wider channels because
prices can cover greater distances in 100 weeks than in 100 days. Volatile markets
have wider (or taller) channels than quiet, sleepy markets.
Channels are very useful for trading and performance tracking. We’ll review the
first in Chapter 41 (Channel Trading Systems) and the second in Chapter 59 (Trade
Journal—Measuring Your Performance.)

Prices, Values, and the Value Zone
One of the key concepts in market analysis—the concept that all of us intuitively understand but almost never spell out—is that prices are different from values. We buy
stocks when we feel that their current prices are below their true value and expect
prices to rise. We sell and sell short when we think that stocks are priced above their
real value and are likely to come down.
We buy undervalued stocks and sell overvalued shares—but how to define value?
Fundamental analysts do it by studying balance sheets and annual reports, but
those sources aren’t nearly as objective as they seem. Companies often massage
their financial data. Fundamental analysts don’t have a monopoly on the concept
of value. Technical analysts can define values by tracking the spread between a
fast and a slow EMA. One of these EMAs reflects a short-term and the other
a long-term consensus of value. Value lives in the zone between the two moving averages
(Figure 22.2).
Very important: it’s impossible to trade successfully with just a single indicator
or even a pair of moving averages. Markets are too complex to extract money from
them with a single tool. We need to build a trading system using several indicators as
well as analyze markets in more than one timeframe. Keep this in mind as we review

80

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 22.2â•… DIS daily, 26- and 13-day EMAs. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

EMAs and the Value Zone
A short-term MA identifies a short-term consensus of value, while a long-term MA reflects
a long-term consensus of value. Value “lives” in the zone between the two moving averages. Select the parameters for this pair so that the long-term average is approximately
twice the length of the short-term EMA. Looking at a chart, you can immediately tell which
EMA is longer or shorter—the fast one hugs prices more closely, while the slow one moves
more slowly. The slow EMA helps identify the trend, while the fast MA sets the boundary
of the value zone.
When looking to buy a stock, it pays to do it in the value zone, rather than overpay and
buy above value. Similarly, when shorting, it pays to wait for a rally into the value zone to
establish a short position rather than sell short when prices collapse.
During the uptrend shown on this chart, you can see pullbacks to value, offering attractive buying opportunities in areas marked 1, 2, 3, and 4. The downward reversal of the slow
EMA marks the end of the uptrend. At the right edge of the chart, the trend is down, while
a pullback to value in area 5 offers a shorting opportunity.

various indicators—they are the building blocks of trading systems, which we’ll
review later in the book.
Keeping this in mind will help you become a more rational trader. Once you
know how to define value, you can aim to buy at or below value and sell above value.
We’ll return to look for trading opportunities in overvalued and undervalued markets when we examine price channels or envelopes in Chapter 41 on the Channel
Trading System.

■■23. Moving Average Convergence-

Divergence: MACD Lines and
MACD-Histogram

Moving averages help identify trends and their reversals. A more advanced indicator was constructed by Gerald Appel, an analyst and money manager in New York.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

23. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

81

Moving Average Convergence-Divergence, or MACD for short, consists of not one,
but three exponential moving averages. It appears on the charts as two lines whose
crossovers give trading signals.

How to Create MACD
The original MACD indicator consists of two lines: a solid line (called the MACD
line) and a dashed line (called the Signal line). The MACD line is made up of two
exponential moving averages (EMAs). It responds to changes in prices relatively
quickly. The Signal line smooths the MACD line with another EMA. It responds to
changes in prices more slowly. In Appel’s original system, buy and sell signals were
given when the fast MACD line crossed above or below the slow Signal line.
The MACD indicator is included in most programs for technical analysis. To create MACD by hand:
1. Calculate a 12-day EMA of closing prices.
2. Calculate a 26-day EMA of closing prices.
3. Subtract the 26-day EMA from the 12-day EMA, and plot their difference as a
solid line. This is the fast MACD line.
4. Calculate a 9-day EMA of the fast line, and plot the result as a dashed line. This
is the slow Signal line.

Market Psychology
Each price reflects the consensus of value among the mass of market participants at
the moment of the trade. A moving average represents an average consensus of value
for a selected period of time—it is a composite photo of mass consensus. A longer
moving average tracks longer-term consensus, and a shorter moving average tracks
shorter-term consensus.
Crossovers of the MACD and Signal lines identify shifts in the balance of power
of bulls and bears. The fast MACD line reflects mass consensus over a shorter time
period. The slow Signal line reflects mass consensus over a longer period. When
the fast MACD line rises above the slow Signal line, it shows that bulls dominate the
market, and it is better to trade from the long side. When the fast line falls below
the slow line, it shows that bears dominate the market and it pays to trade from the
short side.

Trading Rules for MACD Lines
Crossovers of the MACD and Signal lines identify changes of market tides. Trading
in the direction of a crossover means going with the flow of the market. This system generates fewer trades and whipsaws than mechanical systems based on a single
moving average.

82

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

1. When the fast MACD line crosses above the slow Signal line, it gives a buy signal.
Go long, and place a protective stop below the latest minor low.
2. When the fast line crosses below the slow line, it gives a sell signal. Go short, and
place a protective stop above the latest minor high (Figure 23.1).
Bottoms A, B, and C of ABX could be seen as an inverted head-and-shoulders
bottom. Still, our technical indicators deliver much more objective messages than
classical chart patterns.

More on MACD Lines
Sophisticated traders tend to personalize their MACD Lines by using other moving
averages than the standard 12-, 26-, and 9-bar EMAs. Beware of optimizing MACD
too often. If you fiddle with MACD long enough, you can make it give you any signal
you'd like.

FIGURE 23.1â•… ABX weekly, 26- and 13-week EMAs, 12-26-9 MACD Lines. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

MACD Lines
Barrick Gold Corporation (ABX), which has the largest market capitalization of all U.S.
listed gold companies, was dragged down in 2012 and 2013 by the bear market in gold.
Notice the sell signal, marked by a red vertical arrow, when the fast line crossed below the
slow line. That signal reversed more than a year later, when the fast line crossed above the
slow line, marked with a green vertical arrow.
Notice several additional patterns on this chart. When ABX fell to a record low, marked
B, MACD Lines refused to confirm: they didn’t fall to a new low but traced out a double bottom. That new low B turned out to be a false downside breakout, a bullish sign. Bears’ last
attempt to drive ABX lower, in area C, wasn’t confirmed by MACD Lines, which maintained
a steady uptrend. At the right edge of the chart, MACD Lines have reached a new high for
the upmove, indicating strength. Both EMAs are rising, confirming the bullish trend.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com
