
6. Tax Accounting for NVF’s Acquisition of Sharon
Steel Shares
1. NVF acquired 88% of Sharon stock in 1969, paying for each
share $70 in NVF 5% bonds, due 1994, and warrants to buy 11⁄2

Appendixes

577

shares of NVF at $22 per share. The initial market value of the
bonds appears to have been only 43% of par, while the warrants
were quoted at $10 per NVF share involved. This meant that the
Sharon holders got only $30 worth of bonds but $15 worth of warrants for each share turned in, a total of $45 per share. (This was
about the average price of Sharon in 1968, and also its closing price
for the year.) The book value of Sharon was $60 per share. The difference between this book value and the market value of Sharon
stock amounted to about $21 million on the 1,415,000 shares of
Sharon acquired.
2. The accounting treatment was designed to accomplish three
things: (a) To treat the issuance of the bonds as equivalent to a
“sale” thereof at 43, giving the company an annual deduction from
income for amortization of the huge bond discount of $54 million.
(Actually it would be charging itself about 15% annual interest on
the “proceeds” of the $99 million debenture issue.) (b) To offset this
bond-discount charge by an approximately equal “profit,” consisting of a credit to income of one-tenth of the difference between the
cost price of 45 for the Sharon stock and its book value of 60. (This
would correspond, in reverse fashion, to the required practice of
charging income each year with a part of the price paid for acquisitions in excess of the book value of the assets acquired.) (c) The
beauty of this arrangement would be that the company could save
initially about $900,000 a year, or $1 per share, in income taxes from
these two annual entries, because the amortization of bond discount could be deducted from taxable income but the amortization
of “excess of equity over cost” did not have to be included in taxable income.
3. This accounting treatment is reflected in both the consolidated income account and the consolidated balance sheet of NVF
for 1969, and pro forma for 1968. Since a good part of the cost of
Sharon stock was to be treated as paid for by warrants, it was necessary to show the initial market value of the warrants as part of
the common-stock capital figure. Thus in this case, as in no other
that we know, the warrants were assigned a substantial value in
the balance sheet, namely $22 million+ (but only in an explanatory
note).

578

Appendixes

7. Technological Companies as Investments
In the Standard & Poor’s services in mid-1971 there were listed
about 200 companies with names beginning with Compu-, Data,
Electro-, Scien-, Techno-. About half of these belonged to some part
of the computer industry. All of them were traded in the market or
had made applications to sell stock to the public.
A total of 46 such companies appeared in the S & P Stock Guide
for September 1971. Of these, 26 were reporting deficits, only six
were earning over $1 per share, and only five were paying dividends.
In the December 1968 Stock Guide there had appeared 45 companies with similar technological names. Tracing the sequel of this
list, as shown in the September 1971 Guide, we find the following
developments:
Total
Companies

Price
Advanced

Price Declined
Less Than Half

Price Declined
More Than Half

Dropped from
Stock Guide

45

2

8

23

12

COMMENT: It is virtually certain that the many technological
companies not included in the Guide in 1968 had a poorer subsequent record than those that were included; also that the 12 companies dropped from the list did worse than those that were retained.
The harrowing results shown by these samples are no doubt reasonably indicative of the quality and price history of the entire
group of “technology” issues. The phenomenal success of IBM and
a few other companies was bound to produce a spate of public
offerings of new issues in their fields, for which large losses were
virtually guaranteed.

Endnotes

Introduction: What This Book Expects to Accomplish
1. “Letter stock” is stock not registered for sale with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), and for which the buyer supplies a letter stating the purchase was for investment.
2. The foregoing are Moody’s figures for AAA bonds and industrial
stocks.

Chapter 1. Investment versus Speculation:
Results to Be Expected by the Intelligent Investor
1. Benjamin Graham, David L. Dodd, Sidney Cottle, and Charles
Tatham, McGraw-Hill, 4th. ed., 1962. A fascimile copy of the 1934 edition of Security Analysis was reissued in 1996 (McGraw-Hill).
2. This is quoted from Investment and Speculation, by Lawrence Chamberlain, published in 1931.
3. In a survey made by the Federal Reserve Board.
4. 1965 edition, p. 8.
5. We assume here a top tax bracket for the typical investor of 40%
applicable to dividends and 20% applicable to capital gains.

Chapter 2. The Investor and Inflation
1. This was written before President Nixon’s price-and-wage “freeze” in
August 1971, followed by his “Phase 2” system of controls. These
important developments would appear to confirm the views
expressed above.
2. The rate earned on the Standard & Poor’s index of 425 industrial
stocks was about 111⁄2% on asset value—due in part to the inclusion
of the large and highly profitable IBM, which is not one of the DJIA
30 issues.
579

580

Endnotes

3. A chart issued by American Telephone & Telegraph in 1971 indicates that the rates charged for residential telephone services
were somewhat less in 1970 than in 1960.
4. Reported in the Wall Street Journal, October, 1970.

Chapter 3. A Century of Stock-Market History:
The Level of Stock Prices in Early 1972
1. Both Standard & Poor’s and Dow Jones have separate averages for
public utilities and transportation (chiefly railroad) companies. Since
1965 the New York Stock Exchange has computed an index representing the movement of all its listed common shares.
2. Made by the Center for Research in Security Prices of the University
of Chicago, under a grant from the Charles E. Merrill Foundation.
3. This was first written in early 1971 with the DJIA at 940. The contrary
view held generally on Wall Street was exemplified in a detailed
study which reached a median valuation of 1520 for the DJIA in 1975.
This would correspond to a discounted value of, say, 1200 in mid1971. In March 1972 the DJIA was again at 940 after an intervening
decline to 798. Again, Graham was right. The “detailed study” he mentions was too optimistic by an entire decade: The Dow Jones Industrial
Average did not close above 1520 until December 13, 1985!

Chapter 4. General Portfolio Policy: The Defensive Investor
1. A higher tax-free yield, with sufficient safety, can be obtained from
certain Industrial Revenue Bonds, a relative newcomer among financial
inventions. They would be of interest particularly to the enterprising
investor.

Chapter 5. The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks
1. Practical Formulas for Successful Investing, Wilfred Funk, Inc., 1953.
2. In current mathematical approaches to investment decisions, it has become standard practice to define “risk” in terms of average price variations or “volatility.” See, for example, An Introduction to Risk and Return,
by Richard A. Brealey, The M.I.T. Press, 1969. We find this use of the
word “risk” more harmful than useful for sound investment decisions—because it places too much emphasis on market fluctuations.
3. All 30 companies in the DJIA met this standard in 1971.

Endnotes

581

Chapter 6. Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor:
Negative Approach
1. In 1970 the Milwaukee road reported a large deficit. It suspended
interest payments on its income bonds, and the price of the 5% issue
fell to 10.
2. For example: Cities Service $6 first preferred, not paying dividends,
sold at as low as 15 in 1937 and at 27 in 1943, when the accumulations
had reached $60 per share. In 1947 it was retired by exchange for
$196.50 of 3% debentures for each share, and it sold as high as 186.
3. An elaborate statistical study carried on under the direction of the
National Bureau of Economic Research indicates that such has actually been the case. Graham is referring to W. Braddock Hickman,
Corporate Bond Quality and Investor Experience (Princeton University
Press, 1958). Hickman’s book later inspired Michael Milken of Drexel
Burnham Lambert to offer massive high-yield financing to companies
with less than sterling credit ratings, helping to ignite the leveragedbuyout and hostile takeover craze of the late 1980s.
4. A representative sample of 41 such issues taken from Standard &
Poor’s Stock Guide shows that five lost 90% or more of their high
price, 30 lost more than half, and the entire group about two-thirds.
The many not listed in the Stock Guide undoubtedly had a larger
shrinkage on the whole.

Chapter 7. Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor:
The Positive Side
1. See, for example, Lucile Tomlinson, Practical Formulas for Successful
Investing; and Sidney Cottle and W. T. Whitman, Investment Timing:
The Formula Approach, both published in 1953.
2. A company with an ordinary record cannot, without confusing the
term, be called a growth company or a “growth stock” merely
because its proponent expects it to do better than the average in the
future. It is just a “promising company.” Graham is making a subtle but
important point: If the definition of a growth stock is a company that will
thrive in the future, then that’s not a definition at all, but wishful thinking.
It’s like calling a sports team “the champions” before the season is over.
This wishful thinking persists today; among mutual funds, “growth” portfolios describe their holdings as companies with “above-average growth

582

Endnotes

potential” or “favorable prospects for earnings growth.” A better definition might be companies whose net earnings per share have increased
by an annual average of at least 15% for at least five years running.
(Meeting this definition in the past does not ensure that a company will
meet it in the future.)
3. See Table 7-1.
4. Here are two age-old Wall Street proverbs that counsel such sales:
“No tree grows to Heaven” and “A bull may make money, a bear may
make money, but a hog never makes money.”
5. Two studies are available. The first, made by H. G. Schneider, one of
our students, covers the years 1917–1950 and was published in June
1951 in the Journal of Finance. The second was made by Drexel Firestone, members of the New York Stock Exchange, and covers the
years 1933–1969. The data are given here by their kind permission.
6. See pp. 393–395, for three examples of special situations existing in
1971.

Chapter 8. The Investor and Market Fluctuations
1. Except, perhaps, in dollar-cost averaging plans begun at a reasonable
price level.
2. But according to Robert M. Ross, authority on the Dow theory, the
last two buy signals, shown in December 1966 and December 1970,
were well below the preceding selling points.
3. The top three ratings for bonds and preferred stocks are Aaa, Aa, and
A, used by Moody’s, and AAA, AA, A by Standard & Poor’s. There
are others, going down to D.
4. This idea has already had some adoptions in Europe—e.g., by the
state-owned Italian electric-energy concern on its “guaranteed floating rate loan notes,” due 1980. In June 1971 it advertised in New York
that the annual rate of interest paid thereon for the next six months
would be 81⁄8%.
One such flexible arrangement was incorporated in The TorontoDominion Bank’s “7%–8% debentures,” due 1991, offered in June
1971. The bonds pay 7% to July 1976 and 8% thereafter, but the holder
has the option to receive his principal in July 1976.

Endnotes

583

Chapter 9. Investing in Investment Funds
1. The sales charge is universally stated as a percentage of the selling
price, which includes the charge, making it appear lower than if
applied to net asset value. We consider this a sales gimmick unworthy of this respectable industry.
2. The Money Managers, by G. E. Kaplan and C. Welles, Random House,
1969.
3. See definition of “letter stock” on p. 579.
4. Title of a book first published in 1852. The volume described the
“South Sea Bubble,” the tulip mania, and other speculative binges of
the past. It was reprinted by Bernard M. Baruch, perhaps the only
continuously successful speculator of recent times, in 1932. Comment:
That was locking the stable door after the horse was stolen. Charles
Mackay’s Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds
(Metro Books, New York, 2002) was first published in 1841. Neither a
light read nor always strictly accurate, it is an extensive look at how
large numbers of people often believe very silly things—for instance, that
iron can be transmuted into gold, that demons most often show up on
Friday evenings, and that it is possible to get rich quick in the stock
market. For a more factual account, consult Edward Chancellor’s Devil
Take the Hindmost (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, New York, 1999); for a
lighter take, try Robert Menschel’s Markets, Mobs, and Mayhem: A
Modern Look at the Madness of Crowds ( John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 2002).

Chapter 10. The Investor and His Advisers
1. The examinations are given by the Institute of Chartered Financial
Analysts, which is an arm of the Financial Analysts Federation. The
latter now embraces constituent societies with over 50,000 members.
2. The NYSE had imposed some drastic rules of valuation (known as
“haircuts”) designed to minimize this danger, but apparently they
did not help sufficiently.
3. New offerings may now be sold only by means of a prospectus prepared under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
This document must disclose all the pertinent facts about the issue
and issuer, and it is fully adequate to inform the prudent investor as to
the exact nature of the security offered him. But the very copiousness

584

Endnotes

of the data required usually makes the prospectus of prohibitive
length. It is generally agreed that only a small percentage of individuals buying new issues read the prospectus with thoroughness. Thus
they are still acting mainly not on their own judgment but on that of
the house selling them the security or on the recommendation of the
individual salesman or account executive.

Chapter 11. Security Analysis for the Lay Investor:
General Approach
1. Our textbook, Security Analysis by Benjamin Graham, David L. Dodd,
Sidney Cottle, and Charles Tatham (McGraw-Hill, 4th ed., 1962),
retains the title originally chosen in 1934, but it covers much of the
scope of financial analysis.
2. With Charles McGolrick, Harper & Row, 1964, reissued by HarperBusiness, 1998.
3. These figures are from Salomon Bros., a large New York bond house.
4. At least not by the great body of security analysts and investors.
Exceptional analysts, who can tell in advance what companies are
likely to deserve intensive study and have the facilities and capability
to make it, may have continued success with this work. For details of
such an approach see Philip Fisher, Common Stocks and Uncommon
Profits, Harper & Row, 1960.
5. On p. 295 we set forth a formula relating multipliers to the rate of
expected growth.
6. Part of the fireworks in the price of Chrysler was undoubtedly
inspired by two two-for-one stock splits taking place in the single
year 1963—an unprecedented phenomenon for a major company. In
the early 1980s, under Lee Iacocca, Chrysler did a three-peat, coming
back from the brink of bankruptcy to become one of the best-performing
stocks in America. However, identifying managers who can lead great
corporate comebacks is not as easy as it seems. When Al Dunlap took
over Sunbeam Corp. in 1996 after restructuring Scott Paper Co. (and
driving its stock price up 225% in 18 months), Wall Street hailed him as
little short of the Second Coming. Dunlap turned out to be a sham who
used improper accounting and false financial statements to mislead
Sunbeam’s investors—including the revered money managers Michael
Price and Michael Steinhardt, who had hired him. For a keen dissection
of Dunlap’s career, see John A. Byrne, Chainsaw (HarperCollins, New
York, 1999).

Endnotes

585

7. Note that we do not suggest that this formula gives the “true value”
of a growth stock, but only that it approximates the results of the
more elaborate calculations in vogue.

Chapter 12. Things to Consider About Per-Share Earnings
1. Our recommended method of dealing with the warrant dilution is
discussed below. We prefer to consider the market value of the warrants as an addition to the current market price of the common stock
as a whole.

Chapter 13. A Comparison of Four Listed Companies
1. In March 1972, Emery sold at 64 times its 1971 earnings!

Chapter 14. Stock Selection for the Defensive Investor
1. Because of numerous stock splits, etc., through the years, the actual
average price of the DJIA list was about $53 per share in early 1972.
2. In 1960 only two of the 29 industrial companies failed to show current
assets equal to twice current liabilities, and only two failed to have
net current assets exceeding their debt. By December 1970 the number in each category had grown from two to twelve.
3. But note that their combined market action from December 1970 to
early 1972 was poorer than that of the DJIA. This demonstrates once
again that no system or formula will guarantee superior market
results. Our requirements “guarantee” only that the portfolio-buyer is
getting his money’s worth.
4. As a consequence we must exclude the majority of gas pipeline
stocks, since these enterprises are heavily bonded. The justification
for this setup is the underlying structure of purchase contracts which
“guarantee” bond payments; but the considerations here may be too
complicated for the needs of a defensive investor.

Chapter 15. Stock Selection for the Enterprising Investor
1. Mutual Funds and Other Institutional Investors: A New Perspective,
I. Friend, M. Blume, and J. Crockett, McGraw-Hill, 1970. We should
add that the 1966–1970 results of many of the funds we studied were

586

Endnotes

somewhat better than those of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock composite and considerably better than those of the DJIA.
2. Personal note: Many years before the stock-market pyrotechnics in
that particular company the author was its “financial vice-president”
at the princely salary of $3,000 per annum. It was then really in the
fireworks business. In early 1929, Graham became a financial vice president of Unexcelled Manufacturing Co., the nation’s largest producer of
fireworks. Unexcelled later became a diversified chemical company and
no longer exists in independent form.
3. The Guide does not show multipliers above 99. Most such would be
mathematical oddities, caused by earnings just above the zero point.

Chapter 16. Convertible Issues and Warrants
1. This point is well illustrated by an offering of two issues of Ford
Motor Finance Co. made simultaneously in November 1971. One was
a 20-year nonconvertible bond, yielding 71⁄2%. The other was a 25-year
bond, subordinated to the first in order of claim and yielding only
41⁄2%; but it was made convertible into Ford Motor stock, against its
then price of 681⁄2. To obtain the conversion privilege the buyer gave
up 40% of income and accepted a junior-creditor position.
2. Note that in late 1971 Studebaker-Worthington common sold as low
as 38 while the $5 preferred sold at or about 77. The spread had thus
grown from 2 to 20 points during the year, illustrating once more the
desirability of such switches and also the tendency of the stock market to neglect arithmetic. (Incidentally the small premium of the preferred over the common in December 1970 had already been made up
by its higher dividend.)

Chapter 17. Four Extremely Instructive Case Histories
1. See, for example, the article “Six Flags at Half Mast,” by Dr. A. J.
Briloff, in Barron’s, January 11, 1971.

Chapter 18. A Comparison of Eight Pairs of Companies
1. The reader will recall from p. 434 above that AAA Enterprises tried to
enter this business, but quickly failed. Here Graham is making a pro-

Endnotes

587

found and paradoxical observation: The more money a company makes,
the more likely it is to face new competition, since its high returns signal
so clearly that easy money is to be had. The new competition, in turn, will
lead to lower prices and smaller profits. This crucial point was overlooked by overenthusiastic Internet stock buyers, who believed that early
winners would sustain their advantage indefinitely.

Chapter 19. Shareholders and Managements: Dividend Policy
1. Analytical studies have shown that in the typical case a dollar paid
out in dividends had as much as four times the positive effect on market price as had a dollar of undistributed earnings. This point was
well illustrated by the public-utility group for a number of years
before 1950. The low-payout issues sold at low multipliers of earnings, and proved to be especially attractive buys because their dividends were later advanced. Since 1950 payout rates have been much
more uniform for the industry.

Chapter 20. “Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept
of Investment
1. This argument is supported by Paul Hallingby, Jr., “Speculative
Opportunities in Stock-Purchase Warrants,” Analysts’ Journal, third
quarter 1947.

Postscript
1. Veracity requires the admission that the deal almost fell through
because the partners wanted assurance that the purchase price would
be 100% covered by asset value. A future $300 million or more in market gain turned on, say, $50,000 of accounting items. By dumb luck
they got what they insisted on.

Appendixes
1. Address of Benjamin Graham before the annual Convention of the
National Federation of Financial Analysts Societies, May 1958.

Acknowledgments from Jason Zweig

My heartfelt gratitude goes to all who helped me update Graham’s
work, including: Edwin Tan of HarperCollins, whose vision and
sparkling energy brought the project to light; Robert Safian, Denise
Martin, and Eric Gelman of Money Magazine, who blessed this
endeavor with their enthusiastic, patient, and unconditional support;
my literary agent, the peerless John W. Wright; and the indefatigable
Tara Kalwarski of Money. Superb ideas and critical readings came
from Theodore Aronson, Kevin Johnson, Martha Ortiz, and the staff of
Aronson + Johnson + Ortiz, L.P.; Peter L. Bernstein, president, Peter
L. Bernstein Inc.; William Bernstein, Efficient Frontier Advisors; John
C. Bogle, founder, the Vanguard Group; Charles D. Ellis, founding
partner, Greenwich Associates; and Laurence B. Siegel, director of
investment policy research, the Ford Foundation. I am also grateful to
Warren Buffett; Nina Munk; the tireless staff of the Time Inc. Business
Information Research Center; Martin Fridson, chief executive officer,
FridsonVision LLC; Howard Schilit, president, Center for Financial
Research & Analysis; Robert N. Veres, editor and publisher, Inside
Information; Daniel J. Fuss, Loomis Sayles & Co.; F. Barry Nelson,
Advent Capital Management; the staff of the Museum of American
Financial History; Brian Mattes and Gus Sauter, the Vanguard Group;
James Seidel, RIA Thomson; Camilla Altamura and Sean McLaughlin
of Lipper Inc.; Alexa Auerbach of Ibbotson Associates; Annette Larson
of Morningstar; Jason Bram of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York;
and one fund manager who wishes to remain anonymous. Above all, I
thank my wife and daughters, who bore the brunt of my months of
round-the-clock work. Without their steadfast love and forbearance,
nothing would have been possible.
