2. Calculate a 26-day EMA of closing prices.
3. Subtract the 26-day EMA from the 12-day EMA, and plot their difference as a solid line. This is the fast MACD line.

4. Calculate a 9-day EMA of the fast line, and plot the result as a dashed
line. This is the slow Signal line (see the worksheet, Figure 26-1).

Market Psychology

Each price reflects the consensus of value among the mass of market participants at the moment of the trade. A moving average represents an average
consensus of value in a selected period -a composite photo of mass consensus. A long moving average tracks long-term consensus, and a short moving
average tracks short-term consensus.
Crossovers of the MACD and Signal lines identify shifts in the balance of
power of bulls and bears. The fast MACD line reflects mass consensus over
a shorter period. The slow Signal line reflects mass consensus over a longer
period. When the fast MACD line rises above the slow Signal line, it shows

26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

129

Crude Oil
DAY 1

CLOSE

I

i 12-EMA i 26-EMA i

20.70

i

20.39

1 20.46 i

MACD
4.07

i SIGNAL
MACD-HIST
i -0.16 i
0.09 -

...a9 ....1

21.23

1

20.95

i

0.19

i

1

Figure 26-1,

20.76

i

0.07

i

0.12

MACD and MACD-Histogram Worksheet

To obtain MACD lines and an MACD-Histogram take these steps:
1. Calculate the 12-day and 26-day exponential moving averages of

closing prices.
2. Subtract the 26-day EMA from the 12-day EMA to obtain the fast
MACD line.
3. Calculate a %day EMA of the. fast MACD line to obtain the slow
Signal line. Plot both lines to obtain the classic MACD indicator.
4. Subtract the Signal line from the MACD line to obtain an MACDHistogram.

that bulls dominate the market, and it is better to trade from the long side.
When the fast line falls below the slow line, it shows that bears dominate the
market and it pays to trade from the short side.

Trading Rules

Crossovers between the MACD and Signal lines identify changing market
tides. Trading in the direction of a crossover means going with the flow of
the market. This system generates fewer trades and whipsaws than a
mechanical system based on a single moving average.

1. When the fast MACD line crosses above the slow Signal line, it gives
a buy signal. Go long, and place a protective stop below the latest
minor low.

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

130

Jiul
Figure 26-2.

MACD Lines

When the fast MACD line crosses above the slow Signal line, it
gives a buy signal. Sell signals are given when the fast line crosses
below the slow line. These rules help catch all the major trends
and generate fewer whipsaws than crossovers of prices and a single moving average.

2. When the fast line crosses below the slow line, it gives a sell signal.
Go short, and place a protective stop above the latest minor high
(Figure 26-2).

More on MACD

Many traders try to optimize MACD by using other moving averages than
the standard 12-, 26-, and 9-bar EMAs; 5-34-7 is another popular choice.
Some traders try to link MACD to market cycles. The trouble is cycles are
not present in the markets most of the time (see Section 36). If you use
cycles, the first EMA should be one quarter the length of the dominant cycle
and the second EMA half the cycle length. The third EMA is a smoothing
device whose length does not have to be tied to a cycle. Beware of optimiz-

26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

131

ing MACD too often. If you fiddle with MACD long enough, you can make
it give you any signal you want using the same data.
A "quick-and-dirty" way to plot MACD is used by traders whose software does not include this indicator. Some packages allow you to draw only
two EMAs. In that case, you can use crossovers between two EMAs, such as
11-day and 26-day EMAs as a proxy for MACD and Signal lines.

MACD-Histogram offers a deeper insight into the balance of power between
bulls and bears than the original MACD. It shows not only whether bulls or
bears are in control but also whether they are growing stronger or weaker. It
is one of the best tools available to a market technician.
MACD-Histogram = MACD line - Signal line
MACD-Histogram measures the difference between the MACD line and
the Signal line (see worksheet, Figure 26-1). It plots that difference as a histogram - a series of vertical bars. That distance may appear puny, but a cornputer rescales it to fill the screen.
If the fast line is above the slow line, MACD-Histogram is positive and
plotted above the zero line. If the fast line is below the slow line, MACDHistogram is negative and plotted below the zero line. When the two lines
touch, MACD-Histogram equals zero.
When the spread between the MACD and Signal lines increases, MACDHistogram becomes taller or deeper, depending on its direction. When the
two lines draw closer, MACD-Histogram becomes shorter.
The slope of MACD-Histogram is defined by the relationship between
any two neighboring bars. If the last bar is higher (like the height of letters
m-M), the slope of MACD-Histogram is up. If the last bar is lower (like the
depth of letters P-p), then the slope of MACD-Histogram is down.

Market Psychology

MACD-Histogram shows the difference between long-term and short-term
consensus of value. The fast MACD line reflects market consensus over a
shorter period. The slow Signal line reflects market consensus over a longer
period. MACD-Histogram tracks the difference between these two lines.

132

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

The slope of MACD-Histogram identifies the dominant market group. A
rising MACD-Histogram shows that bulls are becoming stronger. A falling
MACD-Histogram shows that bears are becoming stronger.
When the fast MACD line rallies faster than the slow Signal line, MACDHistogram rises. It shows that bulls are becoming stronger than they have
been - it is a good time to trade from the long side. When the fast MACD
line drops faster than the slow line, MACD-Histogram falls. It shows that
bears are becoming stronger - it is a good time to trade from the short side.
When the slope of MACD-Histogram moves in the same direction as
prices, the trend is safe. When the slope of MACD-Histogram moves in a
direction opposite to that of prices, the health of the trend is questioned. It is
best to trade in the direction of the slope of MACD-Histogram because it
shows whether bulls or bears dominate the market.
The slope of MACD-Histogram is more important than its position above
or below the centerline. The best sell signals are given when MACDHistogram is above its centerline but its slope turns down, showing that bulls
have become exhausted. The best buy signals occur when MACD-Histogram
is below its centerline but its slope turns up, showing that bears have become
exhausted.

Trading Rules

MACD-Histogram gives two types of trading signals. One is common and
occurs at every price bar. The other is rare and occurs only a few times a
year in any market - but it is extremely strong.
The common signal is given by the slope of MACD-Histogram (Figure
26-3). When the current bar is higher than the preceding bar, the slope is up.
It shows that bulls are in control and it is time to buy. When the current bar is
lower than the preceding bar, the slope is down. It shows that bears are in
control and it is time to be short. When prices go one way but MACDHistogram moves the other way, it shows that the dominant crowd is losing
its enthusiasm and the trend is weaker than it appears.
1. Buy when MACD-Histogram stops falling and ticks up. Place a protective stop below the latest minor low.
2. Sell short when MACD-Histogram stops rising and ticks down. Place
a protective stop above the latest minor high.
MACD-Histogram ticks up and down on the daily charts so often that is

26. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

Figure 26-3.

133

MACD-Histogram Divergences

MACD-Histogram confirms trends when it reaches new highs or lows
together with prices. The new lows in MACD-Histogram at points A and
F confirm downtrends. New lows in the indicator tell traders that the
downtrend is likely to retest or exceed bottoms A and F. New highs C
and D in MACD-Histogram confirm uptrends. They show that the
uptrend is likely to retest or exceed peaks C and D.
Divergences between MACD-Histogram and prices identify major
turning points. These signals rarely occur, but when .they do, they often
let you catch major reversals and the beginnings of new trends. The
bullish divergence A-B flags a major buying opportunity. Prices are at a
new low, but the indicator is tracing a higher bottom. It shows that bears
are exhausted and bulls are ready to gain the upper hand.
The bearish divergence D-E identifies a major selling opportunity. At
the right edge of the chart, there is a bullish divergence, F-G. The best
time to buy is when MACD-Histogram ticks up from its second bottom,
G.Once you go long, place a protective stop below the price bottom G.
Move the stop up as the trend progresses.

not practical to buy and sell every time i t turns. The changes of slope of
MACD-Histograms are much more meaningful on the weekly charts, which
is why i t is included i n the Triple Screen trading system (see Section 43).

134

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

When to Expect a New Peak or Valley

MACD-Histogram works like headlights on a car - it gives traders a glimpse
of the road ahead. New highs and lows in this indicator are usually followed
by new high or low prices.
A record peak for the past three months in daily MACD-Histogram shows
that bulls are very strong and prices are likely to rise even higher. A record
new low for MACD-Histogram for the past three months shows that lower
prices are likely ahead.
When MACD-Histogram reaches a new high during a rally, the uptrend is
healthy and you can expect the next rally to retest or exceed its previous
peak. If MACD-Histogram falls to a new low during a downtrend, it shows
that bears are strong and prices are likely to retest or exceed their latest low.

The Strongest Signal in Technical Analysis

Divergences between MACD-Histogram and prices occur only a few times a
year in any given market, but they give some of the most powerful messages
in technical analysis. These divergences identify major turning points and
give "extra-strength" buy or sell signals. They do not occur at every important top and bottom, but when you see one, you know that a major reversal is
probably at hand.
When prices rally to a new high, but MACD-Histogram traces a lower
top, it creates a bearish divergence (Figure 26-3). A lower top in MACDHistogram shows that bulls are internally weak even though prices are
higher. When bulls are running out of steam, bears are ready to grab control.
Bearish divergences between MACD-Histogram and prices identify weakness at market tops. They give sell signals when most traders feel excited
about a breakout to a new high!

3. Sell short when MACD-Histogram ticks down from its second, lower
top, while prices are at a new high. Place a protective stop above the
latest high.
As long as prices keep falling to new lows and MACD-Histogram keeps
going lower, it confirms the downtrend. If prices fall to a new low but
MACD-Histogram traces a more shallow low, it creates a bullish divergence.
It shows that prices are falling out of inertia, bears are weaker than they
seem, and bulls are ready to gain control. Bullish divergences between

27. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM

135

MACD-Histogram and prices identify strength at market bottoms. They give
buy signals when most traders feel fearful about a breakdown to a new low!
4. Buy when MACD-Histogram ticks up from its second, more shallow
bottom while prices are at a new low. Place a protective stop below the
latest low.
If a bullish divergence between MACD-Histogram and price is aborted
and prices fall to a new low, you will be stopped out. Continue to watch
MACD-Histogram. If it traces a more shallow third bottom while prices
decline to a new low, you are dealing with a "triple bullish divergence '-an
especially strong buy signal. Buy again as soon as MACD-Histogram ticks
up from its shallow third bottom. The reverse applies to shorting triple bearish divergences.
9

More on MACD-Histogram
MACD-Histogram works in any timeframe: weekly, daily, and intraday. The
signals of weekly MACD-Histogram lead to greater price moves than the
daily or intraday indicators. This principle applies to all indicators - signals
in longer timeframes lead to greater price moves.
When you use MACD and MACD-Histogram on the weekly charts, you
do not have to wait until Friday to get your signals. A major trend can
change in the middle of the week - the market does not watch the calendar.
Because of this, weekly studies have to be performed each day.

27. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM
The Directional system is a trend-following method. It was developed by J.
Welles Wilder, Jr., in the mid-1970s and modified by several analysts. The
Directional system identifies trends and shows when a trend is moving fast
enough to make it worth following. It helps traders take chunks of profit out
of the middle of important trends.

How to Construct the Directional System
Directional Movement is defined as the portion of today's range that is outside of the previous day's range. The Directional system checks whether

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

136

Japanese Yen
Date : H ! ~ ~ . . ~ ~ ~ ~ L P . W ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ F : ! ? . S S ~
.............
711 : 72.24 >----------;-.--:---; 71.87 ' 71 92
....................
712 : 71.83 i 71.63 : 71.69
713 i 71.65 : 71.33 i 71.36 1 27 1 27
715 ;'.....
1
7
2 ..---;
83
.........
----:
..-.;--??..!?sss\--.BJ--718 ...........
7194 ' 7178
7190
30
..........
....+....................
8

719 J:.....
7202
7177
.........
:....';..
..:... 7179
7/10 j 71.95 : 71.87 i 71.90
7/11 i 72.13 i 71.82 i 71.85 j
7/12 : 73.20 :-.....
71 --.--:
94 ' ----:
73 1....
1
.....--............-;
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .9. . . . .

J

30
29
30

1

20

1

20

1

18

7/15 : 72.94 : 72.65 : 72.80
----------.-----------------.--.-.--.---7/16 : 72.75 : 72 55 ' 72 58

....................
7/17 ;
' ..
72
'......
72 --.--;
62 ----:
72 7-...
1
..........
..:91
....;
7/18 : 73.07 i 72.29 : 72.42
J-----.--.--:----:----

Figure 27-1.

Directional System Worksheet

+Dl13 and -Dl1 3 are based on positive and negative directional movements
and the true ranges of the past 13 days. DX is derived from +Dl13 and
-Dl1 3, and ADX is made by smoothing DX. See formulas in the chapter.

today's range extends above or below the previous day's range and averages
that data over a period of time. These complex calculations (see worksheet,
Figure 27-1) are best performed on a computer. The Directional system is
included in most software programs for technical analysis.

27. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM

137

1. Identify "Directional Movement" (DM) by comparing today's highto-low range with yesterday's high-to-low range. Directional
Movement is the largest part of today's range outside of yesterday's
range. There are four types of DM (Figure 27-2). DM is always a positive number (+DM and -DM refer simply to movement above or
below yesterday's range).
2. Identify the "True Range" (TR) of the market you analyze. It is
always a positive number, the largest of three:
A. The distance from today's high to today's low
B. The distance from today's high to yesterday's close
C. The distance from today's low to yesterday's close
3. Calculate daily Directional Indicators (+DI and -DI). They allow
you to compare different markets by expressing their directional
movement as a percentage of each market's true range. Each DI is a
positive number: +DI equals zero on a day that has no directional
movement up; -DI equals zero on a day that has no directional movement down.

4. Calculate smoothed Directional Lines (+DI13 and -DI13). Smooth
+DI and -DI are created with moving averages. Most software packages allow you to pick any period for smoothing, such as a 13-day
moving average. You get two indicator lines: smoothed Positive and
Negative Directional lines, +DI13 and -DI13. Both numbers are positive. They are usually plotted in different colors, or as a solid and a
dashed line.
The relationship between Positive and Negative lines identifies trends.
When +DI13 is on top, it shows that the trend is up, and when -DI13
is on top, it shows that the trend is down. The crossovers of +DI13 and
-DII3 give buy and sell signals.

5. Calculate the Average Directional Indicator (ADX). This unique
component of Directional system shows when a trend is worth following. ADX measures the spread between Directional Lines +D113 and
-DI13. It is calculated in two steps:

138

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

C

D

DIRECTIONAL
MOVEMENT
0

A

+DM

f B1l-l For
L
- DM

Figure 27-2.

Directional Movement

Directional Movement is the largest part of today's range that is outside of
yesterday's range.
A. If today's range extends above yesterday's range, Directional
Movement is positive (+DM).
B. If today's range extends below yesterday's range, Directional
Movement is negative (-DM).
C. If today's range is inside of yesterday's range or extends above and
below it by equal amounts, there is no Directional Movement (DM =
0).If today's range extends both above and below yesterday's range,
D M is positive or negative, depending on which part of the "outside
range" is larger.
D. On a limit up day, +DM equals the distance from today's close to yesterday's high. On a limit down day, -DM equals the distance from
today's close to yesterday's low.

A. Calculate the daily Directional Indicator DX:

27. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM

139

For example, +DI13 = 34; -DI13 = 18. Then,
DX =

34- 1 8
34 + 18

100 =

16

52

100 = 30.77, rounded off = 31

B. Calculate the Average Directional Indicator ADX by smoothing
DX with a moving average, such as a 13-day EMA.
When a trend proceeds in a healthy manner, the spread between two
smoothed Directional lines increases and ADX rises. ADX declines when a
trend reverses or when a market enters a trading range. It pays to use a trendfollowing method when ADX rises and not when ADX declines.

Crowd Behavior
The Directional system tracks changes in mass bullishness and bearishness
by measuring the capacity of bulls and bears to move prices outside of the
previous day's range. If today's high is above yesterday's high, it shows that
the market crowd is becoming more bullish. If today's low is below yesterday's low, it shows that the market crowd is becoming more bearish.
The relative position of Directional lines identifies trends. When the
Positive Directional line is above the Negative Directional line, it shows that
bullish traders dominate the market. When the Negative Directional line
rises above the Positive Directional line, it shows that bearish traders are
stronger. It pays to trade in the direction of the upper Directional line.
The Average Directional Indicator ADX rises when the spread between
Directional lines increases. This shows that market leaders are becoming
stronger, losers are getting weaker, and the trend is likely to continue. When
the ADX rises, it pays to trade in the direction of the upper Directional line,
using a trend-following method.
ADX declines when the spread between +DI13 and -DI13 narrows down.
This shows that the dominant market group is losing its strength, while the
underdogs are gaining. Then the market is in turmoil, and it is better not to
use trend-following methods.

Trading Rules
1. Trade only from the long side when +DI13 is above -DI13. Trade only
from the short side when -Dll3 is above +DII3. The best time to be
long is when both +DI13 and ADX are above -DI13 and ADX rises.
This shows that the uptrend is getting stronger. Go long and place a

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

140

-

I

Japanese Yen

/I+,,','

,~+,'"

ll"ft~

,10,,1\)

1tt1t1811

*'

,1+l~l

I

,...

76,91

"

..
..
..

75,56
74,15
72,74
71,33
68

Directional System

47
21
T

Odt

8

Figure 27-3. Signals of the Directional System
Directional lines identify trends. When +Dl is on top, the trend is up,
and it pays to trade the market from the long side. When -Dl is on top, it
shows that the trend is down and it pays to trade the market from the
short side. The best time to use a trend-following method is when ADX is
rising and is above the lower Directional line. Those are two signs of
dynamic trends.
The Directional system gives its best signals after ADX spends several
weeks below both Directional lines. That happens in quiet, dull markets.
Once ADX "wakes up" and rises by four steps (for example, from 10 to
14), i t gives a strong signal to trade i n the direction of the upper
Directional line. It often flashes this signal at the beginning of major market moves. On this chart, ADX rallied from 9 to 13 in September, just
prior to a dynamic rally in the Japanese Yen. Since the +Dl was on top
when the signal occurred, it signalled to go long.

protective stop below the latest minor low. The best time to be short i s
when -DI13 and ADX are above +Dll3 and ADX rises. This shows
that bears are becoming stronger. Go short and place a protective stop
above the latest minor high.

2. When ADX declines, it shows that the market is becoming less direc-

27. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM

141

tional. There are usually many whipsaws, just as there are turbulences
in the water during the change of tide. When ADX points down, it is
better not to use a trend-following method.

3. When ADX falls below both Directional lines, it identifies a flat,
sleepy market. Do not use a trend-following system but start getting
ready, because major trends emerge from such lulls.
4. The single best signal of the Directional system comes after ADX falls
below both Directional lines. The longer it stays there, the stronger the
base for the next move. When ADX rallies from below both Directional
lines, it shows that the market is waking up from a lull. When ADX
rises by four steps (i.e., from 9 to 13) from its lowest point below both
Directional lines, it "rings a bell" on a new trend. It shows that a new
bull market or bear market is being born (Figure 27-3). Buy if +DI13 is
on top and place a stop below the latest minor low. Sell short if -DII3 is
on top and place a stop above the latest minor high.
For example, if ADX rises from 8 to 1 2 while both lines are above 12
and +DIZ3 is on top, it indicates that a new uptrend is beginning. If
ADX rises from 9 to 13 while both lines are above 1 3 and -DI13 is on
top, it shows that a new downtrend is starting.
The Directional System is unique in telling you when a major new trend is
likely to begin. It rings a bell once or twice a year in any given market. It
signals when a new baby bull or baby bear is being born. Monetary risk is
usually low at that time, due to low volatility while the trend is still young.
