
[XXIII]

[XXIV]

INTRODUCTION

records of outperformance are almost always followed by stretches of underperformance. Over long
periods of time, hardly any fund managers have
beaten the market averages. They encourage investors, rather than spread their risks wisely or seek
the best match for their future liabilities, to put their
money into the most modish assets going, often just
when they become overvalued. And all the while
they charge their clients big fees for the privilege of
losing their money. . . . (One) specific lesson . . . is
the merits of indexed investing . . . you will almost
never find a fund manager who can repeatedly beat
the market. It is better to invest in an indexed fund
that promises a market return but with significantly
lower fees.”
The Little Book readers interested in reviewing the original
sources for the “Don’t Take My Word for It” quotes, found at
the end of each chapter, and other quotes in the main text, can
find them on my website: www.johncbogle.com. I wouldn’t
dream of consuming valuable pages in this book with a weighty
bibliography, so please don’t hesitate to visit my website. It’s really amazing that so many giants of academe and many of the
world’s greatest investors, known for beating the market, confirm and applaud the virtues of index investing. May their common sense, perhaps even more than my own, make you all wiser
investors.

apt
h
C

er O n

e

A Parable


The Gotrocks Family

EVEN BEFORE YOU THINK about “index funds”—
in their most basic form, mutual funds that simply buy
all the stocks in the U.S. stock market and hold them
forever—you must understand how the stock market
actually works. Perhaps this homely parable—my version of a story told by Warren Buffett, chairman
of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., in the firm’s 2005
Annual Report—will clarify the foolishness and counterproductivity of our vast and complex financial market system.

[2]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Once upon a Time . . .
A wealthy family named the Gotrocks, grown over the generations to include thousands of brothers, sisters, aunts,
uncles, and cousins, owned 100 percent of every stock in
the United States. Each year, they reaped the rewards of
investing: all the earnings growth that those thousands of
corporations generated and all the dividends that they distributed.* Each family member grew wealthier at the same
pace, and all was harmonious. Their investment had compounded over the decades, creating enormous wealth, because the Gotrocks family was playing a winner’s game.
But after a while, a few fast-talking Helpers arrive on
the scene, and they persuade some “smart” Gotrocks
cousins that they can earn a larger share than the other
relatives. These Helpers convince the cousins to sell
some of their shares in the companies to other family
members and to buy some shares of others from them in
return. The Helpers handle the transactions, and as brokers, they receive commissions for their services. The
ownership is thus rearranged among the family members.
To their surprise, however, the family wealth begins to
grow at a slower pace. Why? Because some of the return is
now consumed by the Helpers, and the family’s share of the
* To complicate matters just a bit, the Gotrocks family also purchased the
new public offerings of securities that were issued each year.

A PA R A B L E

[3]

generous pie that U.S. industry bakes each year—all those
dividends paid, all those earnings reinvested in the business—100 percent at the outset, starts to decline, simply because some of the return is now consumed by the Helpers.
To make matters worse, while the family had always
paid taxes on their dividends, some of the members are
now also paying taxes on the capital gains they realize
from their stock-swapping back and forth, further diminishing the family’s total wealth.
The smart cousins quickly realize that their plan has
actually diminished the rate of growth in the family’s
wealth. They recognize that their foray into stock-picking
has been a failure and conclude that they need professional assistance, the better to pick the right stocks for
themselves. So they hire stock-picking experts—more
Helpers!—to gain an advantage. These money managers
charge a fee for their services. So when the family appraises its wealth a year later, it finds that its share of the
pie has diminished even further.
To make matters still worse, the new managers feel
compelled to earn their keep by trading the family’s
stocks at feverish levels of activity, not only increasing
the brokerage commissions paid to the first set of
Helpers, but running up the tax bill as well. Now the
family’s earlier 100 percent share of the dividend and
earnings pie is further diminished.

[4]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

“Well, we failed to pick good stocks for ourselves,
and when that didn’t work, we also failed to pick managers who could do so,” the smart cousins say. “What
shall we do?” Undeterred by their two previous failures,
they decide to hire still more Helpers. They retain the
best investment consultants and financial planners they
can find to advise them on how to select the right managers, who will then surely pick the right stocks. The
consultants, of course, tell them they can do exactly that.
“Just pay us a fee for our services,” the new Helpers assure the cousins, “and all will be well.” Alas, the family’s
share of the pie tumbles once again.

Get rid of all your Helpers. Then our family will
again reap 100 percent of the pie that Corporate
America bakes for us.

Alarmed at last, the family sits down together and
takes stock of the events that have transpired since some
of them began to try to outsmart the others. “How is it,”
they ask, “that our original 100 percent share of the pie—
made up each year of all those dividends and earnings—
has dwindled to just 60 percent?” Their wisest member, a
sage old uncle, softly responds: “All that money you’ve
paid to those Helpers and all those unnecessary extra
taxes you’re paying come directly out of our family’s total

A PA R A B L E

[5]

earnings and dividends. Go back to square one, and do so
immediately. Get rid of all your brokers. Get rid of all
your money managers. Get rid of all your consultants.
Then our family will again reap 100 percent of however
large a pie that corporate America bakes for us, year
after year.”
They followed the old uncle’s wise advice, returning
to their original passive but productive strategy, holding
all the stocks of corporate America, and standing pat.
That is exactly what an index fund does.

. . . and the Gotrocks Family Lived Happily
Ever After
Adding a fourth law to Sir Isaac Newton’s three laws of
motion, the inimitable Warren Buffett puts the moral of
the story this way: For investors as a whole, returns decrease as motion increases.
Accurate as that cryptic statement is, I would add
that the parable reflects the profound conflict of interest
between those who work in the investment business and
those who invest in stocks and bonds. The way to wealth
for those in the business is to persuade their clients,
“Don’t just stand there. Do something.” But the way to
wealth for their clients in the aggregate is to follow the
opposite maxim: “Don’t do something. Just stand there.”
For that is the only way to avoid playing the loser’s game

[6]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

of trying to beat the market. When any business is conducted in a way that directly defies the interests of its
clients in the aggregate, it is only a matter of time until
change comes.
The moral of the story, then, is that successful investing is about owning businesses and reaping the huge rewards provided by the dividends and earnings growth of
our nation’s—and, for that matter, the world’s—corporations. The higher the level of their investment activity,
the greater the cost of financial intermediation and taxes,
the less the net return that the business owners as a group
receive. The lower the costs that investors as a group
incur, the higher rewards that they reap. So to realize the
winning returns generated by businesses over the long
term, the intelligent investor will minimize to the bare
bones the costs of financial intermediation. That’s what
common sense tells us. That’s what indexing is all about.
And that’s what this book is all about.
Don’t Take My Word for It
Listen to Jack R. Meyer, former president of Harvard Management Company, the remarkably successful wizard who tripled the Harvard endowment
fund from $8 billion to $27 billion. Here’s what he
had to say in a 2004 Business Week interview: “The

A PA R A B L E

investment business is a giant scam. Most people
think they can find managers who can outperform,
but most people are wrong. I will say that 85 to 90
percent of managers fail to match their benchmarks.
Because managers have fees and incur transaction
costs, you know that in the aggregate they are deleting value.” When asked if private investors can draw
any lessons from what Harvard does, Mr. Meyer responded, “Yes. First, get diversified. Come up with
a portfolio that covers a lot of asset classes. Second,
you want to keep your fees low. That means avoiding the most hyped but expensive funds, in favor of
low-cost index funds. And finally, invest for the
long term. [Investors] should simply have index
funds to keep their fees low and their taxes down.
No doubt about it.”
In terms that are a bit more academic, Princeton
professor Burton G. Malkiel, author of A Random
Walk Down Wall Street, expresses these views:
“Index funds have regularly produced rates of return exceeding those of active managers by close to
2 percentage points. Active management as a whole
cannot achieve gross returns exceeding the market as a
while and therefore they must, on average, underperform the indexes by the amount of these expense and
transaction costs disadvantages.
(continued)

[7]

[8]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

“Experience conclusively shows that index-fund
buyers are likely to obtain results exceeding those of
the typical fund manager, whose large advisory fees
and substantial portfolio turnover tend to reduce investment yields. Many people will find the guarantee
of playing the stock-market game at par every round a
very attractive one. The index fund is a sensible, serviceable method for obtaining the market’s rate of return with absolutely no effort and minimal expense.”

ap t er T wo
h
C

Rational Exuberance


Business Reality Trumps
Market Expectations.

THAT WONDERFUL PARABLE ABOUT the Gotrocks family
in Chapter 1 brings home the central reality of investing:
“The most that owners in the aggregate can earn between
now and Judgment Day is what their business in the aggregate earns,” in the words of Warren Buffett. Illustrating
the point with Berkshire Hathaway, the publicly owned investment company he has run for 40 years, Buffett says,
“When the stock temporarily overperforms or underperforms the business, a limited number of shareholders—
either sellers or buyers—receive out-sized benefits at the
expense of those they trade with. [But] o ve r time, the

[10]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

aggregate gains made by Berkshire shareholders must o f
necessity matc h the business gains o f the company.”

“Over time, the aggregate gains made by
shareholders must of necessity match the
business gains of the company.”

How often investors lose sight of that eternal principle!
Yet the record is clear. History, if only we would take the
trouble to look at it, reveals the remarkable, if essential,
linkage between the cumulative long-term returns earned by
business—the annual dividend yield plus the annual rate of
earnings growth—and the cumulative returns earned by the
U.S. s tock market. Think about that certainty for a moment. Can you see that it is simple common sense?
Need proof? Just look at the record since the twentieth century began (Exhibit 2.1). The average annual total
return on stocks was 9.6 percent, virtually identical to the
investment return of 9.5 percent—4.5 percent from dividend yield and 5 percent from earnings growth. That tiny
difference of 0.1 percent per year arose from what I call
speculative return. Depending on how one looks at it, it is
merely statistical noise, or perhaps it reflects a generally
upward long-term trend in stock valuations, a willingness
of investors to pay higher prices for each dollar of earnings at the end of the period than at the beginning.

R AT I O N A L E X U B E R A N C E
EXHIBIT 2.1

[11]

Investment Return versus Market Return—Growth
of $1, 1900 –2005

100,000

Dollars

10,000

1,000

Annual
Growth Rate
Investment Return
9.5%
(earnings growth plus yield)
Market Return
9.6%
(includes speculative return*)

100

10

1
1909 1919 1929 1939 1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 1999

*Impact of change in price-earnings ratio.

Compounding these returns over 106 years produced
accumulations that are truly staggering. Each dollar initially invested in 1900 at an investment return of 9.5 percent grew by the close of 2005 to $15,062.* Sure, few (if
any) of us have 106 years in us, but, like the Gotrocks
family over the generations, the miracle of compounding
returns is little short of amazing—it is perhaps the ultimate winner’s game.
* But let’s be fair. If we compound that initial $1, not at the nominal return
of 9.5 percent but at the real (after-inflation) rate of 6.5 percent, the accumulation grows to $793. But increasing real wealth nearly 800 times over is
not to be sneezed at.

[12]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

As Exhibit 2.1 makes clear, there are bumps along
the way in the investment returns earned by our business
corporations. Sometimes, as in the Great Depression of
the early 1930s, these bumps are large. But we get over
them. So, if you stand back from the chart and squint
your eyes, the trend of business fundamentals looks almost like a straight line sloping gently upward, and those
periodic bumps are barely visible.
Stock market returns sometimes get well ahead of
business fundamentals (as in the late 1920s, the early
1970s, the late 1990s). But it has been only a matter of
time until, as if drawn by a magnet, they soon return, although often only after falling well behind for a time (as
in the mid-1940s, the late 1970s, the 2003 market lows).
In our foolish focus on the short-term stock market
distractions of the moment, we, too, often overlook this
long history. We ignore that when the returns on stocks
depart materially from the long-term norm, it is rarely because of the economics of investing—the earnings growth
and dividend yields of our corporations. Rather, the reason that annual stock returns are so volatile is largely because of the emotions of investing.
We can measure these emotions by the price/earnings
(P/E) ratio, which measures the number of dollars investors are willing to pay for each dollar of earnings. As
investor confidence waxes and wanes, P/E multiples rise

R AT I O N A L E X U B E R A N C E

[13]

and fall.* When greed holds sway, we see very high P/Es.
When hope prevails, P/Es are moderate. When fear is in
the saddle, P/Es are very low. Back and forth, over and
over again, swings in the emotions of investors momentarily derail the steady long-range upward trend in the economics of investing.

“It is dangerous . . . to apply to the future
inductive arguments based on past experience.”

What Exhibit 2.1 shows is that while the prices we
pay for stocks often lose touch with the reality of corporate values, in the long run, reality rules. So, while investors seem to intuitively accept that the past is
inevitably prologue to the future, any past stock market
returns that have included a high speculative stock return component are a deeply flawed guide to what lies
ahead. To understand why past returns do not foretell
the future, we need only heed the words of the great
British economist John Maynard Keynes, written 70
years ago: “It is dangerous . . . to apply to the future inductive arguments based on past experience, unless one
can distinguish the broad reasons why past experience
was what it was.”
* Changes in interest rates also have an impact, uneven though it may be,
on the P/E multiple. So, I’m oversimplifying a bit here.

[14]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

But if we can distinguish the reasons the past was
what it was, then, we can establish reasonable expectations about the future. Keynes helped us make this distinction by pointing out that the state of long-term
expectation for stocks is a combination of enterprise
(“forecasting the prospective yield of assets over their
whole life”) and speculation (“forecasting the psychology
of the market”). I’m well familiar with those words, for 55
years ago I incorporated them in my senior thesis at
Princeton, written (providentially for my lifetime career
that followed) on the mutual fund industry. It was entitled, “The Economic Role of the Investment Company.”
This dual nature of returns is reflected when we look
at stock market returns over the decades. Using Keynes’s
idea, I divide stock market returns into two parts: (1) Investment Return (enterprise), consisting of the initial dividend yield on stocks plus their subsequent earnings
growth, which together form the essence of what we call
“intrinsic value”; and (2) Speculative Return, the impact
of changing price/earnings multiples on stock prices.
Let’s begin with investment returns. Exhibit 2.2 shows
the average annual investment return on stocks over the
decades since 1900. Note first the steady contribution of
dividend yields to total return during each decade; always
positive, only once outside the range of 3 percent to 7 percent, and averaging 4.5 percent. Then note that the con-

R AT I O N A L E X U B E R A N C E
EXHIBIT 2.2
8.2

4.7
3.5

Investment Return by the Decade (Percentage/ Year)

6.3

11.5

2.0

5.6

4.3

[15]

5.9

−1.1

4.5
−5.6

14.9

10.8

9.9

3.9

5.0

6.9

8.6

13.4

9.6

10.6

9.9

4.4

7.4

3.5

5.2

3.2

5.5
3.1

6.8

9.5

5.7

4.5

5.0

1.1

1900s 1910s 1920s 1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s*

Avg.

Dividends
Earnings Growth
Example: In the 1980s, the P/E multiple rose from 7.3 to 15.2 times, a 110
percent increase, equal to 7.7 percent per year.
*2000 –2005 inclusive.

tribution of earnings growth to investment return, with
the exception of the depression-ridden 1930s, was positive
in every decade, usually running between 4 percent and 7
percent, and averaging 5 percent per year. Result: Total
investment returns (the top line, combining dividend yield
and earnings growth) were negative in only a single decade
(again, in the 1930s). These total investment returns—the
gains made by business—were remarkably steady, generally running in the range of 8 percent to 13 percent each
year, and averaging 9.5 percent.
Enter speculative return. Compared with the relative
consistency of dividends and earnings growth over the
decades, truly wild variations in speculative return punctuate the chart as price/earnings ratios (P/Es) wax and
wane (Exhibit 2.3). A 100 percent rise in the P/E, from

[16]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

EXHIBIT 2.3

Speculative Return by the Decade (Percentage/
Year)

1900s 1910s 1920s

1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s

Avg.

10 to 20 times over a decade, would equate to a 7.2 percent annual speculative return. Curiously, without exception, every decade of significantly negative speculative
return was immediately followed by a decade in which it
turned positive by a correlative amount—the quiet 1910s
and then the roaring 1920s, the dispiriting 1940s and
then the booming 1950s, the discouraging 1970s and
then the soaring 1980s—reversion to the mean (RTM)
writ large. (Reversion to the mean can be thought of as
the tendency for stock returns to return to their long-term
norms over time—periods of exceptional returns tend to
be followed by periods of below average performance, and
vice versa.) Then, amazingly, there is an unprecedented
second consecutive exuberant increase in speculative return in the 1990s, a pattern never before in evidence.
By the close of 1999, the P/E rate had risen to an unprecedented level 32 times, setting the stage for the return
to sanity in valuations that soon followed. The tumble in

R AT I O N A L E X U B E R A N C E

[17]

stock market prices gave us our comeuppance. With earnings continuing to rise, the P/E currently stands at 18 times,
compared with the 15 times level that prevailed at the start
of the twentieth century. As a result, speculative return has
added just 0.1 percentage points to the annual investment
return earned by our businesses over the long term.
When we combine these two sources of stock returns, we get the total return produced by the stock market (Exhibit 2.4). Despite the huge impact of speculative
EXHIBIT 2.4

Total Stock Return by the Decade (Percentage/ Year)

Investment Return:
Dividends
8.2

4.7
3.5

6.3

11.5

2.0

5.6

4.3

5.9

Earnings Growth

−1.1

4.5

14.9

10.8

9.9

3.9

5.0

6.9

8.6

13.4
9.9

5.5
3.1

3.5

9.6

10.6

4.4

7.4

5.2

3.2

−5.6

6.8

9.5

5.7

4.5

5.0
1.1

Speculative Return: Impact of P/E Change
9.3
3.3

0.8

7.2

0.3

0.1
−1.0

−3.4

−6.3

Market Return (S&P 500)
14.8
9.0

−0.8

−7.5
20.1

8.6
2.9

1900s 1910s 1920s

7.7

−8.0
17.3

7.6

17.8
9.6

5.9

−1.2

1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s

Avg.

[18]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

return—up and down—during most of the individual
decades, there is virtually no impact over the long term.
The average annual total return on stocks of 9.6 percent,
then, has been created almost entirely by enterprise, with
only 0.1 percentage point created by speculation. The
message is clear: in the long run, stock returns depend almost entirely on the reality of the investment returns
earned by our corporations. The perception of investors,
reflected by the speculative returns, counts for little. It is
economics that controls long-term equity returns; emotions, so dominant in the short-term, dissolve.

Accurately forecasting swings in investor
emotions is not possible. But forecasting the
long-term economics of investing carries
remarkably high odds of success.
