
Moving Average Convergence Divergence
The Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD), a popular leading
oscillator, represents the difference between two exponential moving
averages (EMAs) of different durations. The theory is that when the shortterm MA suddenly crosses a long-term MA, their intersection could signal
the start of a trend. In order to enhance the MACD’s signaling power, it is
plotted against an MA of itself in the form of a histogram.
Before your head starts to spin, let’s look at a concrete example. You can see
from the USD/CAD chart in Figure 6-16 that when the 12-day EMA crosses
below the 26-day EMA, the MACD line plotted below similarly moves into
negative territory. By itself, this could be interpreted as a signal to sell. When
the MACD crosses below the 9-day MA of itself, the bar chart also
undergoes a crossover from positive to negative territory, and this produces
yet another sell signal. All of these signals are indicated by vertical dotted
lines.
There are several additional observations that can be made about the MACD.
First of all, the default settings are 12, 26, and 9 days (for the short-term
EMA, long-term EMA, and MACD MA, respectively). You can easily

Forex for Beginners
change these parameters using charting software, which will obviously
produce slightly different signals. Secondly, the MACD is prone to false
signals since it may hover at an extreme level (or move back and forth
between positive and negative territory) for many successive periods. Sure
enough, the USD/CAD continues rising shortly after the second sell signal in
Figure 6-16. Third, the imminent reversal signaled by the MACD may not
take place for several periods after sentiment reaches an extreme level,
exposing traders to risk in the interim. Any trader that put in a sell order for
the USD/CAD following the final sell signal in Figure 6-16 may very well
have experienced losses before the CAD/USD began to trend downward.

Figure 6-16. MACD in practice

Stochastic Oscillator
A stochastic oscillator uses changes in momentum as a basis for predicting
changes in price. Specifically, it seeks to establish where the current price of
an asset stands relative to its range over a recent period of time. This
calculation (%K) is then compared to a moving average of itself (%D). The

157

158

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
chartist must select both the number of periods (typically 14 or 20) for the
%K calculation and the number of periods (typically 3 or 5) for the %D
calculation. This is known as a fast stochastic and is shown in the middle
panel in Figure 6-17. Those that are not satisfied with the fast stochastic
and/or have longer trading horizons can utilize a slow stochastic, which
simply uses the fast stochastic as its starting point (also known as its %K)
and performs yet another moving average. This slow stochastic is typically
smoother and should generate fewer false signals. It is displayed in the
bottom panel in Figure 6-17.

Figure 6-17. Using fast and slow stochastics to identify buy and sell opportunities

Stochastic oscillators fluctuate between 0 and 100, and most technicians use
the thresholds of 20% and 80%, respectively, as basis for identifying
oversold and overbought conditions. Since a currency pair may remain at an
extreme level for quite some time as a result of sustained buying or selling
pressure, it makes sense to wait until the stochastic has reversed—when the
%D crosses the %K—before acting. It’s also worth looking at where the

Forex for Beginners
stochastic currently reads relative to the halfway point. Below 50% implies
that the pair is trading in the bottom half of its recent range and suggests
bearishness. The opposite is true for readings above 50%.
Consistent with Figure 6-17, fast stochastics typically produce more signals
(and more noise) than slow stochastics. That being said, each time the fast
stochastic rose above 80 and then contracted sharply, the EUR/JPY followed
suit. The dozen or so declines in the fast stochastic to below 20 meanwhile
seem to coincide nicely with declines in the EUR/JPY. While the slow
stochastic produces even fewer signals—potentially causing its followers to
miss good trading opportunities—most of these signals are quite accurate. In
short, you should understand that increasing the number of periods should
produce clearer but fewer signals.

Relative Strength Index and
Commodity Channel Index
The Relative Strength Index (RSI) is similar to the stochastic oscillator. The
RSI formula normalizes changes in momentum to an index from 0 to 100,
where readings above 70 and below 30 represent overbought and oversold
conditions, respectively. Whereas a stochastic indicator compares the most
recent closing price with a trading range for a given number of periods, the
RSI merely examines only upward and downward movements in price for a
given period.
If the number of upward price movements exceeds the number of downward
price movements, the RSI will increase. In theory, when the RSI crosses one
of its twin thresholds (70 and 30, typically), it signifies that momentum has
reached an extreme level and a reversal may be imminent. In addition, the
appearance of resistance (support) in an RSI when the underlying currency is
sharply rising (falling) implies difficulty sustaining upward (downward)
momentum and could similarly herald a correction.
The commodity channel index (CCI) also measures momentum, but it does so
by comparing the current price level to a simple moving average of itself
over a given number of periods. Fluctuations between -100 and +100 are
considered normal while movements outside of that band hint toward a
reversal. For the best signal, it’s advisable to wait until the CCI crosses back
through one of the boundary lines before acting.

159

160

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
The only variable traders need to input into their charting software to
compute either an RSI or CCI is the number of periods. Naturally, a lower
number will generate more sensitive readings. In Figure 6-18, I used 14
periods and 20 periods, respectively, for the RSI and CCI, which are the
default settings in most charting software.

Figure 6-18. Downward reversals in the USD/CHF take place when the RSI crosses 70 and
the CCI falls back below 100

As you see from the chart above, the accuracy and simplicity of the RSI are
impressive, which explains why it is one of the most popular technical
indicators. The two biggest reversals in the USD/CHF coincide with an RSI
peak of slightly above 70 (indicated by the vertical black lines). Figure 6-18
also illustrates how using two indicators together can produce especially
robust signals. Since the CCI rises above 100 and falls below -100 on several
occasions (as indicated by the vertical gray lines), it helps to have another
indicator with which to compare it. When used together, the RSI and CCI
yield two very strong sell signals, both of which are followed by
retracements in the USD/CHF. In fact, these two indicators are beeping

Forex for Beginners
loudly at the present (rightmost end of the chart), suggesting that another
correction might come soon!

Awesome Oscillator
There are actually hundreds of different technical indicators and an infinite
number of iterations and ways to combine them. In fact, when researching
this book, I came across a handful that I had never even heard of before, and
anyone with an imagination and a basic programming ability could create a
new one. How about the Kritzer Index?
In fact, the awesome oscillator may very well have been invented by a
technical analyst with too much time on his hands. It compares the 34-period
MA with the 5-period MA, and the result is a histogram that moves back and
forth across a 0-line. When the oscillator crosses firmly through this line, it
generates a buy signal. The inventor of the awesome oscillator has also
suggested that two peaks (or troughs) might also provide a strong signal.
Unfortunately, based on the way the awesome oscillator is constructed, it
inherently provides concurrent (rather than advance) signals. In other words,
when the 5-day MA crosses the 34-day MA, it may already be too late to
buy. This is clearly evident in Figure 6-19; the strongest buying signal
doesn’t come until after the massive 10% correction has already taken place.

161

162

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis

Figure 6-19. Awesome oscillator produces signals that lag actual price movements

Summary
As you may have sensed, this overview represents only the tip of the
technical analysis iceberg. The indicators that I selected for inclusion in this
book are those that I believe are most compatible with trend trading and
fundamental analysis. Consider that entire books have been written not only
about technical analysis but also about specific aspects of technical analysis.
For those of you that plan to approach trading from technical perspective, I
would certainly recommend delving deeper into the subject on your own.
I have tried to present technical analysis in a way that is straightforward and
intuitive. While it’s not necessary to memorize the formulas for calculating
the various indicators in your technical arsenal, it nonetheless is important to
understand how they are calculated. If you can avoid taking the indicators at
face value, you will be rewarded with a fuller understanding of what you are
seeing in their readouts.

Forex for Beginners
In concluding this chapter, I would like to offer a couple of caveats regarding
technical analysis. First, charts and technical indicators often produce unclear
or conflicting signals. For that reason, it’s worth using a couple of indicators
together in order to optimize their effectiveness. Recall that in Figure 6-18,
the RSI and CCI produced incredibly accurate signals when used together. At
the same time, don’t get carried away and try to develop technical trading
rules that are based on too many indicators. Figure 6-20 takes this idea to a
comical extreme. The chart is so cluttered that it’s hardly even possible to see
the underlying movements in the EUR/USD, let alone to make a reasonable
interpretation and open a position!

Figure 6-20. Extreme example of a chart with too many indicators

Second, consider that the flexibility of technical analysis is a potential pitfall
as much as it is a benefit. While it might seem convenient that technical
analysis can theoretically be applied to all asset prices at all times, this could
lead to arbitrariness and laziness. In other words, it’s important to tweak the
parameters of individual indicators and to experiment with different

163

164

Chapter 6 | Technical Analysis
combinations of indicators until you find one that seems to fit the particular
currency pair at a particular time, as well as your particular strategy.
Finally, technical analysis is far from foolproof. To be sure, it’s very easy to
find examples of currency behavior that accord perfectly with the signals
produced by technical indicators. However, there are just as many
counterexamples. That’s because technical indicators are not really designed
to predict the future; all they can do is reorient the way that we see the past.
They can convert seemingly random currency movements into smooth lines
and indexes that are easy to interpret so that you might have a better idea of
what is apparently happening in the present. As for what will happen next,
well, that is a different story altogether.

CHAPTER

7
Trading
Strategy
Using a Combination of Analytical
Tools to Develop a Trading
Strategy
In Chapter 5 and Chapter 6, I offered overviews of both fundamental and
technical analysis. Together, these chapters address the majority of the
factors that cause exchange rates to fluctuate. At this point, then, you should
have all of the basic tools necessary to make sense of past exchange rate
movements and to make well calculated forecasts of future trends. The next
step is to incorporate these tools into a concrete trading strategy.
Strategies can be broken down across many different lines. Short-term
strategies must be distinguished from long-term strategies. Strategies based
on fundamental analysis will be different than strategies based on technical
analysis. Trading the news, on the other hand, falls into a category of its own.
Leveraged spot trading will require a different kind of strategy from trading
currency options. And so on.
Ultimately, the strategy that you adopt should be tailored to your specific
circumstances, including financial situation, risk appetite, time horizon, and
investment objectives. In order to aid you in your efforts to create a unique,
personalized approach to forex, I would like to offer a handful of general
strategies, which are outlined in this chapter.

166

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy

Long-Term Fundamental Strategy
Long-term fundamental strategy is perhaps the easiest to plan and execute. It
is akin to the buy-and-hold strategy practiced by many stock and bond
market investors. The goal is to identify currency pairs that are
fundamentally misaligned on a current and/or projected basis. More
specifically, it could be the case that a particular exchange rate seems to be
justified by current financial-economic fundamentals but that expected
changes in fundamentals would require a proportional change in the
exchange rate.
A long-term bet on a currency pair may vary in duration from a few months
to a few years, though you should enter any such trade with the expectation
of holding the investment for six months to one year. If the projected
movement takes place earlier than expected, you might decide to “take
profits” and move on to a different bet. If, after a year, the expected
movement hasn’t materialized, you might similarly decide to move on.
Alternatively, if circumstances suggest that your original forecast remains
valid, you might decide to stay the course.
Those of you with a long-term fundamental outlook could engage with the
forex market from an existing investment account. If you choose to go this
route, you will probably find it easier to square currency trades with preexisting investment objectives and strategies. Forex will simply become one
part of a diversified investment portfolio. The downside is that the range of
potential investments will be limited to Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) and
mutual funds. In addition, interest earnings on currency investments will
accrue indirectly through trading gains. Still, for those that only check their
investment accounts once or twice a week, the hassle from having to log in
and make trades through a separate account with a forex broker will
outweigh the modest savings from slightly lower spreads.
Long-term bets are suitable for those investors with generalized theories,
which may or may not be informed by a close examination of economic data.
For example, there are many investors that are concerned that the dollar will
collapse, or at least decline markedly across most currencies. This is based
on the vague notions that the US twin deficits (trade and government
spending) are problematic, that the dollar’s role in central bank reserves is

Forex for Beginners
disproportionate with the US share of the global economy, and that the
United States seems to be losing its superior economic position to emerging
market economies. For investors with this concern, it wouldn’t be
unreasonable to make a long-term bet against the US dollar, either by selling
a broad index fund or by selling the dollar against another currency (or
currencies). Beware that the latter will expose you to additional risk. For
example, given the European Union’s ongoing fiscal problems, the dollar
could very well continue to rise against the euro for reasons that have much
to do with the euro and very little to do with the dollar. In fact, if you had
bought the EUR/USD in late 2008, when the markets were beginning to
rebound, you would have earned a return of about 0% as of January 2012. On
the other hand, if you had hedged your bet by selling the dollar against
multiple currencies, you might have achieved an annual return of about 10%.
(See Figure 7-1.)

Figure 7-1. Between 2008 and 2011, the US dollar fell on an overall basis. Against individual
currencies, however, performance varied.

Likewise, there are many investors that seek exposure to emerging market
currencies as an asset class. Given that emerging markets boast the lion’s
share of global GDP growth, strong government finances, and current
account and trade surpluses, this probably isn’t a bad idea. If you think that
there is a strong case to be made for a particular currency, you could buy that
one currency (against the dollar) and wait. If, on the other hand, you think
that emerging market currencies as a whole will rise, you could buy multiple
currency pairs simultaneously. Of course, this latter strategy will lower your
expected return, but it will also lower your risk exposure. Considering how
much performance among emerging market currencies has varied (Figure 72), this probably wouldn’t be a bad idea.

167

168

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy

Figure 7-2. Emerging market currency returns (against the US dollar) vary considerably

Timing does not usually play a significant role in long-term currency
investing. If you have a general theory or investment objective, my advice is
to not try and time the market. Over 6–12 months of investing, the idea of
trying to tack an extra 1% on to your overall return through shrewd timing is
a little bit ridiculous. If market conditions are abnormal or illiquid (such as
during the 2008 financial crisis), you might want to adopt a wait-and-see
approach. Otherwise, my experience has been that there’s no time like the
present!
If it turns out that you mistimed your entry and your position is already in the
red shortly after you opened it, you can always scale your position. Also
known as dollar cost averaging, this involves adding to your position in
order to lower your profit threshold. For example, if you had bought $1,000
worth of the EUR/USD at $1.30 and only one week later it had fallen to
$1.25, you could double down on your position with another purchase of
$1,000. This lowers your average buying cost to $1.275. As soon as the
EUR/USD surpasses this level, your position will be back in the black! If not
for this tactic, you would have to wait until the EUR/USD crosses $1.30
before the position would be profitable again. As for exiting a trade, the same
logic applies. If the currency pair has already outperformed your
expectations, you might want to consider taking profits by selling off part of
your position. This way, if your position begins to depreciate, you will have
locked in a portion of the gains and minimized further risk.
You should continue to monitor and re-evaluate your position for as long as
it remains open. Ask yourself, for example, “Have the US twin deficits begun
to decline? Has the EU fiscal crisis been brought closer to resolution? Have

Forex for Beginners
emerging market economies slipped into recession?” It’s fair to have a
general belief that a particular currency will rise or fall over the long term,
but sticking to such a belief in the face of presently contradictory factors
takes real persistence, or even foolishness!
Finally, you should have an idea of when you will close your position.
Perhaps it is after a certain amount of time. Perhaps it is only when the
currency pair has crossed a certain threshold. Remember: a bull (or bear)
market that lasts forever is simply not possible in forex. (For the record, even
stock market investors are starting to question this ideal!) In other words,
make sure that your strategy has an endpoint built in.

Purely Technical Strategy
Those with larger profit goals and shorter attention spans will probably
gravitate toward trading strategies that are grounded in technical analysis. In
fact, there is plenty of evidence that the majority of currency traders fall into
this category. For example, most forex brokers don’t offer long-term charts
(with price intervals that exceed one day) and historical price data because
most traders aren’t interested in them. Technical traders typically pay little
attention to fundamental analysis. News developments are not in and of
themselves noteworthy but are only relevant insofar as the volatility they
generate may threaten trading strategies.
There are two time horizons that are suitable for technical trading strategies:
short-term and medium-term. My definition of a short-term duration is
anything less than one day, wherein discrete positions remain open for
minutes or hours. The advantage of closing all positions at the end of each
trading day is that you don’t have to worry about how the market is
performing when you aren’t actively trading. In addition, intraday leverage is
basically free, as interest is usually charged only on overnight positions.
(How interest is charged varies between brokers.) The downsides of having
an intraday time horizon are increased pressure and greater risk. Profits on
individual trades may not exceed a few dozen PIPs, which means that trades
need to be timed perfectly. For better or worse, tremendous leverage
(exceeding 20:1) is also the rule for these kinds of trades, adding to the sense
of pressure.
If you choose to adopt a short-term technical trading strategy (otherwise
known as scalping), you will be limited to a handful of the most liquid

169

170

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
currency pairs during the most liquid hours of the day. Just as profits can be
reaped almost instantaneously, losses can pile up with equal speed. In short,
this kind of trading is basically akin to gambling, which explains why the
majority of day traders wipe out their accounts shortly after opening them. It
goes without saying that I don’t advocate this approach.
Those with more patience (one full day to a few weeks) will find that
technical analysis still has plenty to offer. Less time spent trading means
more time spent on research and analysis, which should translate into a
higher success rate for individual trades. In addition, a longer time horizon
will allow you to target higher profit thresholds (more than 100 PIPs/trade),
which require less leverage (less than 5:1). You won’t need to worry about
planning trades around certain times of the day, as liquidity is less of an
issue. While you will expose yourself to potential losses from overnight
positions, there are certain tools that you can take advantage of in order to
minimize risk. (Such tools include scaling, stop-loss orders, and more. They
are touched on throughout this chapter and covered extensively in Chapter
11.) Those that still aren’t comfortable with this risk can nonetheless choose
