
393 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

study of their accuracy and proper application to trading. While
great credit and respect is due the pioneers of candlestick charting of
the West, it is past time for this edition.
Greg Morris recognized the need to enhance and broaden his landmark work, and has done the most comprehensive statistical analysis
ever on candlesticks. With the trading application analysis of Ryan
Litchfield, this book sets the high-water mark for those who want to
know how to properly integrate candlesticks into their trading. What
follows from Ryan is the practical application and perspective
traders need to really put candles in context. Candlesticks are not
magical; they make sense, can be easily learned, and are only mysterious to the uninformed. Western pattern charting is far superior to
candlesticks for trend and pattern recognition, but the two styles are
not in competition. Candlesticks are a very short term (a few days)
sentiment indicator while Western pattern trading can project price
targets and behavior for weeks, months, and years. The delicate
dance of support and resistance at pivotal price points is tremendously enhanced when bathed in candlelight.
Twenty years ago, without modern computing power the proper
analysis of candlesticks was not possible and the hungry Western
traders created a market that made it unnecessary. All previous
attempts to do accuracy studies have lacked context and depth. This
comprehensive work shines a long overdue bright light on candlesticks, and traders can now properly integrate East and West.

EAST-WEST SYNERGY
When candlestick charting was introduced to the Western markets it
was a novelty, but it now enjoys widespread acceptance. This may be
explained in part by the natural human tendency to seek out a competitive advantage. The proliferation of financial publications, new

䊏 394

Chapter Ten

electronic toys, new technical indicators, and trading software is evidence of that appetite to get ahead. Some traders seem to get an
almost cultish, tunnel-visioned obsession about their favorite secret
weapon or tool, and while candlestick charting is as good as or better than any charting tool, it is not a mysterious or magical secret
weapon to divine the markets.
With about 200 years of application, candlesticks are the most
tried and tested charting methodology, and they can be quite good at
interpreting and predicting short-term behavior and short-term chart
movement. Over the last century the West has also developed some
great tools for chart pattern reading and technical analysis. The good
news is that when properly integrated, candlesticks and Western chart
analysis can combine to form a sum that is greater than its parts.
This chapter is focused on providing a foundation for traders to
appreciate the real value and contribution that candlestick charting
can make to Western traders. Details of pattern construction, recognition, and application will be explored in later chapters.
Candlesticks along with other technical toys and tools are of little
value to a trader unless properly trained in their use. Unfortunately, the
majority of traders who try to incorporate candles into their trading
misunderstand what candlesticks can do, and generally expect more
from candlesticks than they are capable of delivering. Traders should
not expect candlestick signals to divine the market and call out trades.
The full integration of candlestick charting has been hampered by
a tendency among many proponents to see them as an alternative.
While they are a superior alternative to Western bar charts, they are
not a substitute for Western chart patterns. The appropriate blending
of East and West requires an understanding of:
• The unique value of candlesticks.
■ The application to trading and investing.
■ The process that generates price action and drives patterns.

395 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

■
■

The way news affects price.
The correlation with Western technical indicators that
leads to the appropriate integration with the Western style
pattern trading.

So Who Needs Candlesticks?
There is a basic premise to build on here. Simply put, candlestick
charting is not needed to trade well. Say what? In a book about the
value of candlesticks, that may seem an odd premise. Granted, but it
is key to understanding and appreciating the unique contribution
they can make.
Consistent patterns with support and resistance define the entry
points for bullish and bearish trades (see Figures 10-1 and 10-2). As
Figure 10-1
6-Jun-2005 4:00pm
Pfizer 28.01 (Daily)

29.0
28.5
28.0
27.5
27.0
26.5
26.0
25.5
25.0
24.5
24.0

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

䊏 396

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-2
6-Jun-2005 4:00pm
JetBlue 22.35 (Daily)

26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18

Oct

Nov

Dec

2005

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

long as the pattern is intact, there is not much need for anything more
than the picture to trade the pattern.
What candles bring to the table is a visual dynamic that reveals the
attitude or behavior of the traders as they approach the pivot points
of support and resistance. Trading is therefore enhanced by patterns
that describe sentiment and behavior. Given that the patterns have
been studied for over 200 years, their insight must be considered a
valid addition.
Investing versus Trading
Investing

Candlesticks have little or no value to investors. Investing is fundamentally driven, and other than general lip service to buying low and

397 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

catching an upside movement for a few months or years, it is a buy
and hope approach to the market. Long-term bullish positions may
be initiated by major pullbacks, or just the expectation that historically good companies tend to go up, or the ever popular “hot tip.”
Sadly, in most cases, institutional and public buying comes well after
the ideal entry point, and selling is often near a bottom after the pain
of a reversal gets too much to take.
Candlesticks are a short-term trading tool for fine-tuning entry and
exit decisions, so they do not help long-term investing very much.
Trading

Trading by contrast is pattern driven and generally short term. Here
candlesticks can be very valuable, as entry and exits are much more
crucial. Pivot points are the recognizable and predictable price points
where significant moves may take place. Trading is anticipating a
potential price action, positioning to enter the early stage of the trade,
adding to it as it develops, and then exiting as it matures and sets up a
reversal. Trading is opportunistic, and it follows the surging of trends
or the waves of an oscillating pattern. Trading also involves lots of
reversals, and this is where candles shine the brightest (see Figure
10-3). Candlestick patterns are reversal signals; and even though continuation patterns are widely written about, they actually represent
failed reversals.
Candlestick charting is therefore more valuable to traders than to
investors because the short-term strength of candlesticks merges well
with the cyclical nature of pattern trading.
Price and Pattern Manipulation
Candles can add so much insight to trading, but how price action and
patterns develop must be understand to properly integrate Japanese
candlesticks with Western chart patterns.

䊏 398

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-3
13-Jan-2005 4:00pm
Cree 35.07 (Daily)

42
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

2005

The tendency for trading patterns to form is well documented, but
very little is offered to explain why and how they form. Exploring
why patterns develop will set the stage for the powerful contribution
that candles can make to trading Western markets. The fact that a
pattern exists is evidence of price manipulation, which in turn creates
predictability that produces profitability for those who can see the
patterns.
“Pattern = manipulation = predictability = profitability.”
The likelihood of the price patterns not being manipulated is similar to a pile of lumber being dumped off a cliff and landing in the
shape of a house. It’s a pretty safe bet that someone has been manipulating the lumber (see Figure 10-4).

399 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-4

Chart patterns in stocks, commodities, and even in indexes is evidence that a diverse group of players can interact in a free market and
somehow create a masterpiece. It is fascinating that a free market,
where the players are supposedly not deliberately cooperating, consistently drops piles of lumber off cliffs that land in the shape of nice
little houses with smoke coming out of the chimneys. The issue is not
if it happens, but how and how candlesticks can help in trading those
patterns.
The Players
Traders come in various strengths and potencies, and there is a lead
dog or two in every well-traded issue. Whether on the trading floor
or on a yacht in Mission Bay San Diego, they are the E.F. Huttons or
Warren Buffetts of that particular stock. When they take action
everyone who is in the know pays attention. There is a reaction order
among the various levels of traders that tends to create a chain reaction like the ripples from throwing a pebble into a pond.
The pebble represents the key trader or small group of key traders
for a particular stock or commodity. The “Ax” (one name for key
traders) makes a significant move, and a second tier of traders picks
up the action. If successive waves of institutional traders and the public follow suit, a momentum swing is underway (see Figure 10-5).

䊏 400

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-5

The ripples that move out from the center are like the gradual entry
of the rest of the cast into a directional price move of a stock.
So the Ax moves first, then other professionals pick up on the
action, which stirs interest in institutions and managed funds and the
public brings up the rear. It all works rather well considering that a
big part of the cast (the public) does not even know that they are part
of a production. This is like the ultimate reality show where part of
the cast is oblivious to their roles, the other players, or even the game.
Now the key traders (the Ax and other professional traders) are
very influential, but it takes sustained volume from the rest of the
cast to really carry a directional move for very long. The days or
weeks it may take to move from support to resistance (or vice versa)
will take the participation of the rest of the players.
The key traders just get the directional move started. Because they
cannot do it alone, the key traders make the move when they sense
the public is ready to support it. If the key traders are right, the ripples carry their profitable positions on toward the next pivot point.
As the trade moves forward they watch for weakening momentum,
and will test each pivot point by buying or selling to determine if it is
time to switch gears.

401 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

This sequence of participation starting with the key traders and
continuing down to the last public buyers or sellers is what makes the
patterns develop. The key traders wait to see the last buyers climb on
board and then they short the trade to see if it starts a selloff. At the
bottom, they wait until the selling pressure dries up and then they
buy. A popular phrase is that the key traders want to have everyone
on board at the top and be alone in their trading at the bottom (see
Figure 10-6).
Sometimes the support does not materialize and the key traders
know better than to fight the tape. They will quickly switch positions
to find the right fit with the market. This can explain the many whipsaws that develop as the new directional move suddenly reverses and
the early birds who are not alert get caught in the crossfire. The can-

Figure 10-6

䊏 402

Chapter Ten

dles may have given a solid reversal signal, but then the price whips
back the other way. The reason may not be clear, but there was a reason. There is a lot at risk here. The key traders will take the lead, but
they will not ride a lame horse very long.
Traders do not like choppy or indecisive patterns because they can
get violent and bloody or just boring. Climbing in a clothes dryer is
just no fun. The actual direction of a price move is not really the issue
as much as it is just getting a direction going. Actually, a downtrend
is preferable because it triggers fear, which can make for very quick
and profitable movements.
Now the unsuspecting public plays a crucial role in pattern development primarily because they suffer from collective short-term
amnesia. They provide the heavy lifting to raise the trade to a resistance level, and they leave in a crescendo to signal the bottom. Human
nature being what it is, the next upswing will likely draw all the
bloodied and battered eternal optimists back onto the dance floor,
unaware of their crucial role in the process. It sure helps to keep patterns repeating when one major group unwittingly, but repeatedly,
steps up to be cannon fodder. The fact that the “less informed and
less savvy public” includes a lot of fund managers who can’t read a
chart with any measure of skill also helps.
Candlesticks are valuable when used to read the behavior of the
cast of players whose aggregate actions produce the patterns. Their
behavior at support and resistance levels can be very telling and valuable. The candlesticks reflect the interaction of the players—their
emotion, sentiment, and momentum as they revisit familiar ground.
Pattern Variations
The idea that there are key traders in most well-traded stocks may be
news to many, but it is true. The vast majority of traders and or
investors will never meet or know of the key traders in a particular

403 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

stock, but they will nonetheless feel the influence (great or small) that
the key traders exert on the market. Some chart patterns suggest a
very cohesive, almost cooperative interaction of the cast of players
(key traders to the last private party), while others are anything but.
Nice, clean, predictable turns at support and resistance tell one
story and sloppy, overlapping days with erratic reversals tell another
(see Figures 10-7 and 10-8). Traders should first find stocks with
well-defined trading patterns, and then use candlesticks to fine-tune
their entry and exit points. But keep in mind, all the candlestick
knowledge in the world won’t prevent being whipsawed in some
stocks. The players may just not have much cohesiveness. Some
stocks must be played from a distance if at all.
With over 30,000 stocks, plus futures, commodities, currencies
etc.; finding good patterns to trade will not be difficult. The great
Figure 10-7
6-Jun-2005 4:00pm
Time Warner 17.02 (Daily)

20.00
19.75
19.50
19.25
19.00
18.75
18.50
18.25
18.00
17.75
17.50
17.25
17.00
16.75

Dec

2005

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

䊏 404

Chapter Ten

Figure 10-8
6-Jun-2005 4:00pm
General Electric 36.38 (Daily)

37

Descending Wedge
36
35

Ascending Wedge

34
33
32
31
30

GE traders seem prone
to trade in to wedges.

29

Pennant Wedge
O

N D 04 F M

A M J

J

28
A

S O

N D 05 F M

A

M

J

news is that well-patterned stocks (which imply cohesive traders)
tend to produce the most reliable candle signals. The behavior of one
group of traders can vary dramatically from another, which brings up
another interesting correlation: certain stocks tend to throw certain
candlestick patterns more often than others (see Figures 10-9 and
10-10). This makes good sense given that candles simply reflect the
activity of the traders. IBM has very little in the way of tails or shadows. The closes tend to be near the highs or lows of the day. Citigroup (C) tends to have long tails or shadows and show much more
volatility.
A stock tends to have the same group of traders month in and
month out, so repeated patterns should be reviewed to see how consistently they follow through. Because reversals tend to happen at
predictable support and resistance levels, the study of the trader’s

405 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-9
6-Jun-2005 4:00pm
IBM 75.00 (Daily)

18

25

79.5
79.0
78.5
78.0
77.5
77.0
76.5
76.0
75.5
75.0
74.5
74.0
73.5
73.0
72.5
72.0

May

9

16

Jun

23

6

Figure 10-10
6-Jun-2005 4:00pm
Citigroup 47.69 (Daily)
48.0
47.5
47.0
46.5
46.0
45.5
45.0
44.5
44.0
43.5
21

28

Apr

11

18

25

May

9

16

23

Jun 6

䊏 406

Chapter Ten

behavior at those levels can help to recognize similar behavior the
next time those levels are reached. Historically consistent trading
patterns may add confidence to trades, and here again candlesticks
excel, as they are the most studied tool for reading trading behavior
at reversal points.
Playing News
News is a factor in trading; whether scheduled or a surprise, it can
interrupt and distort existing price action. The reaction to the news
can be gradual, violent, or nonexistent, but the market sentiment will
be spelled out by the subsequent candle patterns. If the news supports
the direction of the current move, it tends to move the price faster
toward where it was going anyway, sometimes overnight. Big candle
bodies indicate strong sentiment among the traders, and small bodies
mean lack of follow-through. Long tails express volatile, even violent
contention over the direction, and small tails reveal consensus or lack
of interest.
News often produces big days (reaction or statement days). If a big
day (or two) moves in the direction of the current trend, a very significant candle pattern may be forming. The Rising and Falling Three
Method continuation patterns start with a large day (or two) in the
direction of the trend and are followed by two to four testing days as
traders probe to find out how strong the news really was (See Figure
10-11). If the direction of the trend (up or down) then continues, the
sentiment is verified.
News can also be very fickle. Market sentiment can cause a $5 piece
of news to get a $2 reaction one day and a $9 reaction the next. Big
news can be neutralized by an opposing market trend, and minor news
can get a big response out of a bored market. News happening at support and resistance points can influence the potential reversal, so
traders should pay some attention as the news may trigger or exagger-

407 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-11

ate a reversal or continuation. Candle signals can also reveal the sentiment of the traders as a stock runs up or pulls back ahead of a pending news release.
While it is important to understand the effects of news on patterns,
traders must focus on the pattern and the candle signals, and not a lot
on the news itself.
Technical Indicators
There are a myriad of technical indicators available to traders, and
regardless of which indicators are used, blending them with candlesticks and good charting skills can produce a more in-depth picture
of the price action. For example, a stock may be approaching a support level defined by a trend line or moving average. The candlesticks
signal a loss of momentum and reversal. The technical indicators
show an oversold condition. Considered together, full confirmation

䊏 408

Chapter Ten

from the various “consultants” (each with their own special perspective) helps to trade with greater confidence.
One word of caution: Candles are trumped by the actual price
action, and good traders remember they are trading the stock, not the
indicators. They choose their indicators (“consultants”) carefully and
never take them too seriously. Indicators monitor and reflect behavior; they do not dictate it. Indicators are the sight, not the trigger.
So, returning to the premise, are candlesticks needed to trade well?
No, so the question is, why learn to trade with candlesticks? The
answer is that trading can be much better with them.
Integration—East and West
Western Line Charts may point out a great chart pattern with clear
support and resistance, but they do not show what is going on behind
the scenes. Western Bar Charts show the intraday movement of the
stock, but they are very difficult to interpret at a glance (see Figure
10-12). Candlesticks give quicker and more intuitive feedback to a

Figure 10-12

409 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-13

trader, and 200 years of collective experience and study simply make
them better tools.
Japanese candlesticks will never replace Western chart patterns, but
the strength and advantages of both make their combination superior
to either used separately. The key to making the most of the blend is
playing to their respective strengths. Japanese candles will never pick
out and highlight a double bottom bounce off support, but they can
reflect the bullish or bearish attitude of the traders (see Figure 10-13).
The best of Eastern and Western charting skills truly enhance a
trader’s ability to read the sentiment, emotion, and momentum at
major pivot points, and react appropriately to it. Put another way,
the Western charting shows the customers entering the deli and the
Japanese candlesticks show how hungry they are.

Figure 10-14

䊏 410

Chapter Ten

SUMMARY—EAST-WEST SYNERGY
• Candles are the most tested and studied form of technical
analysis.
• Western pattern charting adds a viable and valuable
dimension that enhances candlestick charting.
• Candles apply differently to investing and trading.
• The motives and dynamics of price and pattern development help to interpret candles’ messages.
• The level of cohesiveness among the traders creates chart
patterns that vary greatly, from predictable and consistent
to choppy and dangerous. Be selective in choosing patterns to trade.
• Certain stocks throw distinctive patterns that reflect the
behavior of that group of traders.
• News is a market reality and candles can reveal the
traders’ valuation of it.
• Technical indicators are enlightening and should be considered as advisory. They do not overrule the price action.
This includes candlesticks. They predict; they do not guarantee.
• Western charts highlight crucial locations and Japanese
Candlesticks reveal the attitude and sentiment.

LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION
The classic real-estate mantra of “location, location, location” has a
perfectly legitimate application to candlestick charting analysis. The
location of a single candle or pattern has a great deal to do with its
relevance and therefore its accuracy. A couple of analogies will illustrate the principle well.

411 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Falling Leaves
In southern climates, leaves will periodically turn color and fall off
throughout the year due to wind and weather, but it goes virtually
unnoticed. In northern climates it is taken very seriously. In late September, the first sign of changing color and dropping leaves gets a
great deal of attention. There is an expectation associated with late
September that winter will arrive soon, and the clearest signal is the
visual display of the leaves. Now the signal is not a guarantee that
foul weather is here but recognition that it is September, and conditions are now ready for it to happen.
Candlestick signals and patterns are defined by the size of bodies,
length of tails, and proximity to neighboring candles. Some require
certain conditions like being in trends, but there are further refinements that will help traders interpret the importance of their signals.
Western pattern trading gives relevance to the location of a stock
or index. A pattern of support and resistance has a built-in expectation of significant movement at certain price points due to the historical behavior of that stock or index. The reversal or continuation
signals from candlesticks are therefore more valuable at a location
already designated for debating the fate of the pattern. Patterns can
be successfully traded without candlesticks, but the candlesticks
unique ability to illuminate behavior at these key pivot points can be
extremely valuable to a trader with a trained eye. Another analogy:
