
he was kindly received at the court of King Edward VI, and rewarded (it is difficult to say
for what) with a pension of one hundred crowns. He continued for several years to
practise in London as an astrologer; casting nativities, telling fortunes, and pointing out
lucky and unlucky days. During the reign of Queen Mary he got into trouble, being
suspected of heresy, and charged with attempting Mary's life by means of enchantments.
He was tried for the latter offence, and acquitted; but was retained in prison on the former
charge, and left to the tender mercies of Bishop Bonner. He had a very narrow escape
from being burned in Smithfield, but he, somehow or other, contrived to persuade that
fierce bigot that his orthodoxy was unimpeachable, and was set at liberty in 1555.
On the accession of Elizabeth, a brighter day dawned upon him. During her retirement at
Woodstock, her servants appear to have consulted him as to the time of Mary's death,
which Circumstance, no doubt, first gave rise to the serious charge for which he was
brought to trial. They now came to consult him more openly as to the fortunes of their
mistress; and Robert Dudley, the celebrated Earl of Leicester, was sent by command of
the Queen herself to know the most auspicious day for her coronation. So great was the
favour he enjoyed that, some years afterwards, Elizabeth condescended to pay him a visit
at his house in Mortlake, to view his museum of curiosities, and, when he was ill, sent her
own physician to attend upon him.
Astrology was the means whereby he lived, and he continued to practise it with great
assiduity; but his heart was in alchymy. The philosopher's stone and the elixir of life
haunted his daily thoughts and his nightly dreams. The Talmudic mysteries, which he had
also deeply studied, impressed him with the belief, that he might hold converse with
spirits and angels, and learn from them all the mysteries of the universe. Holding the
same idea as the then obscure sect of the Rosicrucians, some of whom he had perhaps
encountered in his travels in Germany, he imagined that, by means of the philosopher's
stone, he could summon these kindly spirits at his will. By dint of continually brooding
upon the subject, his imagination became so diseased, that he at last persuaded himself
that an angel appeared to him, and promised to be his friend and companion as long as he
lived. He relates that, one day, in November 1582, while he was engaged in fervent
prayer, the window of his museum looking towards the west suddenly glowed with a
dazzling light, in the midst of which, in all his glory, stood the great angel Uriel. Awe and
wonder rendered him speechless; but the angel smiling graciously upon him, gave him a
crystal, of a convex form, and told him that, whenever he wished to hold converse with
the beings of another sphere, he had only to gaze intently upon it, and they would appear
in the crystal and unveil to him all the secrets of futurity. [The "crystal" alluded to
appears to have been a black stone, or piece of polished coal. The following account of it
is given in the Supplement to Granger's "Biographical History." -- "The black stone into
which Dee used to call his spirits was in the collection of the Earls of Peterborough, from
whence it came to Lady Elizabeth Germaine. It was next the property of the late Duke of
Argyle, and is now Mr. Walpole's. It appears upon examination to be nothing more than a
polished piece of cannel coal; but this is what Butler means when he says, 'Kelly did all
his feats upon The devil's looking-glass -- a stone.'"] This saying, the angel disappeared.
Dee found from experience of the crystal that it was necessary that all the faculties of the
soul should be concentrated upon it, otherwise the spirits did not appear. He also found

that he could never recollect the conversations he had with the angels. He therefore
determined to communicate the secret to another person, who might converse with the
spirits while he (Dee) sat in another part of the room, and took down in writing the
revelations which they made.
He had at this time in his service, as his assistant, one Edward Kelly, who, like himself,
was crazy upon the subject of the philosopher's stone. There was this difference,
however, between them, that, while Dee was more of an enthusiast than an impostor,
Kelly was more of an impostor than an enthusiast. In early life he was a notary, and had
the misfortune to lose both his ears for forgery. This mutilation, degrading enough in any
man, was destructive to a philosopher; Kelly, therefore, lest his wisdom should suffer in
the world's opinion, wore a black skull-cap, which, fitting close to his head, and
descending over both his cheeks, not only concealed his loss, but gave him a very solemn
and oracular appearance. So well did he keep his secret, that even Dee, with whom he
lived so many years, appears never to have discovered it. Kelly, with this character, was
just the man to carry on any piece of roguery for his own advantage, or to nurture the
delusions of his master for the same purpose. No sooner did Dee inform him of the visit
he had received from the glorious Uriel, than Kelly expressed such a fervour of belief that
Dee's heart glowed with delight. He set about consulting his crystal forthwith, and on the
2nd of December 1581, the spirits appeared, and held a very extraordinary discourse with
Kelly, which Dee took down in writing. The curious reader may see this farrago of
nonsense among the Harleian MSS. in the British Museum. The later consultations were
published in a folio volume, in 1659, by Dr. Meric Casaubon, under the title of "A True
and Faithful Relation of what passed between Dr. John Dee and some Spirits; tending,
had it succeeded, to a general Alteration of most States and Kingdoms in the World."
[Lilly, the astrologer, in his Life written by himself, frequently tells of prophecies
delivered by the angels in a manner similar to the angels of Dr. Dee. He says, "The
prophecies were not given vocally by the angels, but by inspection of the crystal in types
and figures, or by apparition the circular way; where, at some distance, the angels appear,
representing by forms, shapes, and creatures what is demanded. It is very rare, yea, even
in our days," quoth that wiseacre, "for any operator or master to hear the angels speak
articulately: when they do speak, it is like the Irish, much in the throat!"]
The fame of these wondrous colloquies soon spread over the country, and even reached
the Continent. Dee, at the same time, pretended to be in possession of the elixir vitae,
which he stated he had found among the ruins of Glastonbury Abbey, in Somersetshire.
People flocked from far and near to his house at Mortlake to have their nativities cast, in
preference to visiting astrologers of less renown. They also longed to see a man who,
according to his own account, would never die. Altogether, he carried on a very
profitable trade, but spent so much in drugs and metals to work out some peculiar process
of transmutation, that he never became rich.
About this time there came into England a wealthy polish nobleman, named Albert Laski,
Count Palatine of Siradz. His object was principally, he said, to visit the court of Queen
Elizabeth, the fame of whose glory and magnificence had reached him in distant Poland.
Elizabeth received this flattering stranger with the most splendid hospitality, and

appointed her favourite Leicester to show him all that was worth seeing in England. He
visited all the curiosities of London and Westminster, and from thence proceeded to
Oxford and Cambridge, that he might converse with some of the great scholars whose
writings shed lustre upon the land of their birth. He was very much disappointed at not
finding Dr. Dee among them, and told the Earl of Leicester that he would not have gone
to Oxford if he had known that Dee was not there. The Earl promised to introduce him to
the great alchymist on their return to London, and the Pole was satisfied. A few days
afterwards, the Earl and Laski being in the antechamber of the Queen, awaiting an
audience of her Majesty, Dr. Dee arrived on the same errand, and was introduced to the
Pole. [Albert Laski, son of Jaroslav, was Palatine of Siradz, and afterwards of Sendomir,
and chiefly contributed to the election of Henry of Valois, the Third of France, to the
throne of Poland, and was one of the delegates who went to France in order to announce
to the new monarch his elevation to the sovereignty of Poland. After the deposition of
Henry, Albert Laski voted for Maximilian of Austria. In 1585 he visited England, when
Queen Elizabeth received him with great distinction. The honours which were shown him
during his visit to Oxford, by the especial command of the Queen, were equal to those
rendered to sovereign princes. His extraordinary prodigality rendered his enormous
wealth insufficient to defray his expenses, and he therefore became a zealous adept in
alchymy, and took from England to Poland with him two known alchymists. -- Count
Valerian Krasinski's "Historical Sketch of the Reformation in Poland."] An interesting
conversation ensued, which ended by the stranger inviting himself to dine with the
astrologer at his house at Mortlake. Dee returned home in some tribulation, for he found
he had not money enough, without pawning his plate, to entertain Count Laski and his
retinue in a manner becoming their dignity. In this emergency he sent off an express to
the Earl of Leicester, stating frankly the embarrassment he laboured under, and praying
his good offices in representing the matter to her Majesty. Elizabeth immediately sent
him a present of twenty pounds.
On the appointed day, Count Laski came, attended by a numerous retinue, and expressed
such open and warm admiration of the wonderful attainments of his host, that Dee turned
over, in his own mind, how he could bind irretrievably to his interests a man who seemed
so well inclined to become his friend. Long acquaintance with Kelly had imbued him
with all the roguery of that personage; and he resolved to make the Pole pay dearly for
his dinner. He found out, before many days, that he possessed great estates in his own
country, as well as great influence; but that an extravagant disposition had reduced him to
temporary embarrassment. He also discovered, that he was a firm believer in the
philosopher's stone and the water of life. He was, therefore, just the man upon whom an
adventurer might fasten himself. Kelly thought so too; and both of them set to work, to
weave a web, in the meshes of which they might firmly entangle the rich and credulous
stranger. They went very cautiously about it; first throwing out obscure hints of the stone
and the elixir; and, finally, of the spirits, by means of whom they could turn over the
pages of the Book of Futurity, and read the awful secrets inscribed therein. Laski eagerly
implored that he might be admitted to one of their mysterious interviews with Uriel and
the angels; but they knew human nature too well to accede at once to the request. To the
Count's entreaties they only replied by hints of the difficulty or impropriety of
summoning the spirits in the presence of a stranger; or of one who might, perchance,

have no other motive than the gratification of a vain curiosity: but they only meant to
whet the edge of his appetite by this delay, and would have been sorry indeed if the
Count had been discouraged. To show how exclusively the thoughts both of Dee and
Kelly were fixed upon their dupe, at this time, it is only necessary to read the introduction
to their first interview with the spirits, related in the volume of Dr. Casaubon. The entry
made by Dee, under the date of the 25th of May 1583, says, that when the spirit appeared
to them, "I, [John Dee], and E. K. [Edward Kelly], sat together, conversing of that noble
Polonian Albertus Laski, his great honour here with us obtained, and of his great liking
among all sorts of the people." No doubt they were discussing how they might make the
most of the "noble Polonian," and concocting the fine story with which they afterwards
excited his curiosity, and drew him firmly within their toils. "Suddenly," says Dee, as
they were thus employed, "there seemed to come out of the oratory, a spiritual creature,
like a pretty girl, of seven or nine years of age, attired on her head, with her hair rolled up
before, and hanging down behind; with a gown of silk, of changeable red and green, and
with a train. She seemed to play up and down, and seemed to go in and out behind the
books; and, as she seemed to go between them, the books displaced themselves, and
made way for her."
With such tales as these they lured on the Pole from day to day; and at last persuaded him
to be a witness of their mysteries. Whether they played off any optical delusions upon
him; or whether, by the force of a strong imagination, he deluded himself, does not
appear; but certain it is, that he became a complete tool in their hands, and consented to
do whatever they wished him. Kelly, at these interviews, placed himself at a certain
distance from the wondrous crystal, and gazed intently upon it; while Dee took his place
in corner, ready to set down the prophecies as they were uttered by the spirits. In this
manner they prophesied to the Pole, that he should become the fortunate possessor of the
philosopher's stone; that he should live for centuries, and be chosen King of Poland; in
which capacity he should gain many great victories over the Saracens, and make his
name illustrious over all the earth. For this pose it was necessary, however, that Laski
should leave England, and take them with him, together with their wives and families;
that he should treat them all sumptuously, and allow them to want for nothing. Laski at
once consented; and very shortly afterwards they were all on the road to Poland.
It took them upwards of four months to reach the Count's estates, in the neighbourhood of
Cracow. In the mean time, they led a pleasant life, and spent money with an unsparing
hand. When once established in the Count's palace, they commenced the great hermetic
operation of transmuting iron into gold. Laski provided them with all necessary materials,
and aided them himself with his knowledge of alchymy: but, somehow or other, the
experiment always failed at the very moment that it ought to have succeeded; and they
were obliged to recommence operations on a grander scale. But the hopes of Laski were
not easily extinguished. Already, in idea, the possessor of countless millions, he was not
to be cast down for fear of present expenses. He thus continued from day to day, and
from month to month, till he was, at last, obliged to sell a portion of his deeplymortgaged estates, to find aliment for the hungry crucibles of Dee and Kelly, and the no
less hungry stomachs of their wives and families. It was not till ruin stared him in the
face, that he awoke from his dream of infatuation -- too happy, even then, to find that he

had escaped utter beggary. Thus restored to his senses, his first thought was how to rid
himself of his expensive visiters. Not wishing to quarrel with them, he proposed that they
should proceed to Prague, well furnished with letters of recommendation to the Emperor
Rudolph. Our alchymists too plainly saw that nothing more was to be made of the almost
destitute Count Laski. Without hesitation, therefore, they accepted the proposal, and set
out forthwith to the Imperial residence. They had no difficulty, on their arrival at Prague,
in obtaining an audience of the Emperor. They found him willing enough to believe that
such a thing as the philosopher's stone existed, and flattered themselves that they had
made a favourable impression upon him; but, from some cause or other -- perhaps the
look of low cunning and quackery upon the face of Kelly -- the Emperor conceived no
very high opinion of their abilities. He allowed them, however, to remain for some
months at Prague, feeding themselves upon the hope that he would employ them: but the
more he saw of them, the less he liked them; and, when the Pope's Nuncio represented to
him, that he ought not to countenance such heretic magicians, he gave orders that they
should quit his dominions within four-and-twenty hours. It was fortunate for them that so
little time was given them; for, had they remained six hours longer, the Nuncio had
received orders to procure a perpetual dungeon, or the stake, for them.
Not knowing well where to direct their steps, they resolved to return to Cracow, where
they had still a few friends; but, by this time, the funds they had drawn from Laski were
almost exhausted; and they were many days obliged to go dinnerless and supperless.
They had great difficulty to keep their poverty a secret from the world; but they managed
to bear privation without murmuring, from a conviction that if the fact were known, it
would militate very much against their pretensions. Nobody would believe that they were
possessors of the philosopher's stone, if it were once suspected that they did not know
how to procure bread for their subsistence. They still gained a little by casting nativities,
and kept starvation at arm's length, till a new dupe, rich enough for their purposes,
dropped into their toils, in the shape of a royal personage. Having procured an
introduction to Stephen, King of Poland, they predicted to him, that the Emperor Rudolph
would shortly be assassinated, and that the Germans would look to Poland for his
successor. As this prediction was not precise enough to satisfy the King, they tried their
crystal again; and a spirit appeared, who told them that the new sovereign of Germany
would be Stephen of Poland. Stephen was credulous enough to believe them, and was
once present when Kelly held his mystic conversations with the shadows of his crystal.
He also appears to have furnished them with money to carry on their experiments in
alchymy: but he grew tired, at last, of their broken promises, and their constant drains
upon his pocket; and was on the point of discarding them with disgrace, when they met
with another dupe, to whom they eagerly transferred their services. This was Count
Rosenberg, a nobleman of large estates, at Trebona, in Bohemia. So comfortable did they
find themselves in the palace of this munificent patron, that they remained nearly four
years with him, faring sumptuously, and having an almost unlimited command of his
money. The Count was more ambitious than avaricious: he had wealth enough, and did
not care for the philosopher's stone on account of the gold, but of the length of days it
would bring him. They had their predictions, accordingly, all ready framed to suit his
character. They prophesied that he should be chosen King of Poland; and promised,

moreover, that he should live for five hundred years to enjoy his dignity; provided
always, that he found them sufficient money to carry on their experiments.
But now, while fortune smiled upon them; while they revelled in the rewards of
successful villany, retributive justice came upon them in a shape they had not anticipated.
Jealousy and mistrust sprang up between the two confederates, and led to such violent
and frequent quarrels, that Dee was in constant fear of exposure. Kelly imagined himself
a much greater personage than Dee; measuring, most likely, by the standard of impudent
roguery; and was displeased that on all occasions, and from all persons, Dee received the
greater share of honour and consideration. He often threatened to leave Dee to shift for
himself; and the latter, who had degenerated into the mere tool of his more daring
associate, was distressed beyond measure at the prospect of his desertion. His mind was
so deeply imbued with superstition, that he believed the rhapsodies of Kelly to be, in a
great measure, derived from his intercourse with angels; and he knew not where, in the
whole world, to look for a man of depth and wisdom enough to succeed him. As their
quarrels every day became more and more frequent, Dee wrote letters to Queen
Elizabeth, to secure a favourable reception on his return to England; whither he intended
to proceed, if Kelly forsook him. He also sent her a round piece of silver, which he
pretended he had made of a portion of brass cut out of a warming-pan. He afterwards sent
her the warming-pan also, that she might convince herself that the piece of silver
corresponded exactly with the hole which was cut into the brass. While thus preparing for
the worst, his chief desire was to remain in Bohemia with Count Rosenberg, who treated
him well, and reposed much confidence in him. Neither had Kelly any great objection to
remain; but a new passion had taken possession of his breast, and he was laying deep
schemes to gratify it. His own wife was ill-favoured and ill-natured; Dee's was comely
and agreeable: and he longed to make an exchange of partners, without exciting the
jealousy or shocking the morality of Dee. This was a difficult matter; but, to a man like
Kelly, who was as deficient in rectitude and right feeling as he was full of impudence and
ingenuity, the difficulty was not insurmountable. He had also deeply studied the character
and the foibles of Dee; and he took his measures accordingly. The next time they
consulted the spirits, Kelly pretended to be shocked at their language, and refused to tell
Dee what they had said. Dee insisted, and was informed that they were henceforth to
have their wives in common. Dee, a little startled, inquired whether the spirits might not
mean that they were to live in common harmony and good-will? Kelly tried again, with
apparent reluctance, and said the spirits insisted upon the literal interpretation. The poor
fanatic, Dee, resigned himself to their will; but it suited Kelly's purpose to appear coy a
little longer. He declared that the spirits must be spirits, not of good, but of evil; and
refused to consult them any more. He thereupon took his departure, saying that he would
never return.
Dee, thus left to himself, was in sore trouble and distress of mind. He knew not on whom
to fix as the successor to Kelly for consulting the spirits; but at last chose his son Arthur,
a boy of eight years of age. He consecrated him to this service with great ceremony, and
impressed upon the child's mind the dignified and awful nature of the duties he was
called upon to perform; but the poor boy had neither the imagination, the faith, nor the
artifice of Kelly. He looked intently upon the crystal, as he was told; but could see
