
DAVID SHAW

as important to know what doesn't work as what does. For that reason,
once we've gone to the considerable expense that's often involved in
determining that an anomaly described in the open literature no
longer exists, the last thing we want to do is to enable one of our competitors to take advantage of this information for free by drawing
attention to the fact that the published results no longer hold and the
approach in question thus represents a dead end.
Are the people who publish studies of market inefficiencies in
the financial and economic journals strictly academics or are
some of them involved in trading the markets?
Some of the researchers who actually trade the markets publish certain aspects of their work, especially in periodicals like the Journal of
Portfolio Management, but overall, there's a tendency for academics to
be more open about their results than practitioners.
Why would anyone who trades the markets publish something
that works?
That's a very good question. For various reasons, the vast majority of the
high-quality work that appears in the open literature can't be used in
practice to actually beat the market. Conversely, the vast majority of the
research that really does work will probably never be published. But
there are a few successful quantitative traders who from time to time
publish useful information, even when it may not be in their own selfinterest to do so. My favorite example is Ed Thorpe, who was a real pioneer in the field. He was doing this stuff well before almost anyone else.
Ed has been remarkably open about some of the money-making strategies he's discovered over the years, both within and outside of the field
of finance. After he figured out how to beat the casinos at blackjack, he
published Beat the Dealer. Then when he figured out how to beat the
market, he published Beat the Market, which explained with his usual
professorial clarity exactly how to take advantage of certain demonstrable market inefficiencies that existed at the time. Of course, the publication of his book helped to eliminate those very inefficiencies.
In the case of blackjack, does eliminating the inefficiencies
mean that the casinos went to the use of multiple decks?
I'm not an expert on blackjack, but it's my understanding that the
casinos not only adopted specific game-related countermeasures of

SHE Q U A N T I T A T I V E ED6E

this sort, but they also became more aware of "card counters" and
became more effective at expelling them from the casinos.
I know that classic arbitrage opportunities are long gone. Did
such sitting-duck trades, however, exist when you first started?
Even then, those sorts of true arbitrage opportunities were few and
far between. Every once in a while, we were able to engage in a
small set of transactions in closely related instruments that, taken
together, locked in a risk-free or nearly risk-free profit. Occasionally,
we'd even find it possible to execute each component of a given arbitrage trade with a different department of the same major financial
institution—something that would have been impossible if the institution had been using technology to effectively manage all of its
positions on an integrated firm wide basis. But those sorts of opportunities were very rare even in those days, and now you basically don't
see them at all.
Have the tremendous advances in computer technology, which
greatly facilitate searching for market inefficiencies that provide
a probabilistic edge, caused some previous inefficiencies to disappear and made new ones harder to find?
The game is largely over for most of the "easy" effects. Maybe someday, someone will discover a simple effect that has eluded all of us,
but it's been our experience that the most obvious and mathematically straightforward ideas you might think of have largely disappeared as potential trading opportunities. What you are left with is a
number of relatively small inefficiencies that are often fairly complex
and which you're not likely to find by using a standard mathematical
software package or the conventional analytical techniques you might
learn in graduate school. Even if you were somehow able to find one
of the remaining inefficiencies without going through an extremely
expensive, long-term research effort of the sort we've conducted over
the past eleven years, you'd probably find that one such inefficiency
wouldn't be enough to cover your transaction costs.
As a result, the current barriers to entry in this field are very high.
A firm like ours that has identified a couple dozen market inefficiencies in a given set of financial instruments may be able to make
money even in the presence of transaction costs. In contrast, a new

DAVID SHAW

entrant into the field who has identified only one or two market inefficiencies would typically have a much harder time doing so.
What gives you that edge?

It's a subtle effect. A single inefficiency may not be sufficient to overcome transaction costs. When multiple inefficiencies happen to coincide, however, they may provide an opportunity to trade with a
statistically expected profit that exceeds the associated transaction
costs. Other things being equal, the more inefficiencies you can identify, the more trading opportunities you're likely to have.
How could the use of multiple strategies, none of which independently
yields a profit, be profitable? As a simple illustration, imagine that there
are two strategies, each of which has an expected gain of $100 and a
transaction cost of $110. Neither of these strategies could be applied
profitably on its own. Further assume that the subset of trades in which
both strategies provide signals in the same direction has an average profit
of $180 and the same $110 transaction cost. Trading the subset could be
highly profitable, even though each individual strategy is ineffective by
itself. Of course, for Shaw's company, which trades scores of strategies in
many related markets, the effect of strategy interdependencies is tremendously more complex.
As the field matures, you need to be aware of more and more inefficiencies to identify trades, and it becomes increasingly harder for
new entrants. When we started trading eleven years ago, you could
have identified one or two inefficiencies and still beat transaction
costs. That meant you could do a limited amount of research and
begin trading profitably, which gave you a way to fund future
research. Nowadays, things are a lot tougher. If we hadn't gotten
started when we did, I think it would have been prohibitively expensive for us to get where we are today.
Do you use only price data in your model, or do you also employ
fundamental data?
It's definitely not just price data. We look at balance sheets, income
statements, volume information, and almost any other sort of data

THE QUANTITATIVE

we can get our hands on in digital form. I can't say much about the
sorts of variables we find most useful in practice, but I can say that
we use an extraordinary amount of, data, and spend a lot of money
not just acquiring it but also putting it into a form in which it's useful
to us.
Would it be fair to summarize the philosophy of your firm as follows? Markets can be predicted only to a very limited extent, and
any single strategy cannot provide an attractive return-to-risk
ratio. If you combine enough strategies, however, you can create
a trading model that has a meaningful edge.
That's a really good description. The one thing that I would add is that
we try to hedge as many systematic risk factors as possible.
I assume you mean that you balance all long positions with correlated short positions, thereby removing directional moves in
the market as a risk factor.
Hedging against overall market moves within the various markets
we trade is one important element of our approach to risk management, but there are also a number of other risk factors with respect
to which we try to control our exposure whenever we're not specifically betting on them. For example, if you invest in IBM, you're
placing an implicit bet not only on the direction of the stock market
as a whole and on the performance of the computer industry relative to the overall stock market, but also on a number of other risk
factors.
Such as?
Examples would include the overall level of activity within the economy, any unhedged exchange rate exposure attributable to IBM's
export activities, the net effective interest rate exposure associated
with the firm's assets, liabilities, and commercial activities, and a
number of other mathematically derived risk factors that would be
more difficult to describe in intuitively meaningful terms. Although
it's neither possible nor cost-effective to hedge all forms of risk, we try
to minimize our net exposure to those sources of risk that we aren't
able to predict while maintaining our exposure to those variables for
which we do have some predictive ability, at least on a statistical basis.

SHAW

Some of the strategies you were using in your early years are now
completely obsolete. Could you talk about one of these just to
provide an illustration of the type of market inefficiency that at
least at one time offered a trading opportunity.
In general, I try not to say much about historical inefficiencies that
have disappeared from the markets, since even that type of information could help competitors decide how to more effectively allocate
scarce research resources, allowing them a "free ride" on our own negative findings, which would give them an unfair competitive advantage. One example I can give you, though, is undervalued options
[options trading at prices below the levels implied by theoretical models]. Nowadays, if you find an option that appears to be mispriced,
there is usually a reason. Years ago, that wasn't necessarily the case.
When you find an apparent anomaly or pattern in the historical
data, how do you know it represents something real as opposed
to a chance occurrence?
The more variables you have, the greater the number of statistical
artifacts that you're likely to find, and the more difficult it will generally be to tell whether a pattern you uncover actually has any predictive value. We take great care to avoid the methodological pitfalls
associated with "overfitting the data."
Although we use a number of different mathematical techniques
to establish the robustness and predictive value of our strategies, one
of our most powerful tools is the straightforward application of the
scientific method. Rather than blindly searching through the data for
patterns—an approach whose methodological dangers are widely
appreciated within, for example, the natural science and medical
research communities—we typically start by formulating a hypothesis
based on some sort of structural theory or qualitative understanding
of the market, and then test that hypothesis to see whether it is supported by the data.
Unfortunately, the most common outcome is that the actual data
fail to provide evidence that would allow us to reject the "null hypothesis" of market efficiency. Every once in a while, though, we do find a
new market anomaly that passes all our tests, and which we wind up
incorporating in an actual trading strategy.

f«E Q U A N T I T A T I V E l l i E

I heard that your firm ran into major problems last year [1998],
but when I look at your performance numbers, I see that your
worst equity decline ever was only 11 percent—and even that
loss was recovered in only a few months. I don't understand how

there could have been much of a problem. What happened?
The performance results you're referring to are for our equity and
equity-linked trading strategies, which have formed the core of our
proprietary trading activities since our start over eleven years ago. For
a few years, though, we also traded a fixed income strategy. That
strategy was qualitatively different from the equity-related strategies
we'd historically employed and exposed us to fundamentally different
sorts of risks. Although we initially made a lot of money on our fixed
income trading, we experienced significant losses during the global
liquidity crisis in late 1998, as was the case for most fixed income
arbitrage traders during that period. While our losses were much
smaller, in both percentage and absolute dollar terms, than those suffered by, for example, Long Term Capital Management, they were
significant enough that we're no longer engaged in this sort of trading
at all.
LTCM—a hedge fund headed by renowned former-Salomon bond
trader John Meriwether and whose principals included economics
Nobel laureates Robert Merton and Myron Scholes—was on the
brink of extinction during the second half of 1998. After registering
an average annual gain of 34 percent in its first three years and
expanding its assets under management to near $5 billion, LTCM
lost a staggering 44 percent (roughly $2 billion) in August 1998 alone.
These losses were due to a variety of factors, but their magnitude was
primarily attributable to excessive leverage: the firm used borrowing
to leverage its holdings by an estimated factor of over 40 to 1. The
combination of large losses and large debt would have resulted in

LTCM's collapse. The firm, however, was saved by a Federal Reserve
coordinated $3.5 billion bailout (financed by private financial institutions, not government money).

IHE Q:UANTITATIV£;I1BI

With all the ventures you have going, do you manage to take any
time off?
I just took a week off—the first one in a long time.

So you don't take much vacation?
Not much. When I take a vacation, I find I need a few hours of work
each day just to keep myself sane.

You have a reputation for recruiting brilliant Ph.D.'s in math and
sciences. Do you hire people just for their raw intellectual capability, even if there is no specific job slot to fill?
Compared with most organizations, we tend to hire more on the
basis of raw ability and less on the basis of experience. If we run
across someone truly gifted, we try to make them an offer, even if we
don't have an immediate position in mind for that person. The most
famous example is probably Jeff Bezos. One of my partners
approached me and said, "I've just interviewed this terrific candidate
named Jeff Bezos. We don't really have a slot for him, but I think he's
going to make someone a lot of money someday, and I think you
should at least spend some time with him." I met with Jeff and was
really impressed by his intellect, creativity, and entrepreneurial
instincts. I told my partner that he was right and that even though we
didn't have a position for him, we should hire him anyway and figure
something out.
Did Bezos leave your firm to start Amazon?
Yes. Jeff did a number of things during the course of his tenure at D. E.
Shaw, but his last assignment was to work with me on the formulation
of ideas for various technology-related new ventures. One of those
ideas was to create what amounted to a universal electronic bookstore. When we discovered that there was an electronic catalog with
millions of titles that could be ordered through Ingram's [a major
book distributor], Jeff and I did a few back-of-the-envelope calculations and realized that it ought to be possible to start such a venture
without a prohibitively large initial investment. Although I don't think
either of us had any idea at the time how successful such a business
could be, we both thought it had possibilities. One day, before things
had progressed much further, Jeff asked to speak with me. We took a

walk through Central Park, during which he tolcl me that he'd "gotten
the entrepreneurial bug" and asked how I'd feel about it if he decided
he wanted to pursue this idea on his own.

What was your reaction?
I told him I'd be genuinely sorry to lose him, and made sure he knew
how highly I thought of his work at D. E. Shaw, and how promising I
thought his prospects were within the firm. But I also told him that,
having made a similar decision myself at one point, I'd understand
completely if he decided the time had come to strike out on his own
and would not try to talk him out of it. I assured him that given the
relatively short period of time we'd been talking about the electronic
bookstore concept, I'd have no objections whatsoever if he decided
that he wanted to pursue this idea on his own. I told him that we
might or might not decide to compete with him at some point, and he
said that seemed perfectly fair to him.
Jeff's departure was completely amicable, and when he finished
the alpha version of the first Amazon system, he invited me and others at D. E. Shaw to test it. It wasn't until I used this alpha version to
order my first book that I realized how powerful this concept could
really be. Although we'd talked about the idea of an electronic bookstore while Jeff was still at D. E. Shaw, it's the things Jeff did since
leaving that made Amazon what it is today.

Shaw's trading approach, which requires highly complex mathematical models, vast computer power, constant monitoring of worldwide markets by a staff of traders, and near instantaneous, extreme
low-cost trade executions, is clearly out of the reach of the ordinary
investor. One concept that came up in this interview, however, that
could have applicability to the individual investor is the idea that
market patterns ("inefficiencies" in Shaw's terminology) that are not
profitable on their own might still provide the basis for a profitable
strategy when combined with other patterns. Although Shaw disdains chart patterns and traditional technical indicators, an analogous idea would apply: It is theoretically possible that a combination

of patterns (or indicators) could yield a useful trading model, even if
the individual elements are worthless when used alone.
This synergistic effect would apply to fundamental inputs as well.
For example, a researcher might test ten different fundamental factors and find that none are worthwhile as price indicators. Does this
imply that these fundamental inputs should be dismissed as useless?
Absolutely not. Even though no single factor provides a meaningful
predictor, it is entirely possible that some combination of these
inputs could yield a useful price indicator.
Another important principle that came up in this interview concerns the appropriate methodology in testing trading ideas. A trader
trying to develop a systematic approach, or any approach that incorporates computer patterns as signals, should caution against data mining—letting the computer cycle through the data, testing thousands
or millions of input combinations in search of profitable patterns.
Although the expense of computer time is usually no longer an issue,
such computational profligacy has a more critical cost: it will tend to
generate trading models (systems) that look great, but have no predictive power—a combination that could lead to large trading losses.
Why? Because patterns can be found even in random data. For
example, if you flipped one million coins ten times apiece, on average, about 977 of those coins would land on heads all ten times.
Obviously, it would be foolish to assume that these coins are more
likely to land on heads in the future. But this type of naive reasoning
is precisely what some system developers do when they test huge
numbers of input combinations on price data and then trade the
combination that is most profitable. If you test enough variations of
any trading system, some of them will be profitable by chance—just
as some coins will land on heads on every toss if you flip enough
coins. Shaw avoids this problem of data mining by requiring that a
theoretical hypothesis precede each computer test and by using rigorous statistical measures to evaluate the significance of the results.

STEVE COHEN
The Trading Room

"He's the best," said an industry contact, referring to Steve Cohen, when I
asked him to recommend possible interview candidates. I would hear virtually the same assessment repeated several more times whenever
Cohen's name was mentioned by industry acquaintances. When I looked
at Cohen's numbers, I understood the reason for their ebullient praise. In
the seven years he has managed money, Cohen has averaged a compounded annual return of 45 percent, with only three losing months in
the entire period—the worst a tiny 2 percent decline.
These numbers, however, dramatically understate Cohen's trading
talent. Cohen is so good that he is able to charge a 50 percent profit
incentive fee, which means that his actual trading profits have averaged
approximately 90 percent per year. Despite stratospheric fees—approximately two and a half times the hedge fund industry average—Cohen
has not had a problem attracting investors. In fact, his flagship fund is
closed to new investment.
Cohen's firm, S.A.C., which derives its name from his initials, is
located in an office building whose architectural style can best be
described as "Connecticut Corporate"—a low-rise, rectangular facade of
glass squares. I expected to find Cohen sitting in a window-encased
office with a glass and steel desk. Instead, the receptionist led me into a
huge, windowless room with six long rows of desks, seating approximately sixty traders, each trader with an array of six to twelve computer
screens. Despite its size, the room was so filled with people and equipment that it felt more cavelike than cavernous. The absence of windows
created a bunkerlike atmosphere.
275

STEVE COHEN

The traders were all dressed casually, with attire ranging from T-shirts
and shorts, which was appropriate for the weather, to jeans or slacks and
polar fleeces for those who found the air conditioning too cold. Cohen
was seated near the middle of one row of desks, totally indistinguishable
from any of the other traders in the room. (He was one of the polar fleece
contingent.) Cohen has used his trading success to lure traders specializing in a whole range of market sectors. He has chosen to surround himself with traders, figuratively and literally.
When I arrived, Cohen was in the midst of a lengthy phone conversation—ironically, he was being interviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
("This is media day down here!" Cohen would later exclaim to a caller,
referring to the dual interviews.) I squeezed a chair in alongside Cohen's
slot within the room-length desk while I waited for him to get off the
phone. Throughout his phone conversation, Cohen kept his eyes glued
on the quote screens in front of him. At one point, he interrupted his
conversation to call out an order. "Sell 20 [20,000] Pokemon." As an
aside to the rest of the room, he said, "My kids love it, but what the
hell." He reminded me of Jason Alexander from Seinfeld—a combination of a slight physical resemblance, speech patterns, and sense of
humor.
The room was surprisingly quiet, considering the number of traders. I
realized what was missing—ringing phones; the order clerks had open
lines to the exchange floors. Every now and then there would be a flurry
of activity and an accompanying wave of increased noise. Traders continually shouted out buy and sell orders, news items, and queries to others
in the room. Sample: "Anyone know—Is Martha Stewart going to be a
hot offering?" Every couple of minutes, Cohen called out a buy or sell
order to be executed, in a tone so casual that you might have thought he
was placing an order for a tuna fish on rye, instead of buying or selling
