The net supply and demand from the traders causes the price to move
either up or down. That price movement is moved by all the influences
that traders—including you—can see and not see. As a result, I think of
the price as the most important piece of information at any one moment
for traders. However, on his or her own, can a currency trader make
money trading the price movements and momentum? Let’s take a look
at this idea.

Price Momentum Has Its Limits
The current price and price momentum, whether it be up or down, is important, but as far as its usefulness for trading, it has its limits. Traders
who watch the price can see or follow the price direction. Many beginning
traders will look at the price action or momentum and base trading decisions simply on that movement. If the price is going up, they will buy. If the
price is going down, they will sell. Moreover, the more momentum there is
in a specific direction, the more excited the trader will be about getting in
on that move.
As a result, the inexperienced trader will buy when the price has already gone up and sell when the price has already gone down. Sometimes
it works, and the price continues to go higher or lower and the trader feels
happy. Sometimes it doesn’t, and the price reverses and the trader is sad
and often confused. “Why didn’t it do what it did last time I traded like
that?” the trader will often say.
In reality, because the trader does not have a reason to trade, trading is
random. Trading is done because of the thrill of the trade, the thrill of the
momentum. It is similar to a gambler betting red or black on the roulette
wheel over and over again. The gambler continues to bet because the thrill
of the wins and the vision of the potential wins. There is no real rationale to think the next spin’s odds will be any different than the previous
spin.
In trading, the trader remembers the winning trades too. However, unlike the gambler who most likely thinks he is lucky when he bets red or
black and wins, the high from the random wins in trading is often believed
to be because of a trading aptitude and prowess. The trader thinks he is
fully responsible for making the trade and having a gain. They were good
trades. “Nice trade,” he says to himself, and often he cannot wait to tell
someone about it.
In reality, the trader is likely more lucky than skilled. After all, there
was no reason other than price momentum in a direction to do the trade.
To me, that is not enough. Price momentum just tells me a direction now. It
does not tell me at what price level I am wrong. It does not tell me where my
stop level should be, except when the price momentum fades or goes the

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

128

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

other way. It does not define risk. It runs counter to my mission statement
of keeping risk to a minimum, because I cannot define risk. If I cannot
define risk, I don’t know if my risk is minimized. (Remember: I want to
make the most money with the least amount of risk.) It also does not tell me
at what price I should be bullish or bearish. As a result, price momentum
is an ambiguous trading tool.
When there is no price level that determines a trade decision of either
bullish or bearish, the trader is left with hoping that momentum continues
in the direction.
We have all gotten caught up in the emotion of buying a fast-rising market only to have the market reverse or even slow down. Suddenly, visions
of buying the high price flood our mind, and rightly so. There was no reason to do the trade. The trade was simply a reactionary bet that the price
would do what it already has done.
The traders who have purchased near the high simply on price momentum all have this same reversal fear. As a result, if buying slows, a flood of
selling by the overzealous, out-of-synch buyers often causes a sharp price
correction in the opposite direction. Typically, if the momentum buyer
does not sell on the correction back down, the corrective move has likely
scared the trader to the point of simply getting out as close to breakeven as
possible. Thoughts like “If the market gets back to my entry point, I will get
out and reevaluate the market” or, for the religious, “Please God, just get
me back to breakeven and I promise I won’t be an impulsive buyer again.”
Is this type of trading the way to keep fear to a minimum? Not in my mind.
The game plan is in shambles.
Of course, there will be times when the price momentum trader will
see the momentum continue in the direction of the trade, and the trader
may even make some good money. In my mind, even if the trader does find
“success” in this approach from time to time, it often simply encourages
the continuation of bad trading habits—trading habits that rely on the luck
of the momentum continuing before fear is increased. Trading habits that
do not have any concept of risk.
This is the equivalent of giving a misbehaving child a piece of candy
in order to distract her from what she is doing wrong. The child does not
learn. When the candy is gone, the misbehaving will continue and your
child’s dentist bills will also rise.
There is an old saying, “I would rather be lucky than smart.” A lot of
less-experienced traders rely on that luck by trading the price momentum.
As with so many sayings, however, there is always what I call the “dot,
dot, dot” that gets forgotten over time. In this case it may be that “I would
rather be lucky than smart . . . but luck always runs out, while learning lasts
forever.”

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Trader’s Toolbox

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

129

Trading Price Ranges
Inexperienced traders who get burned trading price momentum—if they
don’t lose all their money—tend to regroup and realize that buying or selling market price momentum is not a way to make money consistently.
What typically happens is that fear and uncertainty are just too high, luck
runs out, and losses mount.
So instead of buying new highs and selling new lows with the price
momentum, the trader switches tactics and starts buying low and selling
high. The old Wall Street axiom to “buy cheap and sell dear” becomes the
new trading strategy.
Unfortunately, like trading price momentum, the strategy fails to address what exactly is cheap and what is expensive. Moreover, there is no
reason to trade other than the price is lower or higher. In other words,
what is the stop level if a dip is bought and the price continues to make
new lows? The trader is supposed to buy dips, and most will, doubling up
on the position. The market moves lower, and they will buy another dip.
Pretty soon, the trending market to the downside leads to a large loss or
liquidation.
Of course, this strategy can work just fine in a nontrending market.
In Figure 6.1 the price is trading in a confined range for the USDJPY between 91.07 and 91.79. Buying at the dips and selling at the peak would
have yielded seven profitable trades of 72 pips for a total of +504 pips over
an eight-day trading period. Not a bad gain.
At the point marked “1,” the market starts what is a trend move. For the
dip-buying trader, it represents a dip to buy. The first buy occurs at 91.07.
The next buy occurs at the cheaper price of 90.87, the third at 90.35, and so
on. A total of five buys are executed. In addition, since the trader is good
at buying dips (I will give him the benefit of the doubt), all the price lows
are bought. Note that the corrective waves higher are all shallow, which is
typical of a trending market, and the trader is never in a position to break
even or make a profit. Finally, when the price falls sharply at point 6, the
trader’s fear is just too high, his account value is largely depleted, and the
entire position is liquidated. The total loss on the five dip-buying trades
totals minus 1,364 pips, which far outpaces the gains from trading the lowto-high trading range. The time period it took to lose over twice the amount
was around eight trading days—the same length of time to make the 504
pips in gains. Trends move quickly and losses accrue quickly too.
What range traders typically find out is that buying low prices and selling high prices only goes so far, especially during trending periods. The
price only tells you that the current price is cheaper or more expensive
than in the most recent past. It does not tell you how cheap or expensive

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

130

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

FIGURE 6.1 Buying Cheap and Selling Dear

the market price will get, nor does it define the risk of the trade. In addition, it also leads to trading against the trend. Trends are where the most
money is made. It is also where the most money can be lost. As seen in the
example, the price in a trending market can get cheaper and cheaper and
cheaper, and with it so can your account value.
Although the current price and price direction are no doubt some of
the most important things a trader needs to follow, they are not the answer
to success as a trader.
Instead, traders, like carpenters, like lawyers, like software programmers, need to apply tools to that price. The tools are filters that take the
price and transform it into a meaningful bias for the trader—a bias to be
bullish or a bias to be bearish. In the transformation, the tools should make
the trader’s job easier. They should make the trader more efficient. They
should make the trader more profitable. They should not make the trader
counterproductive. They should not cause uncertainty or fear but encourage certainty and confidence. Using the analogy from the beginning of the
chapter, the hammer head should not fly off the handle and hit the trader
in the head.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

131

The Trader’s Toolbox

THE TOOLS
The next sections will outline the three tools I use to attack the currency
trends: moving averages, trend lines and remembered lines, and Fibonacci
retracements. In the subsequent chapters I will outline how you can use
each tool to become a successful currency trader.

Moving Averages
As introduced earlier, the moving average, or simple moving average, is
one of the tools that I use to attack the currency trends. In the book I will
use the abbreviation MA to designate both. A simple moving average takes
the closing price level over a variable number of periods and calculates the
average over that period.
For example, if a trader wants to calculate the simple moving average
for a 10-day period, the calculations shown in Table 6.1 would be made
given the following closing values over the last 10 days.
The cumulative sum of the closing values over the last 10 days totals
12.323. Taking that total and dividing by the days used for the cumulative
sum or moving average period, equals the MA. In our example, taking the
cumulative total of 12.323 and dividing by 10 periods or days equals the
10-day MA. So:
12.323/10 days = 1.2323
The 10-day MA = 1.2323
The simple moving average is designed to smooth out a series of prices
and take the volatility out of the series. The shorter the MA, the faster the
TABLE 6.1 Calculating the 10-Day Simple Moving Average
Day

Closing Daily Price

Cumulative Total

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

1.2220
1.2331
1.2309
1.2388
1.2373
1.2312
1.2270
1.2310
1.2333
1.2384

1.2220
2.4551
3.686
4.9248
6.1621
7.3933
8.6203
9.8513
11.0846
12.323

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

132

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

average will react to current price trends. The longer the MA, the slower
the average will react to current price trends.
From a technical perspective, the MA levels are placed over a chart of
price bars, candlesticks, or even a line graph. In this book I will use candlesticks and bar charts in most of the graphs. I will use the generic word
“bar” to describe a candlestick and “bars” to describe a series of candlesticks. The MA on a chart is in the form of a line. That is because for each
bar, there is only one MA.
A moving average can be calculated using bars on a chart that can show
any time period. That is, you can have a moving average on a minute chart,
a 5-minute chart, a 15-minute chart, a 30-minute chart, an hourly chart, a
daily chart, a weekly chart, or even a monthly chart. In each, the calculation
is the same—take the closing value of a series of bars, sum them up, and
figure out the average over x periods.
You can also vary the x-periods used to calculate the MA on the chart.
For example, you can have an 18 bar MA, a 34 bar MA, a 50 bar MA, a 100
bar MA, or a 200 bar MA, and anything in between. Although there can be
a moving average for any x-period, the periods listed are some the market
tends to favor over others. In the next chapter I will outline the moving
averages I feel the market is most focused on.
When looking at the 100 bar MA, the convention for a daily chart is to
say the “100 day MA.” For an hourly chart, the same convention is used.
That is, I would say the “100 hour MA.” For less than an hour chart, such
as a 5-minute, 15-minute, or 30-minute chart, it is not correct to say the
“100 5-minute MA.” Instead, I like to say the “100 bar MA on the 5-minute
chart” or the “100 bar MA on the 30-minute chart.” For a minute chart, the
convention would go back to the “100 minute MA.”
From what we have learned, there can be many chart time periods.
There can also be many MA time periods including the 18 bar, 34 bar, 50
bar, 100 bar, 200 bar, and any MA time period in between.
The question becomes which moving average to use and on what time
period charts. In Chapter 7, I will outline the time periods that I focus on
and use to evaluate the market for entry and trading the trends. In the next
sections, I will introduce the basic use of the MA lines, and why it is a tool
I need in our trader’s toolbox.
What They Do When analyzing a chart, the current price will be either
above or below the moving average. Dependent on if the price is above or
below the moving average will determine if the bias is bullish or bearish.
The following rules apply:

r If the current price > x-period moving average = Bullish bias
r If the current price < x-period moving average = Bearish bias

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Trader’s Toolbox

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

133

FIGURE 6.2 100 Bar MA on the 5-Minute Chart

In Figure 6.2 the 100 bar MA on the 5-minute chart is represented by
the solid line in the chart. When the price is greater than the MA line the
bias is said to be bullish. When the price moves below the MA line, the bias
turns bearish.
Of course, the price can also be at the MA level. At these levels, I like
to say the price is at the borderline, where the market is neither bullish nor
bearish. In Figure 6.2, note how the price comes up to test the 100 bar MA
level on the chart and trades on the borderline level, but then moves back
down and continues the bearish trend down. We will discuss how traders
use the moving average lines in more detail in the next chapter.
How They Fit in the Toolbox If we are to use the moving average as a
tool, we know it must conform to our trading rule. That is, moving averages
need to define a trend (or nontrend), define risk, and be unambiguous. Do
the moving averages conform?
An MA line helps traders define trends, but it can also be used to help
define nontrends. We know that if the price is above or below the moving
average line, it gives either a bullish or bearish bias. Does that indicate that
there is a trend? Not necessarily.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

134

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

In Figure 6.2, the price moves below the 100 bar MA at around the
1.2265 level. This turns the bias bearish. However, the slope of the line at
that time is positive or moving higher in the chart. This is because the move
from the top was pretty steep. The moving average line needs some time
to react or adjust to the sudden change of direction. Should the trader be
bearish? Yes. The price is below the MA line. If the price is below the MA
line, the bias is bearish. As a result, the trader should be short if he has a
position. Is the market trending? Not necessarily, or at least not yet.
Eventually, in the chart the moving average line flattens and then turns
down from around the 1.2270 level. Since the price remains below the 100
bar MA line and the slope of the MA line is starting to move down, the
bearishness is confirmed and the trend is confirmed.
Another benefit of a moving average line is it can also define nontrends.
If the moving average is going sideways, it often can be a prelude to a trendtype move.
In Figure 6.3 the 100 bar MA on the 5-minute chart is moving sideways
between 1.3487 and 1.3492 in the gray shaded area. The market is nontrending in a narrow range. Markets that are nontrending can only continue to
nontrend or eventually trend. In this case, the nontrend transitioned into a
bearish trend. The price started a move down to a low of 1.3355.

FIGURE 6.3 Nontrending to Trending Using MA

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Trader’s Toolbox

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

135

In the next chapter I will talk more about using the moving averages to
anticipate and attack currency trends like this example demonstrates.
The second requirement for the tools we use is that they define risk for
the trader. The moving average gives traders a clear bullish or bearish bias.
The line that makes up the moving average is the equivalent of a borderline.
If the price is above the line, the bias is bullish. If the price is below the MA
line, the bias is bearish. In Figure 6.3, the price was consolidating below
the MA line in the chart as the market consolidated around the sideways
100 bar MA.
Toward the end of the shaded area, the price moved back above the
MA line. Although this gives a bullish bias for traders, the price could only
move 8 pips above the MA line at 1.3488 to 1.3496 high before moving back
down and below the line. Remember the “If . . . Should” rule from the previous Chapter 5. The “If . . . Should” rule says “If the price moves above
the 100 bar MA line, the price should move higher.” If a price can’t move
higher, there is only one way it can go—down. The trend started to the
downside.
What is the risk to the trader who shorted the market on the move back
below the MA line? The risk is if the price were to move back above the MA
line, plus a buffer for volatility of 5 to 15 pips. Risk is clearly defined. Risk
is limited.
With risk defined, the trader is fully able to evaluate if the exposure is
acceptable. If it is, the only thing left to do is execute the trade. Once done,
fear should be dispersed. It is now a question of what happens. Does the
trend begin and the market move lower, or is the trade stopped out?
No one knows for sure what will happen. There are clues, however,
that give traders more confidence in the trades. What we do know is that
using moving averages satisfies the requirement of defining trading risk,
and by defining risk, fear is kept to a minimum.
The final requirement for the tools for trading is if it is an unambiguous
trading tool. Since a moving average gives a bullish signal if the price is
above the moving average line and a bearish signal if the price is below the
moving average line, it is indeed an unambiguous trading tool.
Being unambiguous allows the trader to define risk and to keep fear to
a minimum. It also allows the trader to be patient and wait for opportunities
to trade when the price moves closer to the moving average line. Doing so
keeps risk to a minimum. This is a major advantage of using unambiguous
trading tools like the moving average.
In Figure 6.4 the EURUSD is trending higher with the moving average
line sloping to the upside. The corrective moves off the higher highs approached and tested the 100 bar MA line and found trend following buyers.
When the market price finally broke, the bias turned bearish and the price
turned lower. When unambiguous tools are used there is no guessing as

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

136

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

FIGURE 6.4 Moving Averages Are Unambiguous Tools

to the directional bias—price above the MA line is bullish, price below the
line is bearish.
In Chapter 7, I will explore using the moving average in more detail,
including what moving averages I use, how to use moving averages to anticipate trends, and how to use moving averages to stay on the trend.

Trend Lines and Remembered Lines
In Chapter 5, Rule 1 was to follow the K.I.S.S. principle. That is, “Keep It
Simple to be Successful.” We also are fully aware by now of the requirements for our trading tools of defining trends and risk and being unambiguous.
The second tool that I use to attack the currency trends is about as
simple as you can get, and it also satisfies the requirements of our trading
tools. The second set of tools is trend lines and what I call remembered
lines. Most traders are familiar with trend lines. “Remembered lines” is a
term I coined to represent a type of trend line. It is explained in more detail
shortly.
In the Introduction, I spoke of how my father used hand-drawn charts
to follow and trade the trends in the market. He used graph paper and

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Trader’s Toolbox

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

137

each day drew the bar charts and point-and-figure charts for the respective
instruments he followed. When the lapse of time or a market move outside
the range required a new graph page, he simple taped the new page to the
last and spread the extended pages across his desk to analyze.
Calculating a moving average was something he could do, but it had to
be a shorter-period moving average such as an 18 day MA. Longer-period
moving averages were not an option. They were simply too time consuming
without a personal computer for help.
Besides point and figure analysis, he would take out a pencil and ruler
and draw trend lines. They told the story of the trends. They told the story
of nontrend periods. If he had two higher lows, he would connect the points
and see the uptrend. If he had two lower highs, he could connect those
points and see the downtrend. The more connected points along a line,
the better the support or resistance. They provided clues for trading trends
back then, and they still provide clues for trading trends today.
What They Do When I look at a chart, I immediately look to see if there
are any trend lines I can draw that I can rely on for trading clues. The
typical trend line I will draw will connect higher lows, signaling a bullish
trend, or lower highs, signaling a bearish trend.
The general trend line trading rules are the following:
