
exploding AT&T bonds. They were perfectly capable of turning the same
firepower on me as they used on my customers. I had done their dirty
work for a year and had only a few thousand dollars to show for it.
Money out of my pocket was money in the pocket of the man who has
sung my praises. He knew that better than I. Words were cheap. He
knew that too.
I decided, in the end, I had been taken for a ride, a view I still think is
strictly correct. I wasn't sure how many millions of dollars I had made
for Salomon Brothers-, but by any fair measure I deserved much more
than ninety thousand dollars. By the standards of our monopoly money
business, ninety grand was like being on welfare. I felt cheated, genuinely
indignant. How else could I feel? I looked around me and saw people
getting much more when they hadn't generated a penny of the revenues
themselves.
"You don't get rich in this business," said Alexander when I complained
privately to him. "You only attain new levels of relative poverty. You think
Gutfreund feels rich? I'll bet not." Wise man, Alexander. He studied
Buddhism, which he liked to use to explain his detachment. On the other
hand, he was three full years out of the training program and no longer
constrained by the band. The firm had just paid him a fantastic sum of
money. He could afford his lofty sentiment.
He had, however, put his finger on the insatiable hunger for more felt by
anyone who had succeeded at Salomon Brothers and probably at any Wall
Street firm. The hunger or, if you will, the greed took different forms,
some of which were healthier for Salomon Brothers than others. The
most poisonous was the desire to have more now: short-term greed
rather than long-term greed. People who are short-term greedy aren't
loyal. Salomon Brothers people in 1986 wanted their money now because
it looked as if the firm were heading for disaster. Who knew what 1987
would bring?
Shortly after bonus time, London traders and salespeople-along with
Ranieri's people in New York-began to stream out the door for more
money elsewhere. Big guarantees were still being made by other firms to
Salomon traders and salesmen. The older employees, who were playing
for real money, had been bitterly disappointed. They had expected, say
$800,000 and had received only $450,000. There simply wasn't enough
to go around. It had been a terrible year for the firm, yet somehow each

person individually felt he had done well.
A year after I arrived I was able to look around me and count on two
hands and a foot the number of people who had been with the firm longer
than I. All but three of the twenty or so older Europeans who had
l»
set the office pace in the age of the two-bottle lunch had left for
greener pastures. Each was quickly replaced with half a dozen geeks, so
that though people were quitting as fast as they could find other jobs,
the firm expanded.
Finding the bodies was simply not a problem. By the end of 1986 traces
of the American collegiate madness appeared in Britain. There was the
same eerie popular feeling that no job was worth taking outside
investment banking. I was called upon at the end of the year to give a
talk to the Conservative Students Society at the London School of
Economics. If there was a place on earth able to resist both a
Conservative Students Society and the temptation of Salomon Brothers,
it was the LSE, a traditional hotbed of left-wing sentiment.
The subject of my speech was the bond market. That, I figured, would
keep them away in droves. Anything about the bond market promises to
be long and dull. Yet in the event more than one hundred students turned
up, and when one seedy-looking fellow who was guzzling a beer in the
back shouted that I was a parasite, he was booed down. After the talk I
was besieged not with abuse, and not with questions about the bond
market, but with questions about how to get a job at Salomon Brothers.
One young British radical claimed to have memorized the entire starting
lineup of the New York Giants because he had heard the personnel
director at Salomon was a Giants fan (true). Another wanted to know if it
was a fact, as he had read in the Economist, that people at Salomon
Brothers didn't stab you in the back but came at you head-on with a
hatchet. What was the best way to show that he was sufficiently
aggressive? Was it possible to go too far, or should he just let it all hang
out?
At its peak in mid-1987 Victoria Plaza contained nine hundred people and
looked more like a day-care center than the flagship office of a global
empire. The ever-apposite Dash Riprock looked up one day and said,
"Just the managing directors and the kiddies." By then I knew what he
meant almost before he said it; I had an inbuilt Dash Riprock decoding

device. The average length of service of my colleagues in London fell
rapidly from six years to less than two years. Their average age, once
well into the thirties, was about twenty-five.
Throughout early 1987 a tired old joke circulated that a sign was soon to
be posted beside the exit from the trading floor: WILL THE LAST ONE
OUT PLEASE TURN OUT THE LIGHTS? Then a fresh new joke (to me,
at least) made the rounds. Only it turned out to be true. The head trader
of British government bonds (called gilts) had quit. The managing
directors of the London office fell to their knees (figuratively speaking)
and pleaded with him to stay. He was the backbone of a new and fragile
enterprise, they said. Screw backbones, he said, he had been offered
much more money by Goldman Sachs, and he was going to get while the
getting was still good. He was, after all, merely a trader trading his
services. What did they expect? They expected, they said, for him to
forget about trading for a moment and consider the importance of
loyalty to the firm.
And you know what he said to that? He said, "You want loyalty, hire a
cocker spaniel."
Chapter Ten
How Can We
Make \bu
Happier?
HERE DEVELOPED a pattern to our existence. Each month began with an
analysis of our small unit's performance, each week with an office
meeting, and each day with a series of phone calls to whoever we thought
might like to roll the dice. Dash Riprock beat me to our desk each
morning by at least an hour. He had this idea that his bonus might suffer
if a boss caught him away from his telephone. He was quite mistaken. The
bosses rightly cared far more about how much money we squeezed from
our customers than how much time we spent squeezing. Nevertheless,
Dash was shocked I had the audacity to arrive after 7:45 A . M. and
would occasionally broadcast my arrival over the hoot and holler: "I'd
just like to thank Michael Lewis for coming into work today. Give him a
big hand, ladies and gentlemen."
Then we'd lapse into what I can only describe as a stream of
consciousness communication. When we weren't talking about his future,
or how to beat the market, or the fate of Salomon Brothers, or how to

educate the three geeks who now worked for us, we jabbered at each
other like Jewish mothers. It was typical of social conversation on the
trading floor.
DASH: Saw a painting at Sotheby's today. Might buy it.
ME: Where did you get that suit?
DASH: Where's the yen?
ME: Can I borrow your Atlantic Monthly!
DASH: I bought it in Hong Kong. Four hundred bucks. Costs eight
hundred here.
ME: Who's the artist?
DASH: Yeah, but give it back. Or you're dead.
ME: Are they going to pay us at the end of the year?
DASH: Michael, do they ever pay us at the end of the year?
On one day late in the second year, September 24, 1987, the pattern was
unexpectedly broken. True, Dash huddled for privacy in his usual tuck
position. True, I was waiting for him to emerge with his usual payload so
I could tell him yet another tasteless joke about President Ronbo. But I
never got my chance. For as I waited someone shouted, "We're in play!"
Dash, finger in ear, absorbed in the art of selling bonds, didn't hear a
thing. I checked my news screens. If people still rubbed their eyes when
they didn't believe what they were seeing, that's what I would have
done. News was flashing across that Ronald O. Perelman, the rive-footfour-inch husband of a New York gossip columnist, the notorious hostile
raider who had lately conquered the cosmetic firm Revlon, was making a
bid to buy a large chunk of Salomon Brothers. His financial backer was
Drexel Burnham, and his advisers were Joseph Perella and Bruce
Wasserstein from First Boston. It was the first time Wall Street had
turned and attacked its own.
All of a sudden my telephone board looked like a clear night in the
Rockies; lights twinkled and pulsed. The customers were calling,
ostensibly to express their condolences that our firm was about to be
stormed and mutilated by a heartless predator. Theirs was a hollowsounding concern, however. They only wanted to gawk, the way people do
who gather around the scene of an accident and stare at the twisted
metal and trembling victims. More than a few were thinking that big, bad
Salomon Brothers had finally met a force in the market that was bigger
and badder still, amused that that force happened to be a leading

purveyor of ladies' cosmetics. My Frenchman was wittily unmoved. "Soon
you'll be offering free lipstick samples with every purchase of bonds
more than a million dollars, which means I will own a lot of lipstick," he
said, then hung up.
Why was a lipstick merchant coming after us? The most intriguing
answer was that it wasn't his idea. Perelman's bid could easily be seen
as a hate bomb lobbed at John Gutfreund by Drexel's junk bond king,
and Perelman's true backer, Michael Milken. Milken often lobbed hate
bombs at people who treated him badly. And Gutfreund had treated him
badly. In early 1985 Milken had visited our offices for a breakfast
meeting with Gutfreund. It started with Milken growing angry because
Gutfreund refused to speak to him as an equal. It ended in a shouting
match, with Milken being escorted from the building by a security guard.
Gutfreund subsequently cut Drexel out of all Salomon Brothers bond
deals.
Then Drexel found itself at the center of the largest SEC investigation
ever. Rather than send flowers, a Salomon Brothers managing director
mailed to Milken's clients copies of legal complaints (for extortion and
racketeering) filed against Milken by three other clients. The
relationship between Salomon Brothers and Drexel Burnham was, in
September 1987, rightly regarded as the worst between any two firms
on Wall Street.
Milken spooked Gutfreund. For all of his worldly ambition, Gutfreund
remained remarkably parochial and introverted. That's why, for example,
it never occurred to him that anyone would manage his London office but
Americans. We weren't businesspeople, and we hadn't seized the
opportunity to diversify when we were strong. We really never knew how
to do anything more than trade bonds. No one at Salomon had ever
created a substantial new business with the exception of Lewie Ranieri,
and he had eventually been buried for his troubles. Milken, on the other
hand, had built the biggest new business on Wall Street directly
adjacent to our own, and his goal was to usurp Salomon's position in the
bond markets.
"Whatever Gutfreund said," said one of my colleagues much nearer to
Gutfreund than I, "he always thought just one firm was capable of
deballing Salomon Brothers, of taking over our franchise: Drexel. He
wasn't worried about the white shoes at Morgan Stanley because he

thought our competitive drive was that much stronger. But Drexel is
tough like us. And Henry [Kaufman] was predicting a long-term decline in
the credit quality of corporate America. They were all turning to junk.
That meant our client base was drifting toward Drexel."
But it wasn't only our clients. Our employees defected to Drexel at an
alarming rate. At least a dozen former Salomon Brothers traders and
salespeople staffed Milken's eighty-five-man Beverly Hills junk bond
trading floor, and many more worked for Drexel in New York. Every
month or so another bond trader, salesman, or research analyst walked
off the side of the New York trading floor and announced to management
he was leaving for Drexel. How did Salomon management respond? "Put it
this way," says one who did, "you weren't allowed back out on the trading
floqr to collect your jacket."
The defections to Drexel were, not surprisingly, self-perpetuating.
Reports of the magical sums of money to be made working for Michael
Milken trickled back into Salomon and made us drool. One Salomon middle
executive left to join Milken in Beverly Hills in 1986. In his third month
on the new job he found an extra hundred thousand dollars in his weekly
paycheck. He knew it wasn't bonus time. He assumed Drexel's
accountants had made a mistake. He told Milken.
"No," said Milken, "it is no mistake. We just want to let you know how
happy we are with the job you are doing."
Another former Salomonite told of his first bonus with Michael Milken.
Milken handed him several million dollars more than he expected. He had
grown accustomed to Salomon Brothers' bonus sessions, where he had
rarely got more than he expected. Now he was staring at a bonus that
was bigger than John Gutfreund's entire compensation package. He sat
in his chair, stunned, like a character from the old television show "The
Millionaire." Someone had just handed him enough money to retire on,
and he didn't know how to express his gratitude. Milken watched him,
then asked, "Are you happy?" The former Salomon employee nodded.
Milken leaned forward in his chair and asked, "How can we make you
happier?"
Milken drowned his people in money. The magnificent stories had many of
us at Salomon hoping for a phone call from Milken. It also bred loyalty on
his Beverly Hills trading floor. Milken, at times, seemed to preside over a
cult. "We owe it all to one man," one Drexel trader told author Connie

Bruck. "And we are all extraneous. Michael has denuded us of ego." Every
ego has its price. One of my former fellow trainees who had gone to work
for Milken told me that, of the eighty-five who staffed the Beverly Hills
Office, "Twenty to thirty are worth ten million dollars or more, and five
or six have made more than a hundred million." Whenever a newspaper
printed an estimate of Milken's paycheck, apparently, the entire Beverly
Hills office of Drexel had a chuckle at how low it was. My friend and
others with him told me that Milken was
worth more than a billion dollars. Still, you had to wonder what gave
Michael Milken greater pleasure, making a billion dollars or watching
Gutfreund squirm as one of his biggest clients, Ronald Perelman, stalked
Salomon Brothers. "I know Michael, and I like Michael," says Lewie
Ranieri, who had been fired by Gutfreund two months before (and now
appeared like the Ghost of Christmas Past). "His epitaph should read: He
never betrayed a friend, and he never showed mercy towards an enemy."
The second way to see Perelman's bid was as retribution for the sins of
our management. Dash and I decided that a take-over of our firm was
not such a bad idea, not that anyone sought our views. We knew that
Ronald Perelman, lipstick mogul, swashbuckler, and rogue, had no clue how
to run an investment bank. But we also knew that if he succeeded in
conquering Gutfreund, the first thing he would do would be to examine
the firm as a business, instead of as an empire, which would be a new and
refreshing approach to running Salomon Brothers. No question, a lot of
corporate take-overs are shams, thinly disguised. The raiders claim that
they are going to oust lazy, stupid managers when what they really want
is to strip the assets from the company. But our take-over was a
heartwarming exception. Our assets were our people; we had no land, no
overfunded pension plan, no brand names to strip. Salomon Brothers was
an honest target. Our management deserved the ax.
The only business plan on Wall Street more sensationally wrong than the
one Salomon had already devised was the one Salomon was charting for
the coming months. We had the temperament and wisdom of a Lebanese
taxi driver: We had our foot slammed down either on the accelerator or
on the brake; we knew no moderation and had no judgment. When we had
decided we needed more space in New York, did we, like mortals, slip
quietly across the street into larger offices? No. We began construction,
with real estate developer Mort Zuckerman, of Columbus Circle, of the

biggest, most expensive real estate project to date in Manhattan. Susan
Gutfreund ordered a box of glass ashtrays with the design of our future
palace etched into the bottoms. We would eventually bail out of the
project at a cost of $107 million; she kept the ashtrays.
We had also set our sites on global domination and built the largest
trading floor in the world above a London train station. Now London
was a glorious bust and overdue for consolidation, at an estimated loss of
a hundred million dollars. The wits in the English press were referring to
us as "Smoked Salomon." We had built a giant and omnipotent mortgage
department; then we let half of it leave and fired the rest. Lewie and his
monopoly were gone, a loss of at least a few hundred million dollars more.
We had unleashed some of the world's largest egos to struggle for
power on the forty-first floor. Now, New York was plagued with
internecine strife; the price of this mistake might well be the loss of the
firm. On or off. Buy or sell. In or out. Consistency was for little minds,
not for us.
Still, our most severe misjudgments were not steps we had taken but
steps we had neglected to take. It wasn't as though investment banking
in 1987 were no longer a profitable business. On the contrary, it was
more profitable than ever before. Open any newspaper and you saw
investment bankers raking in fees of $50 million and more for a few
weeks of work. For the first time in many years other firms, not
Salomon, were making the money. Ironically, the new winners were just
those men helping Ronald Perelman in his bid to buy us: Milken,
Wasserstein, and Perella. Drexel Burnham, thanks to Michael Milken, had
replaced us as Wall Street's most profitable investment bank in 1986. It
had cleared $545.5 million on revenues of $4 billion, more than we had
made at our best.
Drexel was making its fortune in junk bonds, and that stung. We were
supposed to be Wall Street's bond traders. We were in danger of losing
that distinction, however, for our managers had failed to see how
important junk bonds would become. They thought junk was a passing
fad. That was easily their single most expensive oversight, for it
precipitated not only a revolution in corporate America, and a giddy freefor-all Wall Street, but the take-over attempt of my firm, and for that
final effect it is worth pausing for a moment to examine. I did.

Junk bonds are bonds issued by corporations deemed by the two chief
credit-rating agencies, Moody's and Standard & Poor's, to be unlikely to
repay their debts. "Junk" is an arbitrary but important distinction. The
spectrum of creditworthiness that has IBM at one end and a Beirut
cotton trading firm on the other has a break somewhere in the middle.
At some point the bonds of a company cease to be investments and
become wild gambles. Junk bonds are easily the most controversial
financial tool of the 1980s; they have been much in the news.
But they are not, it should be emphasized, new. Companies, like people,
have always borrowed money to buy things they haven't had the cash to
afford. They also borrow money because, in America at least, it is the
most efficient way to finance an enterprise; interest payments on debt
are tax-deductible. And shaky enterprises have always wanted to borrow
money. At times, as when the turn of the century robber barons built
their empires on mountains of paper, lenders have been surprisingly
indulgent. But never as indulgent as today. What is new, therefore, is the
size of the junk bond market, the array of rickety companies deeply in
hock, and the number of investors willing to risk their principal (and
perhaps also their principles) by lending to these companies.
Michael Milken at Drexel created that market, by persuading investors
that junk bonds were a smart bet, in much the same fashion that Lewie
Ranieri persuaded investors mortgage bonds were a smart bet.
Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s Milken crisscrossed the
nation and pounded on dinner tables until people began to listen to him.
Mortgages and junk made it easier to borrow money for people and
companies previously thought unworthy of the funds. Or, to put it the
other way around, the new bonds made it possible for the first time for
investors to lend money directly to homeowners and shaky companies.
And the more investors lent, the more others owed. The consequent
leverage is the most distinctive feature of our financial era.
In her book The Predators' Ball, Connie Bruck traced the rise of
Drexel's junk bond department (Milken reportedly tried to pay the
author not to publish). The story she tells begins in 1970, when Michael
Milken studied bonds at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School
of Finance. He was blessed with an unconventional mind, which overcame
his conventional middle-class upbringing (his father had been an
accountant). At Wharton he examined fallen angels, the bonds of one-

time blue-chip corporations now in trouble. At the time fallen angels
were the only junk bonds around. Milken noticed that they were cheap
compared with the bonds of blue-chip corporations even considering the
additional risk they carried. The owner of a portfolio of fallen angels, by
Milken's analysis, almost always outperformed the owner of a portfolio
of blue-chip bonds. There was a reason: Investors shunned fallen angels
out of a fear of seeming imprudent. It is a remarkably simple
observation. Like Alexander, Milken noticed that investors were
constrained by appearances and, as a result, had left a window of
opportunity open for a trader who was not. Thus the herd instinct, the
basis for so much human behavior, laid the foundation for a revolution in
the world of money.
Milken began his career that same year, 1970, in Drexel's back office.
He pushed his way onto the trading floor and became a bond trader. He
wore a toupee. Even his friends said it didn't fit him properly; his
enemies said it looked as if a small mammal had died on his head. The
parallels between Milken and Ranieri are striking. Like Ranieri, Milken
lacked both tact and couth, but not confidence. He was perfectly happy
to stand apart from his colleagues. Milken sat in a corner of the trading
floor while he created his market, ostracized until he made too much
money to be anything but the boss. Also like Ranieri, he built a team of
devoted employees.
Milken shared Ranieri's zeal. "Mike's difficulty was that he simply didn't
have the patience to listen to another point of view," a former Drexel
executive told Bruck. "He was terribly arrogant. He would assume he had
conquered a problem and go forward. He was useless in a committee, in
any situation that called for a group decision. He only cared about
bringing the truth. If Mike hadn't gone into the securities business, he
could have led a religious revival movement."
Milken is Jewish, and Drexel, when he joined, was an old-line WASP
investment bank with, he felt, an anti-Semitic streak. Milken considered
himself an outsider. That was a point in his favor. In 1979 a good guess
at who would revolutionize finance in the coming decade would have been
made as follows: Search the unfashionable corner of Wall Street;
eliminate everyone who appears to have just emerged from a Brooks
Brothers catalog, everyone who belongs or claims to belong to exclusive
clubs, and everyone who comes from a good WASP family. (Among the
