
Modules and Preferences

FIGURE 3.11 All three major U.S. exchanges are represented in the Chart
Toppers module.

55

FIGURE 3.12 You can click on any
plus sign to see the detailed results of
the scan for that particular exchange.

reveal the seven scan lists beneath that exchange. You can then click the
plus sign for any particular list to see the individual stock components. In
Figure 3.12, the 10 symbols that are making new yearly highs on the
American Stock Exchange are shown.
You can right-click on any stock symbol to add it to a watch list.
Because the markets move through the day, these lists in turn change
throughout the day. Looking at the Chart Toppers module is not only a

56

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

way to discover where the action is but is also a great way of uncovering
highly dynamic stocks that you might not yet be following.

Futures
There are hundreds of futures contracts available at any one time, and remembering the complex symbols behind them can be very difficult. The futures module neatly organizes all the futures markets, as well as the months
for which contracts are available, into a three-tier hierarchy.
The first tier are the general kinds of futures, which are:
+ E-Minis
+ Currencies
+ Energy
+ Indices
+ Interest Rates
+ Grains
+ Livestock
+ Metals
When you click on any of these categories, you will see all the months
and years for which contracts are available for the markets that reside
within these categories. The month-year combinations will be only for
those contracts that have not yet expired. In other words, even though
the database of futures extends back to the 1950s, you will only see, in
chronological order, the months and years that have not gone by yet. So
the month-year combinations displayed are the second tier of this module.
The third and final tier is the markets themselves (such as pork bellies, silver, wheat, and the like). By clicking on a particular month (such as
March 2011), you will see all the markets for which contracts are available
on that given month. Double-clicking on one of these contracts will fetch
the data for that chart.

Indices
Having an understanding of where the broad market is, and where you
think it might be going, is vital to good investing. There are many hundreds of different indices and indicators available, but only a relatively
small number are widely followed.
Many of these are household names (such as the Dow Jones Industrial
Average), but the symbols that represent some of them are not easy to
remember (such as $XMI, $COMPQ, and $NDX). ProphetCharts provides
a quick way to access any of the most popular with the Indices module

Modules and Preferences

57

FIGURE 3.13 You can have easy access to the chart of any major U.S. index with
the Indices module.

(see Figure 3.13). You can double-click on any of the items in the list (or
drag-and-drop the item from the list into the chart area) to get access to
that index.

Technical Studies
ProphetCharts has almost 200 different technical studies you can apply to
price data. These studies are covered later in the book, but for now all you
need to know is that you can access any of them from the Technical Studies
module.
When you expand this module, all of the studies are displayed in alphabetical order, as shown in Figure 3.14. You can double-click on any
study to apply it to the price chart (or drag-and-drop it onto the chart).
Once a study is applied to a chart, any other symbols you enter will have
the same study. If you double-click another study, it will replace the study
currently being used. (You will learn how to apply multiple studies in
Chapter 7.)

Breakout Studies
This module contains seven predefined study sets. They are called breakout studies because the arrows indicating when a study has broken above
or below a signal area are present (green up-arrow for upward breakout;
red down-arrow for downward breakout). As with Technical Studies, any
of the following seven studies can be applied by double-clicking the name

58

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 3.14 There are nearly 200
diﬀerent technical studies available in
ProphetCharts, any one of which is available in the Technical Studies module.

FIGURE 3.15 The Quick Toggles
module gives you one-click access to
turn settings on or oﬀ.

or by dragging and dropping it into the price chart.
1. CCI with Breakout Signals.
2. EMA with Breakout Signals.
3. MA with Breakout Signals.
4. MACD Hist. with Breakout Signals.
5. Momentum with Breakout Signals.
6. RSI, Wilder with Breakout Signals.
7. Stochastics with Breakout Signals.

Quick Toggles
The next module on the list is Quick Toggles. A toggle is sort of like an
on-off switch. In this case, there are five different items that can be toggled
on or off by checking a box (Figure 3.15). These five items are:
1. Color Bars: When checked, this makes all of the price bars represent-

ing downward movement in price turn red, as well as the corresponding volume bars.

Modules and Preferences

59

2. Hide Expansion: In Chapter 9, you will learn about expanding the

white space in a chart in order to give you more room on the time
axis (to the right of the chart) and the price axis (above and below the
chart). When this item is checked, any expansion you have done with
the expansion tool is suppressed, thus yielding a normal chart without
any extra white space. Unchecking the box puts the chart back into
expanded mode. Ctrl-F yields the same result.
3. Hide Drawn Items: When checked, this will hide all of the trend lines,
Fibonacci studies, highlights, and other items drawn with the tool bar.
This item is similar to Hide Studies in the sense that you can temporarily clean up a chart of embellishments and just look at the prices. You
can use Ctrl-D for the same results.
4. Hide Events: When checked, this will hide any corporate events, such
as stock splits, dividends, conference calls, and earnings announcements. You can use Ctrl-E for the same result.
5. Hide Grid Lines: Normally, ProphetCharts displays the familiar Cartesian coordinate grid of horizontal lines and vertical lines that are on
most charting programs. You may want to eliminate these lines for a
cleaner, simpler chart, which you can do with this checkbox or the
keyboard equivalent, Ctrl-G.
6. Hide Studies: When checked, any of the technical studies being displayed will disappear. Checking this on and off is a quick way of seeing
the pure price chart temporarily if you are using technical studies. You
can use Ctrl-S for the same effect.
7. Hide Volume: When checked, this toggle will eliminate the volume
graph. This frees up more room for the price chart, and if you’re looking at a chart that doesn’t have volume data (or you simply aren’t interested in examining the volume at that time), you should check this
box. You can use Ctrl-Space for the same effect.

Option Controls
If you trade options, you will probably find this module extremely helpful.
In it are four checkboxes that offer options charting features that are difficult or impossible to find anywhere else. The four checkboxes and their
functions are:
1. Avg. Imp. Volatility: Clicking this on will plot on a new graph pane

(beneath the price pane) the average implied volatility for a stock
graph. This data begins February 2005 and works only with stock
charts.

60

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

2. Bid-Ask Overlay: Most options are extremely thinly traded. This means

that 99.9 percent of options charts are virtually unreadable, since they
typically consist of just a few lines here and there. However, the bid
price and ask price within these options markets do change, even if
there is no trading, and the ProphetCharts servers store the bid and
ask information at the close of every day for every option. This means
that a meaningful graph, showing the true market motion of an option irrespective of its popularity, is possible. Checking the Bid-Ask
Overlay box will leave the price data on the chart, but it will also
overlay two line graphs (the upper one being ask, the lower one being bid) so you can see what the market was actually doing during
this time span. This feature works only when you are viewing an
option chart.
3. Compare with Stock: Checking this (when viewing an option graph)
will automatically load the underlying stock corresponding to this option and plot it on its own distinct axis. The stock axis will be on the left
side of the screen (to indicate price), and the option price axis will be
on the right side. This is an outstanding way of viewing how a stock’s
price movement affects an option, since the widely disparate prices
of these two instruments are reconciled by providing an independent
price axis for each.
4. Implied Volatility: This checkbox will work only for an option graph.
Turning this checkbox on will plot an implied volatility for an option
in a separate pane.

PREFERENCES IN PROPHETCHARTS
The last item in the Chart Settings menu in ProphetCharts is called Preferences. This is probably not something you will access very often, but it
has some important features that you may find helpful, some of which are
directly related to modules. Figure 3.16 shows the dialog box that appears
when you choose this item, and the following sections describe each part
of the preferences.

Appearance
This portion of Preferences controls four different elements. Let’s take a
close look at this section to understand each one. See Figure 3.17.
The Font Size dropdown menu lets you choose between Small,
Medium, and Large Fonts. The default is Small Fonts, but you may find
it difficult to read the characters on the chart, such as the data line, the

Modules and Preferences

61

FIGURE 3.16 There are many diﬀerent preferences you can set in ProphetCharts.
These will be retained in your account so you don’t have to set them each time you
use the program.

FIGURE 3.17 You can control the general appearance of ProphetCharts with the
appearance portion of the Preferences section.

62

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

quote panel, and the contents of the other modules. You can make all of
this easier to read with a larger font setting.
The Theme is the color scheme used by ProphetCharts. You can
choose a different theme to change the colors used within the program.
You should try each of the themes so you can select whatever is easiest for
you to read and most pleasing to the eye.
Study Colors lets you apply a color scheme only to the technical studies (if any) present on a chart. The choices as of this writing are Bright,
Earth, and Soft. Which theme you choose is strictly an aesthetic preference
and will not otherwise affect the chart.
Guide Line Opacity controls how heavy the guide lines (that is, the
vertical and horizontal lines that follow the cursor around) are. You can
click the up and down arrows to move this figure anywhere from as low as
0.1 (the lines will be virtually invisible) to 1.0 (the lines will be solid). Here
you can balance the trade-off between plainly visible guidelines against the
visual noise they create for you while examining a chart.

Drawing
There are two checkboxes here, each of which is extremely important to
the behavior of the program. See Figure 3.18.
“Snap to OHLC values during drawing” will, when checked, make
drawn objects snap so that drawing accurate objects is much easier. Each
price bar on a chart has an open, high, low, and close price (OHLC). If this
is not checked, as you are trying to put a drawn object on the chart, the
program will let you freely pick any pixel on the screen.
However, it’s most likely that you want to place the end point of the
drawn object on a specific part of the price bar (most typically the high
or low price). Checking this feature frees you from needing surgeon’s
hands to accurately place a drawn object on the price bars. It is usually a wise idea to have this item checked, particularly if you do a lot of
drawing.

FIGURE 3.18 You will probably want to have both of these boxes checked, since
they make using drawn objects much easier in the program.

Modules and Preferences

63

“Revert to Pointer after drawing” controls the behavior of the tool bar.
If this is not checked, the tool bar will be in what is known as a persistent mode. In this mode, once you have selected an object, that object will
remain selected until you choose another one.
In persistent mode, if you select the Trend Line tool, that tool will remain selected until you choose something else. So every time you go to the
chart and click the mouse, a new trend line will be created. If you intend
to draw a lot of trend lines (or any other particular object), this persistent
mode is handy.
Typically, since you’ll want to revert to the pointer mode after you have
drawn an object, you’ll want this checkbox checked. Most of the time you
will want to draw a single item (such as a trend line) and then be in a position to zoom in or perform some other cursor-related function, as opposed
to drawing a succession of new objects.

Italicize Items Appearing in More Than One
Watch List
Depending on how you organize your watch lists, you might want to know
if there are any duplicates among the contents of your lists. For example,
suppose you had one very large list called Core List, another called Short
Positions, and another called Long Positions. Further suppose you only
wanted a symbol to be in any one of these three lists at any given time.
If the lists are large, it is difficult to keep track, but if you mark
the checkbox to Italicize Items Appearing in More Than One Watch list,
ProphetCharts will do just that—put any symbols that are not unique to a
Watch list in italics. This will help you spot symbols appearing in multiple
places.

Enable Warnings
If checked, this will instruct ProphetCharts to provide warnings about certain functions in the program, such as the deletion of an item from a watch
list. Warnings are helpful when you are first starting to use the program
so that you have a chance to think about what you are going to do before
committing to it. As you gain expertise in the program, however, you may
not want to waste time reading these warnings, and checking this box will
suppress them altogether.

Show Item Counts
If you mark this checkbox, a sum total of the symbols in each Watch list
will appear next to the name of each Watch list. So if you have 157 symbols

64

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

in the Watch list called Focus, then the list name will appear as Focus (157)
in the Watch Lists module. Keeping a count is handy for many reasons; for
instance, if you wanted to track all the components of the S&P 100, it is
helpful to have a checksum next to the watch list you create so that you
know there are indeed 100 symbols housed in that list and that you haven’t
missed any when entering them.

Time Zone
Time is displayed in two different places on a chart—one is in the Quote
module, and another is on the x-axis of the chart when intraday data are
being displayed (and, in turn, on the data line as you move the cursor left
and right). Normally, the time used in these places is based on the local
time of the exchange where the security is traded. If you are looking at a
chart of IBM, which trades on the New York Stock Exchange, the times
shown will be in Eastern (meaning the market opens at 9:30 A . M . and
closes at 4:00 P . M .).
Perhaps you live in San Francisco. From your point of view, the market
opens at 6:30 A . M . and closes at 1:00 P . M . You can choose your time zone in
Preferences so that you don’t have to do a mental conversion of the time
when you look at it. Just choose an appropriate time zone from the list
provided.
As you can see in Figure 3.19, there are a lot of time zone options in
Preferences. Once you are satisfied with your choices, click the OK button
to apply your changes (or Cancel if you want them all ignored).
One final point is that you can also use the Other menu in
ProphetCharts as a shortcut to changing the font size, color theme, or line
color setting, as shown in Figure 3.20.

FIGURE 3.19 If you want to set the time shown for trading events to be the same
as your local time, you can do so here.

Modules and Preferences

65

FIGURE 3.20 A shortcut to some of the appearance controls in ProphetCharts is
available from the Other menu at the top of the program’s screen.

DRAGGING AND DROPPING
Because ProphetCharts uses the latest Java technology, it has access to
the most sophisticated user interface features. One of these is the ability to
drag-and-drop items from place to place.
As an illustration of what a time-saver this is, you could compare the method of moving a stock from one watch list to another in
JavaCharts (which was ProphetCharts’ predecessor) to the current product. In JavaCharts, you would need to:
1. Right-click on the symbol you want to move.
2. Choose the menu item “Move to Watch List.”
3. A dialog box of available watch lists will appear.
4. You choose a watch list from the dropdown and click OK.

With drag-and-drop, you simply click on the symbol you want to move
and drag it to its destination. As you do this, a faint ghost of what you
are dragging appears so you can easily tell what you are doing. In this example (Figure 3.21), the stock Affiliated Managers Grp is being dragged
from the Current Options watch list up to the Candidate Options list.
You can also drag any security from any module (not just watch lists)
onto the chart area to automatically load that symbol. This is often easier than manually typing in the stock symbol (which you might not even

66

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 3.21 Moving an item from one watch list to another is simply a matter
of dragging it from place to place.

know). Again, a ghost image shows in the price chart area until you release
the mouse button, causing the new chart to load. See Figure 3.22.

RIGHT-CLICKING FOR MORE ACTIONS
One last aspect of the modules section is that you can access other functions by right-clicking on the item inside most of the module lists. These
functions vary by module, so here is a snapshot of some of them.
If you store study sets, the names of those sets are in the My Study Sets
module (see Figure 3.23). Right-clicking on any of these names gives you
three choices: (1) Use This Study Set, which will apply that set to the current chart; (2) Delete This Study Set, which, after confirmation, will remove
it from your settings; and (3) Rename This Study Set, which will present a
dialog box in which you can rename any of the study sets as you wish.

FIGURE 3.22 When you drag an item from a watch list into the chart area, it will
automatically chart that item for you once you release the mouse button.

Modules and Preferences

FIGURE 3.23 Right-click on any
study set to apply, delete, or rename it.

67

FIGURE 3.24 Right-clicking on a
symbol from Chart Toppers lets you add
it to any of your watch lists.

Chart toppers gives you access to all the unusual trading activity on
the various exchanges, such as new highs and lows, biggest dollar gainers
and losers, most active securities, and so forth, all partitioned by exchange.
Going through the lists in this module, especially on days when the market
is making a major move, will usually yield at least a few interesting symbols
you would like to add to a watch list. A quick way to do this is to rightclick on the symbol, such as in Figure 3.24, and choose Add to Watch List,
which will provide you a list of your lists so you may click the appropriate
recipient.
My Chart Styles, shown in Figure 3.25, has offerings similar to My Study
Sets when you right-click on its content. That is, you can Use, Delete, or
Rename whatever chart style on which you right-click. If you have warning
messages activated, ProphetCharts will confirm whether you’re sure about
deleting anything.
The longest right-click list is within My Watch Lists (Figure 3.26). The
choices given are:

r Copy to List: Lets you take a stock and copy it to another list while at
the same time leaving it in its current list. When you select this, a dialog
box of available watch lists appears. You can choose the destination
for the selected symbol from this list.

68

FIGURE 3.25 The chart styles module gives you a quick way to apply or
delete a chart style if you right-click on
any existing style.

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 3.26 Right-clicking an item
in a watch list provides a variety of functions, including the ability to copy, move,
delete, or tag the item.

r Move to List: This is like Copy to List, except that the stock is removed from its current list. This is identical in outcome to dragging and
dropping.
r Delete: Removes the symbol from the list.
r Tag: Makes the symbol (or company name) boldface so that it stands
out from the others. This can be a very useful feature if applied properly. Tagging is a way of calling out certain stocks within a list. If you
want to pay special attention to certain securities, you can tag them,
which not only makes them easier to discern because they are bold
but also makes navigating the watch list with the arrows more powerful since you can leap directly from tagged symbol to tagged symbol. If
the symbol you are right-clicking is already tagged, this menu item is
Remove Tag.
r Labels Editor: You will learn about labels in detail in Chapter 16. This
item invokes the dialog box that lets you edit, add, and delete labels
for symbols.

Modules and Preferences

69

r Appy Label Filters: Brings up the dialog box that lets you restrict the
contents of watch lists based on the labels of the items within each one.

r Apply Label: Lets you choose which, if any, of the available labels you

would like to apply to the selected symbol. Labels that are selected will
have a check mark next to them.
You have learned a great deal about modules and preferences in this
chapter. You have learned how to exercise control over many aspects of
the chart’s appearance and how to use some of ProphetCharts features to
make applying these controls quick and easy. In the next chapter, we will
explore watch lists and chart styles to make using ProphetCharts more
efficient.

CHAPTER 4

Watch Lists and
Chart Styles

atch lists are a way of keeping your trading world organized. As
you become a more experienced trader, you will have a variety
of ideas about what to trade. Sometimes you will come across
a stock you are thinking about buying. Other times you will see stocks
you might want to short. Or you might want to start a list of companies
whose products you like, and another list of companies whose stock you
already own.
No matter how you want to organize your trading ideas, the effective
use of watch lists is the best way to handle the goal in ProphetCharts. And
this certainly doesn’t mean putting all the stocks into a single group called
“My Watch List.” This chapter will show you the mechanics of managing
watch lists (as well as chart styles) and how to use them effectively.
