
so the bull trend remained intact. In 1994 the Transports broke down from a line, but this time
it was the Industrials that refused to confirm.

roof:
weed Industrials

Transports

a fas lisst ised iss Fisea ___ iss

possible. Charts 3-3 and 3-4 feature both averages. The half-signals described
at the end of Chapter 1 have not been allowed.

There is no question that interpretation of the theory can, at times, be

very subjective. All the more reason to treat the signals as one witness in the
weight of the evidence “pie.”

fises [1997

Scenes

49
Dow Theory

. . ‘l
ignals, 1997-2001. The 1990 bull signal remained in force until
Angus $908 oben beth sere made new lows following an intermediate rally. The sel bee
for the Industrials (at the dotted vertical line) is a bit controversial because this averag ered
mad marginal new high as it had done in 1989. However, if the price action ting
pring/summer of 1998 is treated as a line formation, the signal is valid. The panei
also crossed below its 200-day moving average around this time. Alter thi rei is no pric
in which both series traced out a series of rising intermediate peaks ary ieee anaes
i high in the Industrials set in January 2000 would have been a bull sig 4 Net tho ons
were unable to confirm. True, they did make a new high in the spring of 18 but there wos
ine or intermediate test of the 1998 low. After the start of 2000, the Ir yn were ee
able to extend their rising peaks and troughs. The two horizontal lines in
points at which both series would confirm for a new bull market.

1200] : —_———,

1100 -|
1000 -
909 +

Industrials

Transports : we

3600 4
3000.4

2600-4

Summary .

* Dow theory is concerned with determining the direction of the pray
trend of the market, not the ultimate duration or size of the tren . Once
confirmed by both averages, the new trend is assumed to be in exis
until an offsetting confirmation by both averages takes P race. Both the

* Major bull and bear markets each have three distinct p ases. nthe
identification of these phases and the appearance of any divergenc oe
the normal volume/price relationship offer useful indications nat
reversal in-the major trend is about to take place. Such supp emen' 3 uy
evidence is particularly useful when the action of the price averages
selves is inconclusive.



‘Typical Parameters for Intermediate Trends 51 .

Intermediate Cycles Defined

A primary trend typically consists of five intermediate trends, three of
which form part of the prevailing trend, while the remaining two run
counter to that trend. In a bull market, the intermediate countertrends are
represented by price declines; in a bear market, they form rallies that sep-
| arate the three intermediate downwaves, as shown in Fig. 41.

It is apparent from the previous discussion that there are essentially two

T e
yp ical types of intermediate price movements. The first, which goes in the direc-

tion of the primary trend, may be called a primary intermediate price movement.
P : The second is an important price movement that lasts from 4 weeks to 3
arameters or . months, occasionally longer. It normally retraces between one-third and two-

e ; thirds of the preceding primary intermediate trend. This price movement,

Interme di at e which runs counter to the main trend, is called a secondary movement or reac-
i tion, Since a primary intermediate price movement operates in the same

Tr e nds | direction as the primary or main market trend, it almost always lasts longer

than its secondary counterpart. Its price magnitude is normally much
greater as well. ane et
| These countertrends or reactions against the main trend are notoriously
difficult to forecast in terms of character, magnitude, and duration.
| Therefore, they should generally be avoided from a trading point of view,
as they will almost invariably be subject to confusing whipsaws. By their
| very nature, they tend to fool the majority and are usually extremely

Some Basic Observations x, “treacherous. Itis possible to design successful mechanized systems based on
. s ; >
The two previous chapters discussed the main or primary trend (that is, the
price movement that corresponds to changes in economic activity over the
Primory intermediote
price movement

to have an idea of the direction and maturity of the primary trend, it is also
helpful to have some understanding of the typical character and duration of
the intermediate trend for the purpose of improving success rates in trading,

and also in assessing when the primary movement may have run its course.

Asuccessful analysis of intermediate trends for any market or stock offers en materia y
the following advantages:

course of a typical 3- to 4-year business cycle). Though itis clearlyimportant , i

Secondary
ee

Secondory
reaction
3

* Changes in intermediate trends aid in the identificati i i
( j ication of tu :
in the primary trend. oe ea pons

Primary uptrend Primary downtrend\,

Intermediate-term trading involves fewer transactions than trading of ' ;
7 (Bull market) (Beor morket \

. minor ptice movements and therefore results in lower commission costs.
ntermediate-trend reversal points occur several times a yearandcan, =; - * “ “

f bs id interpreted, enable a relatively high and quick return on |
: ; Figure 4-1 Intermediate cycles in a primary trend.

50

Bares. a



52 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

intermediate price movements, but poor or losing signals usually come from
secondary market movements that occur against the main trend.
Intermediate-term trends that move in the same direction as the primary
trend generally are easier to profit from, Traders who do not have the
patience to invest for the longer term will find that a successful analysis of
intermediate movements offers superior results, especially as the day-to-day
or minor swings are, to a large degree, random in nature and therefore even
more difficult to capitalize on. This tendency has been most pronounced
in recent years when increasingly sharp price movements have resulted from
emotional kneejerk reactions to the release of unexpected economic data.

A secondary reaction does not have to be a decline in a bull market ora
bear market rally. It can also take the form of a sideways movement or con-

solidation, under the same idea as Charles Dow’s line formation (see the
discussion in Chapter 3).

Intermediate-Term Cycles

Intermediate movements can either go with or against the main trend,
which means that there is an intermediate cycle, just as there is a primary
one. An intermediate cycle consists of a primary intermediate price move-
ment and a secondary reaction. It extends from the low of one intermedi-
ate trend to the low of the other, as shown in Fig. 42.

In a bull market, the up phase of the cycle should be longer in time and
greater in magnitude. The low on the secondary reaction should be higher

! 7
Nea
ye é

|
{
|
|
1
!
!

|
l
,
I
_ ! ___ Mtermediate-

|
ediate-
1 Y interm
_ Intermediate- Intermediate- term ovele
k term cycle term cycle ~~ “> term cycle +r +
Intermediate-
term cycle

Figure 4-2 Intermediate-term cycles.

|

53
‘Typical Parameters for Intermediate Trends

than its predecessor. In a bear market, the reverse conditions hold true (that
is, declines are longer and greater while rallies are short and sharp, b vt
less magnitude). Accordingly, technicians are alerted first to the possibi ity
of a reversal in the primary trend when a third intermediate oe ie near
i i i hether the ove!

ing completion. It is also important to note w verall 7
stmeture looks weak (strong in a bear market) as the previous intermedt
ate Jow (high) is approached and, finally, to note whether that level is

i broken on the downside (upside).
otis does not mean that primary movements can never encompass more
or fewer than three primary intermediate price movements, for often @ °y
do, Expect three as a normal event, but do not be caught off guard if the:
are fewer or more.

Causes of Secondary Reactions

Since the primary trend of stock prices is determined by the Soalase
investors to the future flow of profits, which are in tum determines >a larBe
degree by the course of the business cycle, it would seem il aa aa nto
expect longer-term movements to be interrupted by what 0: nce pro Slecep.
very uncomfortable reactions (or in the case of a bear market, very
soy ‘hows that secondary reactions occur because of technical as
tortions, which arise in the market as a result of overopaimistt (or excess
pessimism), and also because new factors emerge suggesting vat sit ss
conditions are not going to be as extreme as was originally ancicipat ed. oF
even that they are going to materialize in the opposite direction.  €xaT
ple, after the first intermediate-term rally in a bull market ‘or &e ese
reaction may develop because investors, who had discounte 2 an ns
recovery, now see some chinks appearing that might even on tan
actual decline in business conditions. Such fears eventual ly Prove
ungrounded, but are sufficient to cause a countercyclical intermediate
reaction. Another possibility might be fear of rising interest rates, which
could choke off the recovery. Since prices had discounted 2 rong recov.
ery, this change in perception causes investors to pull bac on Pp ices t
fall accordingly. At the same time, many investors get carries away a in i
the rally phase and leverage themselves up. As prices gin. ° ne snis
causes their equity to shrink and forces them to liquidate, whic

ther fuel to the price decline.

A bear vnarket rally for stocks generally takes place pecause re an

improved outlook for business conditions over what was anticipated.



Ss Ss Se Ss SS

market rally for bonds develops under the opposite set of conditions.
Corrections in commodity and currency markets all have their roots in a
changed but incorrect perception of the underlying (primary) economic
trend. The catalyst for the rally is the rush by traders and investors to cover
their short positions (for a definition and explanation of short selling, see
the Glossary). It should be added that the apparent motivating force for the
correction need not necessarily be directly linked to the outlook for busi-
néss or interest rates.

Any of these influences could be the excuse for a countercyclical inter-
mediate price movement. It could be linked to the anticipated resolution
or worsening of a political or military problem, for example. Essentially,
the change in anticipated conditions combined with the unwinding of the
technical distortions of the previous primary intermediate trend and its
associated sharp price movementis sufficient to confuse the majority. Only
when business conditions are correctly expected to change from recovery
to recession (or vice versa) is the primary trend of equities likely to
reverse.

In his excellent book Profits in the Stock Market, H. M. Gartley' pointed out
that in the 40 years ending in 1935, two-thirds of all bull market corrections
in the U.S. stock market developed in two waves of liquidation separated by
a minor rally that retraced between one-third and two-thirds of the first
decline. An observation of such corrections since 1935 also bears out the
finding that most intermediate corrections consist of two, rather than one
or three, phases of liquidation. Unfortunately, intermediate corrections
within a bear market cannot be so easily categorized since some are
one-move affairs or consist of a rally out of a small base, while still others
unfold as a very volatile sideways movement. Even though Gartley’s obser-
vations are concerned with equities, this form of correction applies to all
financial markets,

‘Lambert Gann Publishing, Pomeroy, Washington, 1981.

Typical Parameters for Intermediate Trends 55

Relationship between Primary
Intermediate Moves and
Subsequent Reactions

In Profits in the Stock Market, Gartley published a series of diagrams using the
classification of intermediate trends established by Robert Rhea. Gartley’s
conclusion was that the smaller in magnitude the primary intermediate-term move-
ment was, the larger the retracement tended to be, and vice versa. He noted that
this was just as valid for bull market reactions as for bear market rallies.
Observations of the period since 1933 for virtually all markets appear to sup-
port this hypothesis.

For example, the rally off the 1962 stock market low was only 18 percent
compared to the mean average of 30 percent between 1933 and 1982. This
represented part of a double bottom formation and therefore the first pri-
mary intermediate rally. This relatively small advance was followed by a some-
what larger 71 percent retracement. However, the ensuing rally from late
1962 until mid-1963 was 32 percent and was followed by a small 25 percent
retracement of the gain. Interested readers may wish to be satisfied that what
goes up does not necessarily come down, and vice versa.

The 1976-1980 gold bull market was very powerful, but the intermediate
corrections were quite brief. On the other hand, the rallies between 1982
and 1990 were far less strong, but were followed by corrections of much
greater magnitude proportionally.

Using Intermediate Cycles to
Identify Primary Reversals

Number of Intermediate Cycles

A primary movement may normally be expected to encompass two and a
half intermediate cycles (see Fig. 41). Unfortunately, not all primary move-
ments correspond to the norm; an occasional primary movement may con-
sist of one, two, three, or even four intermediate cycles. Furthermore, these
intermediate cycles may be of very unequal lengths or magnitude, making
their classification and identification possible only after the event. Even so,
intermediate cycle analysis can still be used as a basis for identifying the
Maturity of the primary trend in most cases.

Whenever prices are well advanced in a primary intermediate trend fol-
lowing the completion of two intermediate cycles, technicians should be

* ~“alerted to the fact that a reversal of the primary trend itself may be about

a2

4


56 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

to take place. Again, if only one intermediate cycle has been completed, the
chances of prices reaching higher levels (lower levels in a bear market) are
quite high.

Characteristics of a Final Intermediate Cycle in a Primary Trend

In addition to actually counting the number of intermediate cycles, it is also
possible to compare the characteristics of a particular cycle with those of a

primary trend’s typical pivotal or reversal cycle. These characteristics are dis-
cussed in the following section.

Reversal from Bull to Bear Market Since volume leads price, the fail-
ure of volume to increase above the levels of the previous intermediate cycle
up phase is a bearish sign. Alternatively, if over a period of 3 to 4 weeks vol-
ume expands on the intermediate rally close to the previous peak in vol-
ume but fails to move prices significantly, it represents churning and should
also be treated bearishly. Coincidence of either of these characteristics with

a downward crossover of a 40-week moving average (see Chapter 9) or a |

divergence in an intermediate-term momentum indicator (see Chapter 10)
would be an additional reason for caution.

There are essentially two broad characteristics that suggest that the down-
ward phase of an intermediate cycle could be the first downleg of a bear
market. The first is a substantial increase in volume during the price
decline. The second is a cancellation or retracement of 80 percent or more
of the up phase of that same intermediate cycle. The greater the retrace-
ment, the greater the probability that the basic trend has reversed, especially
because a retracement in excess of 100 percent means that any series of ris-
ing troughs has been broken, thereby placing the probabilities in favor of
a change in the primary trend.

Other signs would include the observation of a mega-oversold or an

extreme swing (see Chapter 10 on momentum for a full explanation of these
terms).

Reversal from Bear to Bull Market The first intermediate up phase
of a bull market is usually accompanied by a substantial expansion in vol-
ume that is significantly greater than those of previous intermediate up
phases (see Fig. 4-3). In other words, the first upleg in a bull market attracts
noticeably more volume than any of the intermediate rallies in the previ-

57

Typical Parameters for Intermediate Trends

Bull market with 372
intermediate cycles

Boar market with 2 W2
intermediate cycles

Figure 4-3 Intermediate trends and volume.

ar market. Another sign of a basic reversal occurs when prices retrace
or leest 80 percent of the previous decline. Again, the greater the propor.
tion of retracement, the greater the odds ofa reversal in the basic trend
the retracement is greater than 100 percent, the odds clearly indicate hat
a reversal in the downward trend is likely because the series of declining
will have broken down. . .
a volume normally expands substantially as the intermediate down
phase during a bear market reaches a low, a shrinkage in volume during an
intermediate decline could well be a warning that the bear market has wp
its course. This is especially true if the price does not reach a new low ur
ing this intermediate decline, since the series of declining intermediate cycli-
cal lows, which is a characteristic of a bear market, may no longer be invact
An example of this is shown in Chart 5-10, where the overall pe in
volume was seen in the June 1962 decline rather than the August to Octo T
sell-off. Chart 5-7 shows no perceptible slackening of volume at the lows, but



58 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

the volume expansion during the January rally, combined with the better-
ing of the October to November high (a 100 percent retracement), offered
a valuable clue that the bear market was over. The final decline in October
represented the down phase of the third intermediate cycle in the bear mar-
ket, which should have warned of its probable maturity. A final sign might
include a mega-overbought condition or an extreme swing. Again, please
refer to Chapter 10 for an explanation of these concepts.

Intermediate Trends in the U.S.
Stock Market, 1897-1982

Amplitude and Duration of Primary Intermediate Upmoves

Between 1897 and 1933, Robert Rhea, the author of Dow Theory, classified
53 intermediate-trend advances within a primary bull market, which ranged
in magnitude from 7 to 117 percent, as shown in Table 4-1.

Thave classified 35 intermediate-term moves between 1933 and 1982, and

the median averaged 22 percent from low to high. The results are shown
in Table 42.

Table 4-1 Primary Intermediate Upmoves, 1897-1933

Porportion of intermediate moves

Price magnitude
25 7-14
50 15-28
25 28-117
100
Median 20

Table 4-2 Primary Intermediate Upmoves, 1933-1982

Swings from low to high, percent

Duration, weeks
Mean average 30 22
Median 22 24
Range 10-105 3-137

Typical Parameters for Intermediate Trends 59

The median average primary intermediate advance since 1897 appears to
be around 20 to 22 percent. The median primary intermediate upmove in
the 1938-1982 period does not differ from that of the earlier period c as
sified by Rhea. However, the median duratiom’ appears to have increase
considerably from 18 weeks in the 1897-1933 period to 24 weeks in the
1933-1982 period.

Amplitude and Duration of Primary Intermediate Downmoves

Using Rhea’s classification, 39 cases of a primary intermediate decline
developed between 1900 and 1932, as summarized in Table 43. .

My research shows that between 1932 and 1982 there were 35 primary
intermediate declines, with a median of 16 percent (the decline was
measured as a percentage from the high). The results are summarized in
eeTke results in the 1932-1982 period did not differ appreciably from those
in the 1897-1933 period. Rhea’s median average swing was 18 percent, as
compared to the more recent 16 percent, whereas the median oan “0
the earlier period was 13 weeks, as compared to 14 weeks in the 1932-
period.

Table 4-3 Primary Intermediate Downmoves, 1900-1932

Proportion of intermediate moves Price magnitude
3-12
Pi 13-27
25 28-54 -

Median 18

Table 4-4 Primary Intermediate Downmoves, 1932-1982

Swings from high Duration (weeks)
Mean ave 18 17
Median 16 4

Range 740 3-43



ee. err

60 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Amplitude and Duration of Bull Market Secondary Reactions
Between 1898 and 1938, Rhea classified 48 cases of bull market secondaries.
In terms of retracement of the previous primary intermediate upmove, they
ranged from 12.4 to 180 percent, with a median of 56 percent. This com-
pared with a range in the 1933-1982 period from 25 to 148 percent, with a
median of 51 percent. The duration of the median in the earlier period was
5 weeks, as compared to 8 weeks between 1933 and 1982. The median per-
centage loss from the previous primary intermediate peak was 12 percent
(the mean average was 13 percent) between 1933 and 1982.

Amplitude and Duration of Bear Market Rallies

Rhea estimated that the median bear market rally retraced 52 percent of
the previous decline, which is comparable to my own median estimate of
61 percent in the 1932-1982 period. The two ranges were 30 and 116 per-
cent and 26 and 99 percent, respectively. Median durations were 6 weeks
in 1898-1933 and 7 weeks in 1932-1982. Rallies off the low averaged 12

and 10 percent for mean and median, respectively, for the 1933-1982
period. ‘

Intermediate Trends in the U.S.
Stock Market Since 1982

Charts 4-1 and 4-2 show the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Composite between
the end of 1982 and the opening of the twenty-first century. The thick ver-
tical lines approximate intermediate rally peaks and the thin ones inter-
mediate troughs. The lower panel contains an intermediate oscillator, the
intermediate KST (see Chapter 12 for an explanation), which roughly
reflects the turning points. This period encompassed the secular bull mar-
ket that began in 1982 and ended at the turn of the century. The classifi-
cation of intermediate trends was particularly difficult compared to previous
periods. I tried (as much as possible) to make the intermediate trends fit
the swings in the oscillator. Because oscillators have a tendency to lead in
bull markets, the actual peaks in the intermediate rallies usually lag those
in the KST. The two charts show that the classification of these trends is far
from a precise task and confirms earlier research between 1897 and 1982
that the range of intermediate trends varies tremendously. In the period
