
•

Chippewa, founded in 1901 as a maker of boots for loggers, today makes sturdy hiking boots and quality outdoor
work boots. It was acquired by Justin in 1985.

•

Tony Lama, which dates back to 1911, when Tony Lama,
who had been a cobbler in the U.S. Army, opened a shoerepair and boot-making shop in El Paso. The boots quickly
became a favorite of local ranchers and cowboys who valued
the good fit and long-lasting quality. In recent years, for
many the Tony Lama name has become synonymous with
high-end boots handcrafted from exotic leathers such as boa,
alligator, turtle, and ostrich, many with prices near $500. In
1990, Tony Lama Jr., chairman and CEO, agreed to merge
with archrival Justin.

Two groups of people buy Western-style boots: those who
wear them day in and day out, because they can’t imagine
wearing anything else; and those who wear them as fashion.
The first group is the heart of Justin’s customer base, but the
second group, while smaller, does have an impact on sales volume as fashion trends twist and turn.
When big-name designers like Ralph Lauren and Calvin
Klein show Western styles in their catalogs, boot sales climb. But
fashion is notoriously fickle, and the company struggled in the
late 1990s. After a peak in 1994, the sales of Western boots
began to decline. In 1999, Justin’s stock price dipped below $13.
(Continued)

73

John Justin Jr. retired in April 1999, and John Roach, former
head of the Tandy Corp., came in to lead a restructuring. In just
over a year, the new management engineered an impressive
turnaround—adding new footwear products, consolidating the
existing lines to eliminate duplicate designs, and instituting efficiencies in manufacturing and distribution. In April 2000, the
streamlined company announced first quarter results: footwear
sales rose 17 percent to $41.1 million, and both net earnings and
gross margins increased significantly.
Two months later, Berkshire Hathaway announced it had
reached an agreement to buy the company, prompting Bear
Stearns analyst Gary Schneider to comment, “This is good
news for employees. Management made all the changes last
year. They’ve already taken the tough measures necessary to
lower costs.”18
Today the boot division of Justin has 4,000 vendors and
about 35 percent of the Western footwear market; in stores that
specialize in Western apparel, some 70 percent of the boots on
the shelves are Justin brands. Most prices start at around $100.
In the higher price brackets (several hundred dollars and up),
Justin has about 65 percent of market share.

Acme Building Brands
The other division of Justin Industries is also a pioneer Texas
company that is more than a century old. Founded in 1891 in
Milsap, Texas, Acme became a Justin company in 1968, when
John Justin Jr. bought it. Today, Acme is the largest and most
profitable brick manufacturer in the country.
Because long-distance shipping costs are prohibitive, bricks
tend to be a regional product. Acme dominates its region
(Texas and five surrounding states) with more than 50 percent
of market share. In its six-state area, Acme has 31 production
facilities, including 22 brick plants, its own sales offices, and
its own f leet of trucks. Builders, contractors, and homeowners
can order bricks direct from the company, and they will be
delivered on Acme trucks. Acme sells more than one billion

74

bricks a year, each one stamped with the Acme logo, and each
one guaranteed for 100 years.
Demand for bricks is tied to housing starts and, therefore,
subject to changes in interest rates and in the overall economy.
Even a run of bad weather can affect sales. Nonetheless, Acme
fared better during the techno-crazed 1990s than the boot
companies, and today is still the chief Justin money-maker. In
addition to its bricks, Acme Building Brands includes Featherlite Building Products Corporation (concrete masonry) and
the American Tile Supply Company, maker of ceramic and
marble tiles.

The Berkshire Deal
For years Justin was largely ignored by Wall Street. With just
two divisions, it was not large enough to be a conglomerate.
Yet, operating in two different categories made it something of
a puzzlement. As John Justin noted in 1999, just before he retired, “The analysts who understand the footwear business
don’t understand the building materials business, and the other
way around.”19
Warren Buffett understands both. For one thing, Berkshire already owned several footwear companies, so he had
years to learn the industry. More to the point, he understands
stable, steady businesses that make products people never stop
needing.
And the timing was right. The company with a reputation
for more than 100 years of quality was facing rocky times; its
stock price had dropped 37 percent over the prior five years, and
there was pressure to split the company into two parts. Buffett’s
well-known preference for simple, low-tech businesses made
this a perfect fit.
When Buffett first met with John Justin in Fort Worth, he
remarked that the city reminded him of Omaha; he meant it as
a great compliment. When he looked into the two components
of the company, he saw something else he admires: franchise
(Continued)

75

quality. Both divisions of Justin have managed to turn themselves into a franchise, through a combination of top quality,
good marketing, and shrewd positioning.
Acme sells a product that most people consider a commodity.
Who, after all, can name the brand of bricks they prefer? Acme
customers, that’s who. With a skillful marketing campaign featuring football legend Troy Aikman, Acme has made itself so
well known that when Texans were recently asked to name their
favorite brand of brick, 75 percent of respondents said Acme.
That brand consciousness is reinforced every time a consumer
picks up a brick and sees the Acme logo stamped into it.
The boots, too, have established themselves as franchises.
Spend a few minutes in any Western-apparel retail outlet, and
you’ll hear customers say things like “My son is ready for some
new Justins” or “Show me what you’ve got in Tony Lamas”
more often than you hear “I’m looking for some cowboy boots.”
When they mention the boots by name, and when they’re willing to pay top price for top quality, that’s a franchise.
After the improvements of its new management team in
1999 and 2000, Justin began attracting attention. According to
Bear Stearns analyst Gary Schneider, there was widespread interest from many buyers, including Europeans, but Buffett’s
was the first offer the company seriously contemplated.20
Berkshire’s offer was for $22 per share in cash. That represented a 23 percent premium over closing stock price, but Buffett was not fazed. “It was a chance to get not only one good
business but two good businesses at one time,” he remarked.
“A double dip, in effect. First-class businesses with first-class
managements, and that’s just what we look for.” Nor, he
added, did he have plans to change anything. “We buy business
that are running well to start with. If they needed me in Fort
Worth, we wouldn’t be buying it.”21 The day after the deal
was announced, Justin’s stock price jumped 22 percent, and
Warren Buffett returned to Omaha with a brand-new pair of
ostrich-skin Tony Lamas.

76

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s

77

way to make a commodity business profitable, then, is to be the lowcost provider.
The only other time commodity businesses turn a profit is during
periods of tight supply—a factor that can be extremely difficult to
predict. In fact, a key to determining the long-term profitability of
a commodity business, Buffett notes, is the ratio of “supply-tight to
supply-ample years.” This ratio, however, is often fractional. The most
recent supply-tight period in Berkshire’s textile division, Buffett quips,
lasted the “better part of a morning.”

The Coca-Cola Company
Shortly after Berkshire’s 1989 public announcement that it owned 6.3
percent of the Coca-Cola Company, Buffett was interviewed by Mellisa Turner, a business writer for the Atlanta Constitution. She asked
Buffett a question he has been asked often: Why hadn’t he purchased
shares in the company sooner? By way of answer, Buffett related what
he was thinking at the time he finally made the decision.
“Let’s say you were going away for ten years,” he explained, “and
you wanted to make one investment and you know everything that you
know now, and you couldn’t change it while you’re gone. What would
you think about?” Of course, the business would have to be simple and
understandable. Of course, the company would have to have demonstrated a great deal of business consistency over the years. And of
course, the long-term prospects would have to be favorable. “If I came
up with anything in terms of certainty, where I knew the market was
going to continue to grow, where I knew the leader was going to continue to be the leader—I mean worldwide—and where I knew there
would be big unit growth, I just don’t know anything like Coke. I’d be
relatively sure that when I came back they would be doing a hell of a lot
more business than they do now.”22
But why purchase at that particular time? Coca-Cola’s business attributes, as described by Buffett, have existed for several decades. What
caught his eye, he confesses, were the changes occurring at Coca-Cola,
during the 1980s, under the leadership of Roberto Goizueta.
Goizueta, raised in Cuba, was Coca-Cola’s first foreign chief executive officer. In 1980, Robert Woodruff, the company’s 91-year-old
patriarch, brought him in to correct the problems that had plagued the

78

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

company during the 1970s. It was a dismal period for Coca-Cola—disputes with bottlers, accusations of mistreatment of migrant workers at
the company’s Minute Maid groves, environmentalists’ claim that
Coke’s “one way” containers contributed to the country’s growing pollution problem, and the Federal Trade Commission charge that the
company’s exclusive franchise system violated the Sherman Anti-Trust
Act. Coca-Cola’s international business was reeling as well.
One of Goizueta’s first acts was to bring together Coca-Cola’s top
fifty managers for a meeting in Palm Springs, California. “Tell me
what we’re doing wrong,” he said. “I want to know it all and once it’s
settled, I want 100 percent loyalty. If anyone is not happy, we will make
you a good settlement and say goodbye.”23
Goizueta encouraged his managers to take intelligent risks. He
wanted Coca-Cola to initiate action rather than to be reactive. He began
cutting costs. And he demanded that any business that Coca-Cola owned
must optimize its return on assets. These actions immediately translated
into increasing profit margins. And captured the attention of Warren
Buffett.

The Washington Post Company
“The economics of a dominant newspaper,” Buffett once wrote, “are
excellent, among the very best in the world.”24 The vast majority of
U.S. newspapers operate without any direct competition. The owners of
those newspapers like to believe that the exceptional profits they earn
each year are a result of their paper’s journalistic quality. The truth, said
Buffett, is that even a third-rate newspaper can generate adequate profits if it is the only paper in town. That makes it a classic franchise, with
all the benefits thereof.
It is true that a high-quality paper will achieve a greater penetration
rate, but even a mediocre paper, he explains, is essential to a community
for its “bulletin board” appeal. Every business in town, every home seller,
every individual who wants to get a message out to the community needs
the circulation of a newspaper to do so. The paper’s owner receives, in effect, a royalty on every business in town that wants to advertise.
In addition to their franchise quality, newspapers possess valuable
economic goodwill. As Buffett points out, newspapers have low capital
needs, so they can easily translate sales into profits. Even expensive

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s

79

computer-assisted printing presses and newsroom electronic systems are
quickly paid for by lower fixed wage costs. Newspapers also are able to
increase prices relatively easily, thereby generating above-average returns on invested capital and reducing the harmful effects of inf lation.
Buffett figures that a typical newspaper could double its price and still
retain 90 percent of its readership.

The McLane Company
McLane is perched on the edge of great growth potential. Now that it
is no longer part of Wal-Mart, it is free to pursue arrangements with
Wal-Mart’s competitors, such as Target and other large stores in the
United States. This, combined with the company’s focus on efficiency
and investment in enterprise-wide software systems, freight management, and point-of-sales systems among other automated processes, will
enable McLane to maintain price efficiency and service quality.
At the time Buffett bought McLane, some of the industry players,
such as Fleming and U.S. Food Service, a division of Royal Ahold,
were going through difficult times for various reasons. Although it is
doubtful that this inf luenced Buffett’s decision, it was said at the time
that if Fleming did indeed go under, an extra $7 billion worth of business would be up for grabs.

The Pampered Chef
The Pampered Chef has demonstrated a consistency that many older
businesses might well envy, with a growth rate of 22 percent each year
from 1995 to 2001. And the long-term outlook is strong. According to
the Direct Selling Association, party plan businesses raked in more than
$7 billion nationwide in 2000, an increase of $2.7 billion since 1996.
Christopher herself is not slowing down. She believes that American cupboards have plenty of room for more products and points out
that Mary Kay, a direct-sell cosmetics company, has a sales force of
600,000—giving her plenty of room to grow. Christopher is developing new products, such as ceramic serving ware, and is expanding into
Canada, the United Kingdom, and Germany. Finally, the company is
structured in such a way that it does not need a lot of capital to expand
and it has no sizable competition in its category.

6
Investing Guidelines
Management Tenets

W

hen considering a new investment or a business acquisition,
Buffett looks very hard at the quality of management. He tells
us that the companies or stocks Berkshire purchases must be
operated by honest and competent managers whom he can admire and
trust. “We do not wish to join with managers who lack admirable qualities,” he says, “no matter how attractive the prospects of their business.
We’ve never succeeded in making a good deal with a bad person.”1
When he finds managers he admires, Buffett is generous with his
praise. Year after year, readers of the Chairman’s Letter in Berkshire’s
annual reports find Buffett’s warm words about those who manage the
various Berkshire companies.
He is just as thorough when it comes to the management of companies whose stock he has under consideration. In particular, he looks
for three traits:
1. Is management rational?
2. Is management candid with the shareholders?
3. Does management resist the institutional imperative?
The highest compliment Buffett can pay a manager is that he or she
unfailingly behaves and thinks like an owner of the company. Managers
81

82

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

who behave like owners tend not to lose sight of the company’s prime
objective—increasing shareholder value—and they tend to make rational
decisions that further that goal. Buffett also greatly admires managers
who take seriously their responsibility to report fully and genuinely to
shareholders and who have the courage to resist what he has termed the
institutional imperative—blindly following industry peers.

When you have able managers of high character running businesses about which they are passionate, you can have a dozen or
more reporting to you and still have time for an afternoon nap.2
WARREN BUFFETT, 1986

All this has taken on a new level of urgency, as shocking discoveries
of corporate wrongdoings have come to light. Buffett has always insisted
on doing business only with people of the highest integrity. Sometimes
that stance has put him at odds with other well-known names in the
corporate world. It has not always been fashionable in business circles to
speak of integrity, honesty, and trustworthiness as qualities to be admired. In fact, at times such talk might have been disparaged as naive
and out of touch with business reality. It is a particularly sweet bit of
poetic justice that Buffett’s stand on corporate integrity now seems to
be a brilliant strategy. But his motivation is not strategic: It comes from
his own unshakable value system. And no one has ever seriously accused
Warren Buffett of being naive.
Later in this chapter, we look more deeply into Buffett’s responses to
these issues of ethical corporate behavior, particularly excessive executive
compensation, stock options, director independence and accountability,
and accounting trickery. He tells us what he thinks must be changed to
protect shareholder interests and gives us ideas on how investors can evaluate managers to determine whether they are trustworthy.

R AT I O N A L I T Y
The most important management act, Buffett believes, is allocation of
the company’s capital. It is the most important because allocation of
( Text continues on page 85.)

CASE IN POINT
SHAW INDUSTRIES, 2000–2002
In late 2000, Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway group agreed
to acquire 87 percent of Shaw Industries, the world’s largest carpet manufacturer, for $19 per share, or approximately $2 billion.
Although the price was a 56 percent premium over the trading
price of $12.19, Shaw’s share price had been a good deal higher
a year earlier. Buffett paid the premium because the company
had so many of the qualities he likes to see: The business was
simple and understandable, had a consistent operating history,
and exhibited favorable long-term prospects.
Carpet manufacturing is not simplistic, given the gargantuan
and complicated machines that spin, dye, tuft, and weave, but
the basic premise is simple and understandable: to make the best
carpets possible and sell them profitably. Shaw now produces
about 27,000 styles and colors of tufted and woven carpet for
homes and commercial use. It also sells f looring and project
management services. It has more than 100 manufacturing plants
and distribution centers and makes more than 600 million
square yards of carpet a year and employs about 30,000 workers.
Buffett clearly believed that people would need carpets and
f looring for a long time to come and that Shaw would be there to
provide them. That translates to excellent long-term prospects,
one of Buffett’s requirements.
What really attracted Buffett, however, was the company’s
senior management. In his 2000 annual report to shareholders,
he commented about the Shaw transaction. “A key feature of
the deal was that Julian Saul, president, and Bob Shaw, CEO,
were to continue to own at least 5 percent of Shaw. This leaves
us associated with the best in the business as shown by Bob and
Julian’s record: Each built a large, successful carpet business before joining forces in 1998.”3
From 1960 to 1980, the company delivered a 27 percent average annual return on investment. In 1980, Bob Shaw predicted
(Continued)

83

that his company would quadruple its $214 million in sales in
ten years; he did it in eight years.
Clearly, Bob Shaw managed his company well, and in a
way that fits neatly with Buffett’s approach. “You have to
grow from earnings,” Shaw said. “If you use that as your philosophy—that you grow out of earnings rather than by borrowing—and you manage your balance sheet, then you never get
into serious trouble.”4
This type of thinking is right up Buffett Alley. He believes
that management’s most important act is the allocation of capital and that this allocation, over time, will determine shareholder value. In Buffett’s mind, the issue is simple: If extra cash
can be reinvested internally and produce a return higher than
the cost of capital, then the company should retain its earnings
and reinvest them, which is exactly what Shaw did.
It was not just that Bob Shaw made good financial decisions, he also made strong product and business decisions by
adapting to changing market conditions. For example, Shaw
retrofitted all of its machines in 1986 when DuPont came out
with new stain-resistant fibers. “Selling is just meeting people,
figuring out what they need, and supplying their needs,” Shaw
said. “But those needs are ever changing. So if you’re doing
business the same way you did it five years ago, or even two
years ago—you’re doing it wrong.”5
Shaw’s strong management is ref lected in the company’s
consistent operating history. It has grown to the number one
carpet seller in the world, overcoming changing marketplace
conditions, changes in technology, and even the loss of major
outlets. In 2002, Sears, one of Shaw’s largest vendors at the time,
closed its carpet business. But the management appeared to see
those difficulties more as challenges to overcome rather than
barriers to success.
In 2002, Berkshire bought the remaining portion of Shaw
that it did not already own. By 2003, Shaw was bringing in
$4.6 billion in sales. Except for the insurance segment, it is
Berkshire’s largest company.

84

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

85

capital, over time, determines shareholder value. Deciding what to do
with the company’s earnings—reinvest in the business, or return money
to shareholders—is, in Buffett’s mind, an exercise in logic and rationality. “Rationality is the quality that Buffett thinks distinguishes his style
with which he runs Berkshire—and the quality he often finds lacking in
other corporations,” writes Carol Loomis of Fortune. 6
The issue usually becomes important when a company reaches a certain level of maturity, where its growth rate slows and it begins to generate more cash than it needs for development and operating costs. At
that point, the question arises: How should those earnings be allocated?
If the extra cash, reinvested internally, can produce an above-average
return on equity—a return that is higher than the cost of capital—then
the company should retain all its earnings and reinvest them. That is the
only logical course. Retaining earnings to reinvest in the company at
less than the average cost of capital is completely irrational. It is also
quite common.
A company that provides average or below-average investment returns but generates cash in excess of its needs has three options: (1) It
can ignore the problem and continue to reinvest at below-average rates,
(2) it can buy growth, or (3) it can return the money to shareholders. It
is at this crossroad that Buffett keenly focuses on management. It is here
that managers will behave rationally or irrationally.
Generally, managers who continue to reinvest despite belowaverage returns do so in the belief that the situation is temporary. They
are convinced that, with managerial prowess, they can improve their
company’s profitability. Shareholders become mesmerized with management’s forecast of improvements.
If a company continually ignores this problem, cash will become an
increasingly idle resource and the stock price will decline. A company
with poor economic returns, a lot of cash, and a low stock price will attract corporate raiders, which often is the beginning of the end of current management tenure. To protect themselves, executives frequently
choose the second option instead: purchasing growth by acquiring another company.
Announcing acquisition plans excites shareholders and dissuades corporate raiders. However, Buffett is skeptical of companies that need to
buy growth. For one thing, it often comes at an overvalued price. For
( Text continues on page 89.)
