
After more than 55 years in this business, I have absolutely no idea how to forecast these swings in investor
emotions.* But, largely because the arithmetic of investing
is so basic, I can forecast the long-term economics of investing with remarkably high odds of success. Why? Simply, it is
* I’m not alone. I don’t know anyone who has done so successfully, or even
anyone who knows anyone who has done so. In fact, 70 years of financial research show that no one has done so.

R AT I O N A L E X U B E R A N C E

[19]

investment returns—the earnings and dividends generated by
American business—that are almost entirely responsible for
the returns delivered in our stock market. Put another way,
while illusion (the momentary prices we pay for stocks) often
loses touch with reality (the intrinsic values of our corporations), in the long run it is reality that rules.
To drive this point home, think of investing as consisting
of two different games. Here’s how Roger Martin, dean of
the Rotman School of Management of the University of
Toronto, describes them. One is “the real market, where
giant publicly held companies compete. Where real companies spend real money to make and sell real products and
services, and, if they play with skill, earn real profits and pay
real dividends. This game also requires real strategy, determination, and expertise; real innovation and real foresight.”
Loosely linked to this game is another game, the expectations market. Here, “prices are not set by real
things like sales margins or profits. In the short-term,
stock prices go up only when the expectations of investors
rise, not necessarily when sales, margins, or profits rise.”

The stock market is a giant distraction.

To this crucial distinction, I would add that the expectations market is not only a product of the expectations of
active investors but the expectations of active speculators,

[20]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

trying to guess what these investors will expect, and how
they will act as each new bit of information finds its way
into the marketplace. The expectations market is about
speculation. The real market is about investing. The only
logical conclusion: the stock market is a giant distraction
that causes investors to focus on transitory and volatile investment expectations rather than on what is really important—the gradual accumulation of the returns earned by
corporate business.
My advice to investors is to ignore the short-term
noise of the emotions reflected in our financial markets
and focus on the productive long-term economics of our
corporate businesses. Shakespeare could have been describing the inexplicable hourly and daily—sometimes even
yearly or longer—fluctuations in the stock market when he
wrote, “[It is] like a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing.” The way to investment success
is to get out of the expectations market of stock prices and
cast your lot with the real market of business.
Don’t Take My Word for It
Simply heed the timeless distinction made by Benjamin Graham, legendary investor, author of The Intelligent Investor and mentor to Warren Buffett. He
was right on the money when he put his finger on the

R AT I O N A L E X U B E R A N C E

essential reality of investing: “In the short run the stock
market is a voting machine . . . (but) in the long run it is
a weighing machine.” Ben Graham continues, using his
wonderful metaphor of “Mr. Market.” “The investor
with a portfolio of sound stocks should expect their
prices to fluctuate and should neither be concerned
by sizable declines nor become excited by sizable advances. He should always remember that market quotations are there for his convenience, either to be
taken advantage of or to be ignored.
“Imagine that in some private business you own a
small share which cost you $1,000. One of your partners, named Mr. Market, is very obliging indeed.
Every day he tells you what he thinks your interest is
worth and furthermore offers either to buy you out
or to sell you an additional interest on that basis.
Sometimes his idea of value appears plausible and
justified by business developments and prospects.
Often, on the other hand, Mr. Market lets his enthusiasm or his fears run away with him, and the value he
proposes seems little short of silly.
“If you are a prudent investor will you let Mr.
Market’s daily communication determine your view
as the value of your $1,000 interest in the enterprise? Only in case you agree with him or in case
you want to trade with him. Most of the time you
(continued)

[21]

[22]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

will be wiser to form your own ideas of the value of
your holdings. The true investor . . . will do better if
he forgets about the stock market and pays attention to
his dividend returns and to the operating results of his
companies.”

C

te r Thre

e

hap

Cast Your Lot
with Business


Rely on Occam’s Razor
to Win by Keeping It Simple.

SO HOW DO YOU cast your lot with business? Simply by
buying a portfolio that owns the shares of every business
in the United States and then holding it forever. It is a
simple concept that guarantees you will win the investment game played by most other investors who—as a
group—are guaranteed to lose.
Please don’t equate simplicity with stupidity. Way back
in 1320, William of Occam expressed it well, essentially setting forth this precept: When there are multiple solutions to

[24]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

a problem, choose the simplest one.* And so Occam’s
Razor came to represent a major principle of scientific inquiry. By far the simplest way to own all of U.S. business is
to hold the total stock market portfolio.

Occam’s Razor: When there are multiple
solutions to a problem, choose the simplest one.

For most of the past 80 years, the accepted stock market portfolio was represented by the Standard & Poor’s
500 Index (the S&P 500), which was created in 1926 and
now lists 500 stocks. It is essentially composed of the 500
largest U.S. corporations, weighted by the value of their
market capitalizations.† In recent years, these 500 stocks
have represented about 80 percent of the market value of
all U.S. stocks. The beauty of such a cap-weighted index
is that it automatically adjusts to changing stock prices and
never has to buy and sell stocks for that reason.
With the enormous growth of corporate pension funds
between 1950 and 1990, it was an ideal measurement standard, the benchmark or hurdle rate that would be the comparative standard for how their professional managers were
performing. Today, the S&P 500 remains a valid standard
* William of Occam expressed it more elegantly: “Entities should not be
multiplied unnecessarily.” But the point is unmistakable.
† The S&P Index originally included just 90 companies, rising to 500 in 1957.

C A S T Y O U R L OT W I T H B U S I N E S S

[25]

against which to compare the returns earned by the professional managers of pension funds and mutual funds.
In 1970, an even more comprehensive measure of the
U.S. stock market was developed. Originally called the
Wilshire 5000, it is now named the Dow Jones Wilshire
Total Stock Market Index. It includes some 4,971 stocks, including the 500 stocks in the S&P 500. However, because
its component stocks also are weighted by their market capitalization, those remaining 4,471 stocks account for only
about 20 percent of its value. Nonetheless, this broadest of
all U.S. stock indexes is the best measure of the aggregate
value of stocks, and therefore a superb measure of the returns earned in U.S. stocks by all investors as a group.
The two indexes have a similar composition. Exhibit
3.1 shows the 12 largest stocks in each, and their weight
in the construction of each index.
Given the similarity of these two portfolios, it is hardly
surprising that the two indexes have earned returns that are
in lockstep with one another. The Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago has gone back to
1926 and calculated the returns earned by all U.S. stocks.
(Its data since 1970 have provided a virtually perfect match
to the Total Stock Market Index.) In fact, returns of the two
indexes parallel one another with near precision. From
1928, the beginning of the measurement period, through
2006, you can hardly tell them apart (Exhibit 3.2).

[26]
$11.9 trillion

Total market cap

Weighting
3.2%
3.0
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.2
21.7%
33.5
64.3
100.0

Rank

S&P 500

Total market cap

1. Exxon Mobil
2. General Electric
3. Citigroup
4. Bank of America
5. Microsof t
6. Procter & Gamble
7. Johnson & Johnson
8. Pfizer
9. Altria Group
10. J.P. Morgan
11. Chevron
12. American International Group
Top 12
Top 25
Top 100
Top 500

Rank

Total Stock Market Index

$15 trillion

2.6%
2.4
1.7
1.5
1.5
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.0
1.0
0.9
17.1%
26.3
50.5
81.0

Weighting

S&P 500 versus Total Stock Market Index: Portfolio Comparison, July 2006

1. Exxon Mobil
2. General Electric
3. Citigroup
4. Bank of America
5. Microsof t
6. Procter & Gamble
7. Johnson & Johnson
8. Pfizer
9. American International Group
10. Altria Group
11. J.P. Morgan
12. Chevron
Top 12
Top 25
Top 100
Top 500

EXHIBIT 3.1

C A S T Y O U R L OT W I T H B U S I N E S S
EXHIBIT 3.2

[27]

S&P 500 and the Total Stock Market Index

$10,000
Total Market
S&P 500
Correlation:

$1,000

Annual Return
10.2%
10.4%
98.0%

$100

$10

$1

61
19
67
19
73
19
79
19
85
19
91
19
97
20
03
20
06

55

49

43

19

19

19

37

19

19

19
31

$0

For the full period, the average annual return on the
S&P 500 was 10.3 percent; the return on the Total Stock
Market Index was 10.1 percent. This represents what we
call a period dependent outcome—everything depends on the
starting date and the ending date. If we were to begin the
comparison at the beginning of 1930 instead of 1926, the returns of the two would be identical: 9.9 percent per year.
Yes, there are variations over the interim periods: the
S&P 500 was much the stronger from 1982 to 1990,
when its annual return of 15.6 percent outpaced the Total
Stock Market Index return of 14.0 percent. But in recent
years (1998 to 2006), small- and mid-cap stocks did better, and the Total Stock Market Index return of 3.4 percent per year nicely exceeded the 2.4 percent return of

[28]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

the S&P 500. But with a long-term correlation of 0.98
between the returns of the two indexes (1.0 is perfect correlation), there is little to choose between them.
Whichever measure we use, it should now be obvious
that the returns earned by the publicly held corporations
that compose the stock market must of necessity equal
the aggregate gross returns earned by all investors in that
market as a group. Equally obvious, as discussed in Chapter 4, the net returns earned by these investors must of
necessity fall short of those aggregate gross returns by
the amount of intermediation costs they incur. Our common sense tells us the obvious; while owning the stock
market over the long term is a winner’s game, beating the
stock market is a loser’s game.

If the data do not prove that indexing wins, well,
the data are wrong.

Such an all-market fund is guaranteed to outpace over
time the returns earned by equity investors as a group.
Once you recognize this fact, you can see that the index
fund is guaranteed to win not only over time, but every
year, and every month and week, even every minute of the
day. Because no matter how long or short the time frame,
the gross return in the stock market, minus intermediation costs, equals the net return earned by investors as a

C A S T Y O U R L OT W I T H B U S I N E S S

[29]

group. If the data do not prove that indexing wins, well,
the data are wrong.
Over the short term, however, it doesn’t always look as
if the S&P 500 (still the most common basis of comparison
for mutual funds and pension plans) or the Total Stock
Market Index is winning. That is because there is no possible way to calculate the returns earned by the millions of
diverse participants, amateur and professional alike, Americans and foreign investors, in the U.S. stock market.
So what we do in the mutual fund field is calculate
the returns of the various funds, counting each fund—
instead of each fund’s assets—as one entry. Since there
are many small-cap and mid-cap funds, usually with relatively modest asset bases, they make a disproportionate impact on the data. When small- and midcap funds are leading the total market, the all-market
index fund seems to lag. When small- and midcap stocks are lagging the market, the index fund looks
formidable indeed.
Nonetheless, the exercise of calculating how the returns earned by the stock market compare with returns
earned by the average equity fund is both illuminating and
persuasive (Exhibit 3.3). If we compare the results of
what are described as “large-cap core” funds with the returns of the S&P 500 (because of its market capitalization
weightings, a “large-cap core” index), the advantage of
the S&P Index is impressive.

[30]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING
Large-Cap Core Funds Outperformed by S&P 500

20
06

20
04

20
01

98
19

19
95

89

6

19
92

19

19
8

80

19
83

19

77

74

19

19

19
71

19
68

Percent

EXHIBIT 3.3

During the 39-year period 1968 to 2006, the S&P
500 fell into the bottom quartile in only two years (and
has not done so since 1979). The Index has outpaced the
average fund in 26 of the remaining 35 years, including 11
of the past 15 years. Its average ranking was in the 58th
percentile (outperforming 58 percent of the comparable
actively managed funds), leading, as we will show in
Chapter 4, to enormous superiority over time. It is hard
to imagine that even a single one of the large-cap core equity funds has a similar record of consistency.
Consistency matters. A fund that is good or very good
in the vast majority of years produces a far larger longterm return than a fund that is superb in half the years and
a disaster in the remaining half. Single-year rankings,

C A S T Y O U R L OT W I T H B U S I N E S S

[31]

then, ignore the sheer arithmetic advantage of that consistency. In the next chapter, the impact of that long-term
consistency is catalogued over the past 25 years.
These annual data are what we call survivor-biased;
they exclude the records of the inevitably poorer performing funds that regularly go out of business. As a result of
this noise in the data, the chart further understates the
success of the market-owning index strategy.
Much criticism has been heaped on the S&P 500
for often picking “new economy” stocks such as JDS
Uniphase and Yahoo! near their inflated peak prices
during the bubble, just before they crashed, thereby
taking on a growth bias at exactly the wrong time.
While the criticism is valid, the excellent long-term
record of the flawed Index belies the existence of a significant problem. In fact, since the market peaked early
in 2000 (as shown in Exhibit 3.3), the S&P 500 has had
only a single significantly subpar year (2000), three
years at about par, and three years (2003, 2004, and
2006) in the top quartile of its peers. I imagine that the
vast majority of money managers would have been ecstatic with such an outcome.

The record of the first index mutual fund: $15,000
invested in 1976; value in 2006, $461,771.

[32]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Thus, the recent era not only has failed to erode, but has
nicely enhanced the lifetime record of the world’s first index
fund—now known as Vanguard 500 Index Fund. Let me be
specific: at a dinner on September 20, 2006, celebrating the
30th anniversary of the fund’s initial public offering, the
counsel for the fund’s underwriters reported that he had
purchased 1,000 shares at the original offering price of
$15.00 per share—a $15,000 investment. He proudly announced that the value of his holding that evening (including
shares acquired through reinvesting the fund’s dividends and
distributions over the years) was $461,771. Now, there’s a
number that requires no comment.*
This cumulative long-term winning record confirms
that owning American business through a broadly diversified index fund is not only logical but, to say the least, incredibly productive. Equally important, it is consistent
with the age-old principle expressed by Sir William of
Occam: instead of joining the crowd of investors who
dabble in complex machinations to pick stocks and try to
outguess the stock market (two inevitably fruitless tasks
for investors in the aggregate), choose the simplest of all
solutions—buy and hold the market portfolio.

*Well, maybe one comment. Of the 360 equity mutual funds then in existence, only 211 remain.

C A S T Y O U R L OT W I T H B U S I N E S S

Don’t Take My Word for It
Hear David Swensen, widely respected chief investment officer of the Yale University Endowment
Fund. “A minuscule 4 percent of funds produce
market-beating after-tax results with a scant 0.6 percent (annual) margin of gain. The 96 percent of
funds that fail to meet or beat the Vanguard 500
Index Fund lose by a wealth-destroying margin of
4.8 percent per annum.”
The simple index fund solution has been
adopted as a cornerstone of investment strategy for
many of the nation’s pension plans operated by our
giant corporations and state and local governments.
Indexing is also the predominant strategy for the
largest of them all, the retirement plan for federal
government employees, the Federal Thrift Savings
Plan (TSP). The plan has been a remarkable success, and now holds some $173 billion of assets for
the benefit of our public servants and members of
armed services. All contributions and earnings are
tax-deferred until withdrawal, much like the corporate 401(k) thrift plans. (Overcoming what must
have been some serious reservations, even the Bush
administration determined to follow the TSP model
in its plan for Personal Savings Accounts as an optional alternative to our Social Security program.)
(continued)

[33]

[34]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Indexing is also praised across the Atlantic
“pond.” Listen to these words from Jonathan
Davis, columnist for London’s The Spectator:
“Nothing highlights better the continuing gap between rhetoric and substance in British financial
services than the failure of providers here to emulate Jack Bogle’s index fund success in the United
States. Every professional in the City knows that
index funds should be core building blocks in any
long-term investor’s portfolio. Since 1976, the
Vanguard index fund has produced a compound
annual return of 12 percent, better than threequarters of its peer group. Yet even 30 years on, ignorance and professional omerta still stand in the
way of more investors enjoying the fruits of this unsung hero of the investment world.”

ap
Ch

t e r F ou

r

How Most Investors
Turn a Winner’s Game
into a Loser’s Game


“The Relentless Rules
of Humble Arithmetic”
BEFORE WE TURN TO the success of indexing as an investment strategy, let’s explore in a bit more depth just why it is
that investors as a group fail to earn the returns that our
corporations generate through their dividends and earnings
growth, ultimately reflected in the prices of their stocks. To
understand why they do not, we need only to recognize the
simple mathematics of investing: All investors as a group
must necessarily earn precisely the market return, but only
before the costs o f investing are deducted.

[36]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

After subtracting the costs of financial intermediation—all those management fees, all those brokerage
commissions, all those sales loads, all those advertising
costs, all those operating costs—the returns of investors
as a group must, and will, and do fall short of the market
return by an amount precisely equal to the aggregate
amount of those costs. In a market that returns 10 percent, we investors together earn a gross return of 10 percent. (Duh!) But after we pay our financial
intermediaries, we pocket only what remains. (And we
pay them whether our returns are positive or negative!)
There are, then, these two certainties: (1) Beating the
market before costs is a zero-sum game; (2) Beating the
market after costs is a loser’s game. The returns earned
by investors in the aggregate inevitably fall well short of
the returns that are realized in our financial markets. How
much do those costs come to? For individual investors
holding stocks directly, trading costs average about 1.5
percent per year. That cost is lower (about 1 percent) for
those who trade infrequently, and much higher for investors who trade frequently (for example, 3 percent for
investors who turn their portfolios over at a rate above 200
percent per year).
In equity mutual funds, management fees and operating expenses—combined, called the expense ratio—average about 1.5 percent per year of fund assets. Then add,

T U R N I N G A W I N N E R ’ S G A M E I N TO A L O S E R ’ S G A M E

[37]

say, another 0.5 percent in sales charges, assuming that a
5 percent initial sales charge is spread over a 10-year
holding period. If the shares are held for five years, the
cost would be twice that figure—1 percent per year.
But then add a giant additional cost, all the more pernicious by being invisible. I am referring to the hidden cost
of portfolio turnover, estimated at a full 1 percent per year.
The average fund turns its portfolio over at a rate of about
100 percent per year, meaning that a $5 billion fund buys
$5 billion of stocks each year and sells another $5 billion.
At that rate, brokerage commissions, bid-ask spreads, and
market impact costs add a major layer of additional costs.

We investors as a group get precisely what we don’t
pay for. So if we pay nothing, we get everything.

Result: the “all-in” cost of equity fund ownership can
come to as much as 3 percent to 3.5 percent per year.* So
yes, costs matter. The grim irony of investing, then, is
that we investors as a group not only don’t get what we
pay for. We get precisely what we don’t pay for. So if we
pay nothing, we get everything. It’s only common sense.
* I’ve ignored the hidden opportunity cost that fund investors pay. Most equity
funds hold about 5 percent in cash reserves. If stocks earn a 10 percent return
and these reserves earn 4 percent, that cost would add another 0.30 percent to
the annual cost (5 percent multiplied by the 6 percent differential in earnings).
