Extraordinary Popular Delusions And The Madness Of Crowds
By Charles MacKay
1841
Copyright 2001 by Litrix Reading Room
Search for this book on Amazon.Com:
Donate to Litrix?
"Il est bon de connaitre les delires de l'esprit humain. Chaque people a ses folies plus ou
moins grossieres." - MILLOT

Contents
VOL I. -- NATIONAL DELUSIONS
THE MISSISSIPPI SCHEME
THE SOUTH SEA BUBBLE
THE TULIPOMANIA.
RELICS.
MODERN PROPHECIES.
POPULAR ADMIRATION FOR GREAT THIEVES.
INFLUENCE OF POLITICS AND RELIGION ON THE HAIR AND BEARD.
DUELS AND ORDEALS
THE LOVE OF THE MARVELLOUS AND THE DISBELIEF OF THE TRUE.
POPULAR FOLLIES IN GREAT CITIES
THE O.P. MANIA.
THE THUGS, or PHANSIGARS.
VOL. II - PECULIAR FOLLIES
THE CRUSADES
THE WITCH MANIA.
THE SLOW POISONERS.
HAUNTED HOUSES.
VOL. III -- BOOK I: Philosophical Delusions
THE ALCHYMISTS
GEBER.
ALFARABI.
AVICENNA.
ALBERTUS MAGNUS and THOMAS AQUINA.
ARTEPHIUS.
ALAIN DE LISLE.
ARNOLD DE VILLENEUVE.
PIETRO D'APONE.
RAYMOND LULLI.
ROGER BACON.
Pope John XXII.
Jean De Meung
NICHOLAS FLAMEL.
GEORGE RIPLEY.
BASIL VALENTINE.
BERNARD of TREVES.
TRITHEMIUS.
THE MARECHAL DE RAYS.
JACQUES COEUR.

PART II.
AUGURELLO.
CORNELIUS AGRIPPA.
PARACELSUS.
GEORGE AGRICOLA.
DENIS ZACHAIRE.
DR. DEE and EDWARD KELLY.
THE COSMOPOLITE.
SENDIVOGIUS.
THE ROSICRUCIANS.
JACOB BOHMEN.
MORMIUS.
BORRI.
INFERIOR ALCHYMISTS OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.
JEAN DELISLE.
ALBERT ALUYS.
THE COUNT DE ST. GERMAIN
CAGLIOSTRO
PRESENT STATE OF ALCHYMY.
VOL. III -- BOOK II: FORTUNE TELLING
VOL. III -- BOOK III: THE MAGNETISERS
The Magnetisers - 1
The Magnetisers - 2
The Magnetisers - 3
The Magnetisers - 4
The Magnetisers - 5
The Magnetisers - 6

VOL. I -- NATIONAL DELUSIONS.
N'en deplaise a ces fous nommes sages de Grece;
En ce monde il n'est point de parfaite sagesse;
Tous les hommes sont fous, et malgre tous leurs soins,
Ne different entre eux que du plus ou du moins.
-- BOILEAU.
In reading the history of nations, we find that, like individuals, they have their whims and
their peculiarities; their seasons of excitement and recklessness, when they care not what
they do. We find that whole communities suddenly fix their minds upon one object, and
go mad in its pursuit; that millions of people become simultaneously impressed with one
delusion, and run after it, till their attention is caught by some new folly more captivating
than the first. We see one nation suddenly seized, from its highest to its lowest members,
with a fierce desire of military glory; another as suddenly becoming crazed upon a
religious scruple, and neither of them recovering its senses until it has shed rivers of
blood and sowed a harvest of groans and tears, to be reaped by its posterity. At an early
age in the annals of Europe its population lost their wits about the Sepulchre of Jesus, and
crowded in frenzied multitudes to the Holy Land: another age went mad for fear of the
Devil, and offered up hundreds of thousands of victims to the delusion of witchcraft. At
another time, the many became crazed on the subject of the Philosopher's Stone, and
committed follies till then unheard of in the pursuit. It was once thought a venial offence
in very many countries of Europe to destroy an enemy by slow poison. Persons who
would have revolted at the idea of stabbing a man to the heart, drugged his pottage
without scruple. Ladies of gentle birth and manners caught the contagion of murder, until
poisoning, under their auspices, became quite fashionable. Some delusions, though
notorious to all the world, have subsisted for ages, flourishing as widely among civilized
and polished nations as among the early barbarians with whom they originated, -- that of
duelling, for instance, and the belief in omens and divination of the future, which seem to
defy the progress of knowledge to eradicate entirely from the popular mind. Money,
again, has often been a cause of the delusion of multitudes. Sober nations have all at once
become desperate gamblers, and risked almost their existence upon the turn of a piece of
paper. To trace the history of the most prominent of these delusions is the object of the
present pages. Men, it has been well said, think in herds; it will be seen that they go mad
in herds, while they only recover their senses slowly, and one by one.
In the present state of civilization, society has often shown itself very prone to run a
career of folly from the last-mentioned cases. This infatuation has seized upon whole
nations in a most extraordinary manner. France, with her Mississippi madness, set the
first great example, and was very soon imitated by England with her South Sea Bubble.
At an earlier period, Holland made herself still more ridiculous in the eyes of the world,
by the frenzy which came over her people for the love of Tulips. Melancholy as all these
delusions were in their ultimate results, their history is most amusing. A more ludicrous
and yet painful spectacle, than that which Holland presented in the years 1635 and 1636,
or France in 1719 and 1720, can hardly be imagined. Taking them in the order of their

importance, we shall commence our history with John Law and the famous Mississippi
scheme of the years above mentioned.
.

THE MISSISSIPPI SCHEME
Some in clandestine companies combine;
Erect new stocks to trade beyond the line;
With air and empty names beguile the town,
And raise new credits first, then cry 'em down;
Divide the empty nothing into shares, And set the crowd together by the ears.
-- Defoe.
The personal character and career of one man are so intimately connected with the great
scheme of the years 1719 and 1720, that a history of the Mississippi madness can have no
fitter introduction than a sketch of the life of its great author, John Law. Historians are
divided in opinion as to whether they should designate him a knave or a madman. Both
epithets were unsparingly applied to him in his lifetime, and while the unhappy
consequences of his projects were still deeply felt. Posterity, however, has found reason
to doubt the justice of the accusation, and to confess that John Law was neither knave nor
madman, but one more deceived than deceiving; more sinned against than sinning. He
was thoroughly acquainted with the philosophy and true principles of credit. He
understood the monetary question better than any man of his day; and if his system fell
with a crash so tremendous, it was not so much his fault as that of the people amongst
whom he had erected it. He did not calculate upon the avaricious frenzy of a whole
nation; he did not see that confidence, like mistrust, could be increased, almost ad
infinitum, and that hope was as extravagant as fear. How was he to foretell that the
French people, like the man in the fable, would kill, in their frantic eagerness, the fine
goose he had brought to lay them so many golden eggs? His fate was like that which may
be supposed to have overtaken the first adventurous boatman who rowed from Erie to
Ontario. Broad and smooth was the river on which he embarked; rapid and pleasant was
his progress; and who was to stay him in his career? Alas for him! the cataract was nigh.
He saw, when it was too late, that the tide which wafted him so joyously along was a tide
of destruction; and when he endeavoured to retrace his way, he found that the current was
too strong for his weak efforts to stem, and that he drew nearer every instant to the
tremendous falls. Down he went over the sharp rocks, and the waters with him. He was
dashed to pieces with his bark, but the waters, maddened and turned to foam by the rough
descent, only boiled and bubbled for a time, and then flowed on again as smoothly as
ever. Just so it was with Law and the French people. He was the boatman and they were
the waters.
John Law was born at Edinburgh in the year 1671. His father was the younger son of an
ancient family in Fife, and carried on the business of a goldsmith and banker. He amassed
considerable wealth in his trade, sufficient to enable him to gratify the wish, so common
among his countrymen, of adding a territorial designation to his name. He purchased with
this view the estates of Lauriston and Randleston, on the Frith of Forth on the borders of
West and Mid Lothian, and was thenceforth known as Law of Lauriston. The subject of
our memoir, being the eldest son, was received into his father's counting-house at the age
of fourteen, and for three years laboured hard to acquire an insight into the principles of

banking, as then carried on in Scotland. He had always manifested great love for the
study of numbers, and his proficiency in the mathematics was considered extraordinary in
one of his tender years. At the age of seventeen he was tall, strong, and well made; and
his face, although deeply scarred with the small-pox, was agreeable in its expression, and
full of intelligence. At this time he began to neglect his business, and becoming vain of
his person, indulged in considerable extravagance of attire. He was a great favourite with
the ladies, by whom he was called Beau Law, while the other sex, despising his foppery,
nicknamed him Jessamy John. At the death of his father, which happened in 1688, he
withdrew entirely from the desk, which had become so irksome, and being possessed of
the revenues of the paternal estate of Lauriston, he proceeded to London, to see the
world.
He was now very young, very vain, good-looking, tolerably rich, and quite uncontrolled.
It is no wonder that, on his arrival in the capital, he should launch out into extravagance.
He soon became a regular frequenter of the gaming-houses, and by pursuing a certain
plan, based upon some abstruse calculation of chances, he contrived to gain considerable
sums. All the gamblers envied him his luck, and many made it a point to watch his play,
and stake their money on the same chances. In affairs of gallantry he was equally
fortunate; ladies of the first rank smiled graciously upon the handsome Scotchman -- the
young, the rich, the witty, and the obliging. But all these successes only paved the way
for reverses. After he had been for nine years exposed to the dangerous attractions of the
gay life he was leading, he became an irrecoverable gambler. As his love of play
increased in violence, it diminished in prudence. Great losses were only to be repaired by
still greater ventures, and one unhappy day he lost more than he could repay without
mortgaging his family estate. To that step he was driven at last. At the same time his
gallantry brought him into trouble. A love affair, or slight flirtation, with a lady of the
name of Villiers [Miss Elizabeth Villiers, afterwards Countess of Orkney] exposed him to
the resentment of a Mr. Wilson, by whom he was challenged to fight a duel. Law
accepted, and had the ill fortune to shoot his antagonist dead upon the spot. He was
arrested the same day, and brought to trial for murder by the relatives of Mr. Wilson. He
was afterwards found guilty, and sentenced to death. The sentence was commuted to a
fine, upon the ground that the offence only amounted to manslaughter. An appeal being
lodged by a brother of the deceased, Law was detained in the King's Bench, whence, by
some means or other, which he never explained, he contrived to escape; and an action
being instituted against the sheriffs, he was advertised in the Gazette, and a reward
offered for his apprehension. He was described as "Captain John Law, a Scotchman, aged
twenty-six; a very tall, black, lean man; well shaped, above six feet high, with large
pockholes in his face; big nosed, and speaking broad and loud." As this was rather a
caricature than a description of him, it has been supposed that it was drawn up with a
view to favour his escape. He succeeded in reaching the Continent, where he travelled for
three years, and devoted much of his attention to the monetary and banking affairs of the
countries through which he passed. He stayed a few months in Amsterdam, and
speculated to some extent in the funds. His mornings were devoted to the study of finance
and the principles of trade, and his evenings to the gaming-house. It is generally believed
that he returned to Edinburgh in the year 1700. It is certain that he published in that city

his "Proposals and Reasons for constituting a Council of Trade." This pamphlet did not
excite much attention.
In a short time afterwards he published a project for establishing what he called a Landbank [The wits of the day called it a sand-bank, which would wreck the vessel of the
state.], the notes issued by which were never to exceed the value of the entire lands of the
state, upon ordinary interest, or were to be equal in value to the land, with the right to
enter into possession at a certain time. The project excited a good deal of discussion in
the Scottish parliament, and a motion for the establishment of such a bank was brought
forward by a neutral party, called the Squadrone, whom Law had interested in his favour.
The Parliament ultimately passed a resolution to the effect, that, to establish any kind of
paper credit, so as to force it to pass, was an improper expedient for the nation.
Upon the failure of this project, and of his efforts to procure a pardon for the murder of
Mr. Wilson, Law withdrew to the Continent, and resumed his old habits of gaming. For
fourteen years he continued to roam about, in Flanders, Holland, Germany, Hungary,
Italy, and France. He soon became intimately acquainted with the extent of the trade and
resources of each, and daily more confirmed in his opinion that no country could prosper
without a paper currency. During the whole of this time he appears to have chiefly
supported himself by successful play. At every gambling-house of note in the capitals of
Europe, he was known and appreciated as one better skilled in the intricacies of chance
than any other man of the day. It is stated in the "Biographie Universelle" that he was
expelled, first from Venice, and afterwards from Genoa, by the magistrates, who thought
him a visitor too dangerous for the youth of those cities. During his residence in Paris he
rendered himself obnoxious to D'Argenson, the lieutenant-general of the police, by whom
he was ordered to quit the capital. This did not take place, however, before he had made
the acquaintance in the saloons, of the Duke de Vendome, the Prince de Conti, and of the
gay Duke of Orleans, the latter of whom was destined afterwards to exercise so much
influence over his fate. The Duke of Orleans was pleased with the vivacity and good
sense of the Scottish adventurer, while the latter was no less pleased with the wit and
amiability of a prince who promised to become his patron. They were often thrown into
each other's society, and Law seized every opportunity to instil his financial doctrines
into the mind of one whose proximity to the throne pointed him out as destined, at no
very distant date, to play an important part in the government.
Shortly before the death of Louis XIV, or, as some say, in 1708, Law proposed a scheme
of finance to Desmarets, the Comptroller. Louis is reported to have inquired whether the
projector were a Catholic, and, on being answered in the negative, to have declined
having anything to do with him. [This anecdote, which is related in the correspondence of
Madame de Baviere, Duchess of Orleans, and mother of the Regent, is discredited by
Lord John Russell, in his "History of the principal States of Europe, from the Peace of
Utrecht;" for what reason he does not inform us. There is no doubt that Law proposed his
scheme to Desmarets, and that Louis refused to hear of it. The reason given for the
refusal is quite consistent with the character of that bigoted and tyrannical monarch.]

It was after this repulse that he visited Italy. His mind being still occupied with schemes
of finance, he proposed to Victor Amadeus, Duke of Savoy, to establish his land-bank in
that country. The Duke replied that his dominions were too circumscribed for the
execution of so great a project, and that he was by far too poor a potentate to be ruined.
He advised him, however, to try the King of France once more; for he was sure, if he
knew anything of the French character, that the people would be delighted with a plan,
not only so new, but so plausible.
Louis XIV died in 1715, and the heir to the throne being an infant only seven years of
age, the Duke of Orleans assumed the reins of government, as Regent, during his
minority. Law now found himself in a more favourable position. The tide in his affairs
had come, which, taken at the flood, was to waft him on to fortune. The Regent was his
friend, already acquainted with his theory and pretensions, and inclined, moreover, to aid
him in any efforts to restore the wounded credit of France, bowed down to the earth by
the extravagance of the long reign of Louis XIV.
Hardly was that monarch laid in his grave ere the popular hatred, suppressed so long,
burst forth against his memory. He who, during his life, had been flattered with an excess
of adulation, to which history scarcely offers a parallel, was now cursed as a tyrant, a
bigot, and a plunderer. His statues were pelted and disfigured; his effigies torn down,
amid the execrations of the populace, and his name rendered synonymous with
selfishness and oppression. The glory of his arms was forgotten, and nothing was
remembered but his reverses, his extravagance, and his cruelty.
The finances of the country were in a state of the utmost disorder. A profuse and corrupt
monarch, whose profuseness and corruption were imitated by almost every functionary,
from the highest to the lowest grade, had brought France to the verge of ruin. The
national debt amounted to 3000 millions of livres, the revenue to 145 millions, and the
expenditure to 142 millions per annum; leaving only three millions to pay the interest
upon 3000 millions. The first care of the Regent was to discover a remedy for an evil of
such magnitude, and a council was early summoned to take the matter into consideration.
The Duke de St. Simon was of opinion that nothing could save the country from
revolution but a remedy at once bold and dangerous. He advised the Regent to convoke
the States-General, and declare a national bankruptcy. The Duke de Noailles, a man of
accommodating principles, an accomplished courtier, and totally averse from giving
himself any trouble or annoyance that ingenuity could escape from, opposed the project
of St. Simon with all his influence. He represented the expedient as alike dishonest and
ruinous. The Regent was of the same opinion, and this desperate remedy fell to the
ground.
The measures ultimately adopted, though they promised fair, only aggravated the evil.
The first, and most dishonest measure, was of no advantage to the state. A recoinage was
ordered, by which the currency was depreciated one-fifth; those who took a thousand
pieces of gold or silver to the mint received back an amount of coin of the same nominal
value, but only four-fifths of the weight of metal. By this contrivance the treasury gained
seventy-two millions of livres, and all the commercial operations of the country were

disordered. A trifling diminution of the taxes silenced the clamours of the people, and for
the slight present advantage the great prospective evil was forgotten.
A chamber of justice was next instituted, to inquire into the malversations of the loancontractors and the farmers of the revenues. Tax collectors are never very popular in any
country, but those of France at this period deserved all the odium with which they were
loaded. As soon as these farmers-general, with all their hosts of subordinate agents, called
maltotiers [From maltote, an oppressive tax.], were called to account for their misdeeds,
the most extravagant joy took possession of the nation. The Chamber of Justice, instituted
chiefly for this purpose, was endowed with very extensive powers. It was composed of
the presidents and councils of the parliament, the judges of the Courts of Aid and of
Requests, and the officers of the Chamber of Account, under the general presidence of
the minister of finance. Informers were encouraged to give evidence against the offenders
by the promise of one-fifth part of the fines and confiscations. A tenth of all concealed
effects belonging to the guilty was promised to such as should furnish the means of
discovering them.
The promulgation of the edict constituting this court caused a degree of consternation
among those principally concerned which can only be accounted for on the supposition
that their peculation had been enormous. But they met with no sympathy. The
proceedings against them justified their terror. The Bastile was soon unable to contain the
prisoners that were sent to it, and the gaols all over the country teemed with guilty or
suspected persons. An order was issued to all innkeepers and postmasters to refuse horses
to such as endeavoured to seek safety in flight; and all persons were forbidden, under
heavy fines, to harbour them or favour their evasion. Some were condemned to the
pillory, others to the gallies, and the least guilty to fine and imprisonment. One only,
Samuel Bernard, a rich banker, and farmer-general of a province remote from the capital,
was sentenced to death. So great had been the illegal profits of this man, -- looked upon
as the tyrant and oppressor of his district, -- that he offered six millions of livres, or
250,000 pounds sterling, to be allowed to escape.
His bribe was refused, and he suffered the penalty of death. Others, perhaps more guilty,
were more fortunate. Confiscation, owing to the concealment of their treasures by the
delinquents, often produced less money than a fine. The severity of the government
relaxed, and fines, under the denomination of taxes, were indiscriminately levied upon all
offenders. But so corrupt was every department of the administration, that the country
benefited but little by the sums which thus flowed into the treasury. Courtiers, and
courtiers' wives and mistresses, came in for the chief share of the spoils. One contractor
had been taxed in proportion to his wealth and guilt, at the sum of twelve millions of
livres. The Count * * *, a man of some weight in the government, called upon him, and
offered to procure a remission of the fine, if he would give him a hundred thousand
crowns. "Vous etes trop tard, mon ami," replied the financier; "I have already made a
bargain with your wife for fifty thousand." [This anecdote is related by M. de la Hode, in
his Life of Philippe of Orleans. It would have looked more authentic if he had given the
names of the dishonest contractor and the still more dishonest minister. But M. de la
Hode's book is liable to the same objection as most of the French memoirs of that and of
