
We find this same Sheriff-depute of Caithness very active four years afterwards in
another trial for witchcraft. In spite of the warning he had received, that all such cases
were to be tried in future by the superior courts, he condemned to death an old woman at
Dornoch, upon the charge of bewitching the cows and pigs of her neighbours. This poor
creature was insane, and actually laughed and clapped her hands at sight of "the bonnie
fire" that was to consume her. She had a daughter, who was lame both of her hands and
feet, and one of the charges brought against her was, that she had used this daughter as a
pony in her excursions to join the devil's sabbath, and that the devil himself had shod her,
and produced lameness.
This was the last execution that took place in Scotland for witchcraft. The penal statutes
were repealed in 1756, and, as in England, whipping, the pillory, or imprisonment, were
declared the future punishments of all pretenders to magic or witchcraft.
Still, for many years after this, the superstition lingered both in England and Scotland,
and in some districts is far from being extinct even at this day. But before we proceed to
trace it any further than to its legal extinction, we have yet to see the frightful havoc it
made in continental Europe from the commencement of the seventeenth to the middle of
the eighteenth century. France, Germany, and Switzerland were the countries which
suffered most from the epidemic. The number of victims in these countries during the
sixteenth century has already been mentioned; but, at the early part of the seventeenth,
the numbers are so great, especially in Germany, that were they not to be found in the
official records of the tribunals, it would be almost impossible to believe that mankind
could ever have been so maddened and deluded. To use the words of the learned and
indefatigable Horst, [Zauber Bibliothek. Theil 5.] "the world seemed to be like a large
madhouse for witches and devils to play their antics in." Satan was believed to be at
everybody's call, to raise the whirlwind, draw down the lightning, blight the productions
of the earth, or destroy the health and paralyse the limbs of man. This belief, so insulting
to the majesty and beneficence of the Creator, was shared by the most pious ministers of
religion. Those who in their morning and evening prayers acknowledged the one true
God, and praised him for the blessings of the seed time and the harvest, were convinced
that frail humanity could enter into a compact with the spirits of hell to subvert his laws
and thwart all his merciful intentions. Successive popes, from Innocent VIII. downwards,
promulgated this degrading doctrine, which spread so rapidly that society seemed to be
divided into two great factions, the bewitching and the bewitched.
The commissioners named by Innocent VIII. to prosecute the witch-trials in Germany,
were Jacob Sprenger, so notorious for his work on demonology, entitled the "Malleus
Maleficarum," or "Hammer to knock down Witches," Henry Institor a learned
jurisconsult, and the Bishop of Strasburgh. Barnberg, Treves, Cologne, Paderborn, and
Wurzburg, were the chief seats of the commissioners, who, during their lives alone,
condemned to the stake, on a very moderate calculation, upwards of three thousand
victims. The number of witches so increased, that new commissioners were continually
appointed in Germany, France, and Switzerland. In Spain and Portugal the Inquisition
alone took cognizance of the crime. It is impossible to search the records of those dark,

but now happily nonexisting tribunals; but the mind recoils with affright even to form a
guess of the multitudes who perished.
The mode of trial in the other countries is more easily ascertained. Sprenger, in Germany,
and Bodinus and Delrio, in France, have left but too ample a record of the atrocities
committed in the much-abused names of justice and religion. Bodinus, of great repute
and authority in the seventeenth century, says, "The trial of this offence must not be
conducted like other crimes. Whoever adheres to the ordinary course of justice perverts
the spirit of the law, both Divine and human. He who is accused of sorcery should never
be acquitted unless the malice of the prosecutor be clearer than the sun; for it is so
difficult to bring full proof of this secret crime, that out of a million of witches not one
would be convicted if the usual course were followed!" Henri Boguet, a witch-finder,
who styled himself "The Grand Judge of Witches for the Territory of St. Claude," drew
up a code for the guidance of all persons engaged in the witch-trials, consisting of
seventy articles, quite as cruel as the code of Bodinus. In this document he affirms, that a
mere suspicion of witchcraft justifies the immediate arrest and torture of the suspected
person. If the prisoner muttered, looked on the ground, and did not shed any tears, all
these were proofs positive of guilt! In all cases of witchcraft, the evidence of the child
ought to be taken against its parent; and persons of notoriously bad character, although
not to be believed upon their oaths on the ordinary occasions of dispute that might arise
between man and man, were to be believed, if they swore that any person had bewitched
them! Who, when he hears that this diabolical doctrine was the universally received
opinion of the ecclesiastical and civil authorities, can wonder that thousands upon
thousands of unhappy persons should be brought to the stake? that Cologne should for
many years burn its three hundred witches annually? the district of Barnberg its four
hundred? Nuremberg, Geneva, Paris, Toulouse, Lyons, and other cities, their two
hundred?
A few of these trials may be cited, taking them in the order of priority, as they occurred in
different parts of the Continent. In 1595 an old woman residing in a village near
Constance, angry at not being invited to share the sports of the country people on a day of
public rejoicing, was heard to mutter something to herself, and was afterwards seen to
proceed through the fields towards a hill, where she was lost sight of. A violent
thunderstorm arose about two hours afterwards, which wet the dancers to the skin, and
did considerable damage to the plantations. This woman, suspected before of witchcraft,
was seized and imprisoned, and accused of having raised the storm, by filling a hole with
wine, and stirring it about with a stick. She was tortured till she confessed, and was
burned alive the next evening.
About the same time two sorcerers in Toulouse were accused of having dragged a
crucifix about the streets at midnight, stopping at times to spit upon and kick it, and
uttering at intervals an exorcism to raise the devil. The next day a hail-storm did
considerable damage to the crops, and a girl, the daughter of a shoemaker in the town,
remembered to have heard in the night the execrations of the wizards. Her story led to
their arrest. The usual means to produce confession were resorted to. The wizards owned
that they could raise tempests whenever they pleased, and named several persons who

possessed similar powers. They were hanged, and then burned in the market-place, and
seven of the persons they had mentioned shared the same fate.
Hoppo and Stadlin, two noted wizards of Germany, were executed in 1599. They
implicated twenty or thirty witches, who went about causing women to miscarry,
bringing down the lightning of heaven, and making maidens bring forth toads. To this
latter fact several girls were found to swear most positively! Stadlin confessed that he had
killed seven infants in the womb of one woman.
Bodinus highly praises the exertions of a witchfinder, named Nider, in France, who
prosecuted so many that he could not calculate them. Some of these witches could, by a
single word, cause people to fall down dead; others made women go with child three
years instead of nine months; while others, by certain invocations and ceremonies, could
turn the faces of their enemies upside down, or twist them round to their backs. Although
no witness was ever procured who saw persons in this horrible state, the witches
confessed that they had the power, and exercised it. Nothing more was wanting to insure
the stake.
At Amsterdam a crazy girl confessed that she could cause sterility in cattle, and bewitch
pigs and poultry by merely repeating the magic words Turius und Shurius Inturius! She
was hanged and burned. Another woman in the same city, named Kornelis Van
Purmerund, was arrested in consequence of some disclosures the former had made. A
witness came forward and swore that she one day looked through the window of her hut,
and saw Kornelis sitting before a fire muttering something to the devil. She was sure it
was to the devil, because she heard him answer her. Shortly afterwards twelve black cats
ascended out of the floor, and danced on their hind legs around the witch for the space of
about half an hour. They then vanished with a horrid noise, and leaving a disagreeable
smell behind them. She also was hanged and burned.
At Bamberg, in Bavaria, the executions from the year 1610 to 1640 were at the rate of
about a hundred annually. One woman, suspected of witchcraft, was seized because,
having immoderately praised the beauty of a child, it had shortly afterwards fallen ill and
died. She confessed upon the rack that the devil had given her the power to work evil
upon those she hated, by speaking words in their praise. If she said with unwonted
fervour, "What a strong man!" "What a lovely woman !" "What a sweet child!" the devil
understood her, and afflicted them with diseases immediately. It is quite unnecessary to
state the end of this poor creature. Many women were executed for causing strange
substances to lodge in the bodies of those who offended them. Bits of wood, nails, hair,
eggshells, bits of glass, shreds of linen and woollen cloth, pebbles, and even hot cinders
and knives, were the articles generally chosen. These were believed to remain in the body
till the witches confessed or were executed, when they were voided from the bowels, or
by the mouth, nostrils, or ears. Modern physicians have often had cases of a similar
description under their care, where girls have swallowed needles, which have been
voided on the arms, legs, and other parts of the body. But the science of that day could
not account for these phenomena otherwise than by the power of the devil; and every
needle swallowed by a servant maid cost an old woman her life. Nay, if no more than one

suffered in consequence, the district might think itself fortunate. The commissioners
seldom stopped short at one victim. The revelations of the rack in most cases implicated
half a score.
Of all the records of the witch-trials preserved for the wonder of succeeding ages, that of
Wurzburg, from 1627 to 1629, is the most frightful. Hauber, who has preserved this list
in his "Acta et Scripta Magica," says, in a note at the end, that it is far from complete, and
that there were a great many other burnings too numerous to specify. This record, which
relates to the city only, and not to the province of Wurzburg, contains the names of one
hundred and fifty-seven persons, who were burned in two years in twenty-nine burnings,
averaging from five to six at a time. The list comprises three play-actors, four innkeepers,
three common councilmen of Wurzburg, fourteen vicars of the cathedral, the
burgomaster's lady, an apothecary's wife and daughter, two choristers of the cathedral,
Gobel Babelin the prettiest girl in the town, and the wife, the two little sons, and the
daughter of the councillor Stolzenberg. Rich and poor, young and old, suffered alike. At
the seventh of these recorded burnings, the victims are described as a wandering boy,
twelve years of age, and four strange men and women, found sleeping in the marketplace. Thirty-two of the whole number appear to have been vagrants, of both sexes, who,
failing to give a satisfactory account of themselves, were accused and found guilty of
witchcraft. The number of children on the list is horrible to think upon. The thirteenth and
fourteenth burnings comprised four persons, who are stated to have been a little maiden
nine years of age, a maiden still less, her sister, their mother, and their aunt, a pretty
young woman of twenty-four. At the eighteenth burning the victims were two boys of
twelve, and a girl of fifteen; at the nineteenth, the young heir of the noble house of
Rotenhahn, aged nine, and two other boys, one aged ten, and the other twelve. Among
other entries appear the names of Baunach, the fattest, and Steinacher, the richest burgher
in Wurzburg. What tended to keep up the delusion in this unhappy city, and indeed all
over Europe, was the number of hypochondriac and diseased persons who came
voluntarily forward, and made confession of witchcraft. Several of the victims in the
foregoing list, had only themselves to blame for their fate. Many again, including the
apothecary's wife and daughter already mentioned, pretended to sorcery, and sold
poisons, or attempted by means of charms and incantations to raise the devil. But
throughout all this fearful period the delusion of the criminals was as great as that of the
judges. Depraved persons who, in ordinary times, would have been thieves or murderers,
added the desire of sorcery to their depravity, sometimes with the hope of acquiring
power over their fellows, and sometimes with the hope of securing impunity in this world
by the protection of Satan. One of the persons executed at the first burning, a prostitute,
was heard repeating the exorcism, which was supposed to have the power of raising the
arch enemy in the form of a goat. This precious specimen of human folly has been
preserved by Horst, in his "Zauberbibliothek." It ran as follows, and was to be repeated
slowly, with many ceremonies and waivings of the hand:-"Lalle, Bachera, Magotte, Baphia, Dajam, Vagoth Heneche Ammi Nagaz, Adomator
Raphael Immanuel Christus, Tetragrammaton Agra Jod Loi. Konig! Konig!"

The two last words were uttered quickly, and with a sort of scream, and were supposed to
be highly agreeable to Satan, who loved to be called a king. If he did not appear
immediately, it was necessary to repeat a further exorcism. The one in greatest repute was
as follows, and was to be read backwards, with the exception of the last two words
"Anion, Lalle, Sabolos, Sado, Pater, Aziel Adonai Sado Vagoth Agra, Jod, Baphra!
Komm! Komm!"
When the witch wanted to get rid of the devil, who was sometimes in the habit of
prolonging his visits to an unconscionable length, she had only to repeat the following,
also backwards, when he generally disappeared, leaving behind him a suffocating smell: "Zellianelle Heotti Bonus Vagotha Plisos sother osech unicus Beelzebub Dax! Komm!
Komm!"
This nonsensical jargon soon became known to all the idle and foolish boys of Germany.
Many an unhappy urchin, who in a youthful frolic had repeated it, paid for his folly the
penalty of his life. Three, whose ages varied from ten to fifteen, were burned alive at
Wurzburg for no other offence. Of course every other boy in the city became still more
convinced of the power of the charm. One boy confessed that he would willingly have
sold himself to the devil, if he could have raised him, for a good dinner and cakes every
day of his life, and a pony to ride upon. This luxurious youngster, instead of being
horsewhipped for his folly, was hanged and burned.
The small district of Lindheim was, if possible, even more notorious than Wurzburg for
the number of its witch-burnings. In the year 1633 a famous witch, named Pomp Anna,
who could cause her foes to fall sick by merely looking at them, was discovered and
burned, along with three of her companions. Every year in this parish, consisting at most
of a thousand persons, the average number of executions was five. Between the years
1660 and 1664, the number consumed was thirty. If the executions all over Germany had
been in this frightful proportion, hardly a family could have escaped losing one of its
members.
In 1627 a ballad entitled the "Druten Zeitung," or the "Witches Gazette," was very
popular in Germany. It detailed, according to the titlepage of a copy printed at Smalcald
in 1627, "an account of the remarkable events which took place in Franconia, Bamberg,
and Wurzburg, with those wretches who from avarice or ambition have sold themselves
to the devil, and how they had their reward at last: set to music, and to be sung to the tune
of Dorothea." The sufferings of the witches at the stake are explained in it with great
minuteness, the poet waxing extremely witty when he describes the horrible contortions
of pain upon their countenances, and the shrieks that rent the air when any one of more
than common guilt was burned alive. A trick resorted to in order to force one witch to
confess, is told in this doggrel as an excellent joke. As she obstinately refused to own that
she was in league with the powers of evil, the commissioners suggested that the hangman
should dress himself in a bear's skin, with the horns, tail, and all the et ceteras, and in this

