
If you’re overwhelmed by the choices that confront you in the world of ETF trading,
don’t fret. Rather than spending days scouring the Internet building a list of ETFs,
I suggest downloading the free Morpheus ETF Roundup at www.morpheustrading.com.

Major Types and Families of ETFs

27

This resource will save you many hours of manually researching the available ETF
families within a particular index.
This comprehensive, user-friendly reference guide groups all the major U.S.-listed
ETFs by sector and subsector and allows you to easily compare the various fund families that offer a product within each group. Want to learn more about a particular ETF,
such as the heaviest-weighted underlying stocks? Simply click any ticker symbol in the
guide to jump to the Web page for that fund. The Morpheus ETF Roundup is updated
as necessary, to keep you abreast of ETFs as they are launched.
An Introduction to Exchange-Traded Notes

Exchange-traded notes (ETNs) were introduced to the ﬁnancial marketplace on June
12, 2006, by Barclays Bank. They were devised as a means to eliminate tracking error
associated with exchange-traded funds. Exchange-traded notes are structured debt
instruments issued by a ﬁnancial institution. A structured debt instrument is a type
of note that is customized for the beneﬁt of the buyer as an inducement to purchase
the debt. In the case of ETNs this might include features that could provide higher
returns or access to markets that the investor may not otherwise have access to. The
term structured also refers to the fact that ETNs track both a debt obligation and an
imbedded derivative such as a futures or options contract. ETNs share the characteristics of both debt and equity investments.
Like ETFs, they trade during normal market hours on an exchange and track the
value of an underlying asset or index in real time. They offer excellent liquidity as they
can be traded just like an ETF or stock.
Unlike ETFs, they represent an unsecured debt obligation of the issuer. As such,
an ETN’s value is partially derived from the credit rating of the issuer and not just the
value of an underlying asset. Simply put, an ETN is valued based upon the underlying value of the index (or asset) and the creditworthiness of the issuer. The likelihood
that the issuing bank will repay the debt is known as credit risk. Consequently, if the
issuer’s debt rating were to be downgraded, the ETN would fall in value even if
the value of the index (asset) were to go up in value. If the issuer goes bankrupt, then the
ETN would be rendered virtually worthless since it is an unsecured debt. ETNs do
provide lien priority for the investor but there is no guaranteed protection of principal
if the issuer defaults.
ETNs provide several advantages over ETFs. The ﬁrst advantage is that ETNs
don’t suffer from tracking error. Tracking errors occur when an investment deviates
from the performance of the underlying index, stock, currency, or commodity that it
is intended to track. For various reasons, this can occur with ETFs. However, since
ETNs are considered prepaid debt instruments there is no tracking error.
As a debt instrument, an ETN is a contractual promise by the issuing ﬁnancial
institution to pay the exact rate of return of the underlying asset/index less any fees.
Consequently, this eliminates tracking error. ETNs also provide a tax advantage over
ETFs. ETNs do not own any assets. They are just a promise to pay the investor a

28

ETF Overview and Selection

stated return. Since no underlying assets are owned ETNs do not pay taxable interest or dividends to the investor. Rather, all interest and dividends are rolled into the
index value. This eliminates ordinary income from the equation. All income is taxed
as capital gains and is not taxed until the ETN matures or is sold (taxes deferred). The
Internal Revenue Service has recently made exclusions to this preferential tax treatment for ETNs that trade in currencies.

Trading ETFs: Gaining an Edge with Technical Analysis, Second Edition
by Deron Wagner
Copyright © 2012 Deron Wagner

PART II

ETF Selection through
Technical Analysis

Trading ETFs: Gaining an Edge with Technical Analysis, Second Edition
by Deron Wagner
Copyright © 2012 Deron Wagner

CHAPTER 3

The Top-Down Strategy
With so many types and families of exchange-traded funds (ETFs), it could be difﬁcult to select the ones offering the best proﬁt potential. In this part of the book, you
will learn a concise, top-down system of technical analysis that simpliﬁes the decision
process and increases your probability of a successful trade. The beauty of my topdown strategy for selecting and trading ETFs lies in its simplicity. When day trading
was in vogue in the late 1990s, traders were obsessed with ﬁnding the magic bullet
that would give them the highest possible level of accuracy in their daily trading decisions. Bollinger bands, oscillators, and the moving average convergence divergence
(MACD) are just a sampling of the numerous indicators that traders used, and still
use, in their quest for accuracy. Unfortunately, most traders and investors eventually
discover that using too many types of technical analysis leads to a bad case of “analysis
paralysis.” Rather than simply putting on positions that have a good chance of proﬁtable results, they spend all their time analyzing tickers for the perfect setup. This leads
to unproﬁtable inactivity. The most proﬁtable systems of technical analysis are also
the most basic and efﬁcient. My top-down strategy is based on simple indicators such
as price, volume, trendlines, relative strength, and support/resistance levels. Further,
these indicators are applied in a logical, easy-to-follow order.
Preferred Time Interval of Trading

In preparation for applying the top-down system, you must ﬁrst determine your preferred time interval of trading; then use that interval to look for a trend. For example,
a day trader who buys and sells all his positions in the same day should not really care
about trends in weekly charts, and perhaps even daily charts. Conversely, a position
trader who typically holds positions for several weeks to several months should not
care much about trends on intraday charts such as the 5-minute or 15-minute interval. In the middle is a swing trader who looks for trade opportunities with holding
times of several days to several weeks. An astute swing trader primarily uses daily
charts for most of the decision making but also uses longer-term weekly charts to conﬁrm his thinking, as well as intraday charts to ﬁnd precision entry points.

31

32

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

The beauty of my top-down strategy is that it works equally well for all time intervals. Examples throughout this book will focus on both swing and position trading.
The Top-Down Strategy Deﬁned

The following is a basic summary of my top-down strategy for selecting ETFs, which
will be discussed in detail in the chapters following this one. The relative simplicity of
this logical process is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Step 1: Determine the direction of the broad market trend.
• If the major indexes are trending steadily higher, nearly any type of ETF with
relative strength can be traded.
• If the major indexes are in a steady downtrend, seek out any ETFs with relative
weakness.
• If the major indexes are range-bound, avoid trading in broad-based ETFs that
track the major indexes.

FIGURE 3.1 Top-Down System of Selecting ETFs

Determine direction of the broad market trend

Uptrending

Downtrending

Range-bound

Find indexes with the
greatest relative strength

Find indexes with the
greatest relative weakness

Identify indexes with relative
strength or weakness, but
avoid broad-based ETFs

Select strongest ETF
family within the index

Select weakest ETF
family within the index

Select strongest and/or
weakest ETF family
within the index

Look for volume
confirmation

Look for volume
confirmation

Look for volume
confirmation

Initiate long position

Initiate short position

Initiate long and/or
short positions

Source: Morpheus Trading Group

The Top-Down Strategy

33

Step 2: Find the individual indexes with the most relative strength or weakness (divergence) compared to the major indexes.
• Compare the charts of industry sector and specialty ETFs with the S&P 500 or
the Nasdaq Composite Index.
• Buy ETFs in the sectors with the most relative strength if the market is
uptrending overall.
• Sell short ETFs in the sectors with the most relative weakness if the market is
downtrending overall.
As an alternative to the graphical method of looking at charts, use numerical
percentage-change market minders to identify relative strength or weakness.
Step 3: Compare all the ETF families within the speciﬁc index to ﬁnd the individual
ETF with the most strength (or weakness) relative to the corresponding index.
• Again, overlay charts of each ETF family with the corresponding sector index.
• Ensure that the ETF is also showing relative strength (or weakness) to itself,
closing in the upper 30 percent (or bottom 30 percent) of its intraday range
every day.
• Monitor changes in volume to conﬁrm institutional buying interest.
Step 4: Select the resulting long or short ETF position now most likely to outperform
the market.
• Use the strategies in this book to:
• Find the ideal entry points.
• Exit with maximum proﬁtability or minimal loss.
Step 5: Find the proper timing for a new position entry in the ETF most likely to
outperform the stock market.
• Use strategies in this book to locate ideal technical entry and exit points for new
ETF trades.
• Know how to manage overnight gaps in your positions.
• Trail stops based on trendlines and other technical indicators for maximum
proﬁtability and conservation of proﬁts.
Determining the Direction of the Broad Market Trend

The ﬁrst step of my top-down strategy for selecting ETFs is also the most critical of
all the steps. Approximately 85 to 90 percent of stocks and ETFs move in the same
general direction as the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite. Therefore, failure to
clearly identify the direction of the broad market’s trend before even considering which
ETFs to buy or sell short is a sureﬁre way to lose capital. Though it may be a cheesy,
worn-out Wall Street cliché, it will serve you quite well to always remember that the
trend is your friend.
To ascertain whether or not a steady broad market trend exists, I use a combination of trendlines and moving averages (MAs), both basic technical indicators available

34

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

on most charting packages, on the charts of the S&P 500, the Nasdaq Composite, and
the Dow (hereafter, the “major indexes”).
The ﬁrst test any of the major indexes must pass is the “trendline test.” The number of major indexes that pass the trendline test determines how strongly an overall
trend is in place. The more broad-based indexes that conﬁrm the presence of the
trendline test, the more aggressive and conﬁdent you can be about trading and investing in the broad-based ETFs.
Whether or not a trend exists is, of course, dependent on the time frame you’re
analyzing. A steady trend may exist on an intraday chart with a 60-minute (hourly)
time interval, but not on the longer-term daily charts. By the same token, a steady trend
may exist on the daily charts, but not on the longer-term weekly charts. The following
example charts are daily charts, which are also referred to as “intermediate-term trends.”
In looking for an uptrend, draw a trendline from the last major low that was
formed on a daily chart, through the “swing lows” of each pullback within the context of the uptrend. I prefer candlestick charts, but bar charts are equally effective.
A primary uptrend is deﬁned as having three anchor points that coincide with at least
two “higher highs” and two “higher lows.” A higher high is formed when the price of
an index holds above the last signiﬁcant high upon pulling back from a rally. A higher
low is formed in the same way. The time frame of these higher highs and higher lows
depends on your preferred interval of trading or investing. Again, my examples focus
primarily on the daily charts.
Figure 3.2 is a daily chart of the S&P 500; the higher lows and higher highs that
form the trendline’s anchor points are circled. All MAs have been removed from the
chart so that you can more easily see the annotated trendlines.

FIGURE 3.2 Daily Chart of S&P 500 in an Uptrend: Two Higher Highs and Two Higher Lows
$SPX.X – Daily S&P 500 Index
S&P 500 in an uptrend

1,540.00
1,520.00
1,507.67
1,500.00

Second
higher high

Uptrend ends when
lower low is set

First
higher high

1,480.00
1,460.00
1,440.00

Second
higher low

1,420.00
1,400.00

First
higher low

1,380.00
4,000,000.00
2,993,460.00

Mar

Source: TradeStation

Apr

May

Jun

35

The Top-Down Strategy

To the dismay of long-term investors who only buy stocks and ETFs and never
sell short, the stock market regularly enters periods of steady downtrends. Fortunately,
my top-down strategy is designed to help you just as easily proﬁt by trading on the
short side in conﬁrmed downtrends or bear markets. Downtrend lines are merely
drawn in the inverse fashion of uptrend lines. Starting with the last major high, you
connect the subsequent anchor points on the way down, looking for a series of at least
two lower highs and two lower lows. Again, you want three anchor points to conﬁrm
an established downtrend. Figure 3.3 is a daily chart of the Nasdaq Composite that
meets the deﬁnition of a clearly deﬁned downtrend.
Making sure the index has at least two higher highs and higher lows for uptrends
is important because it prevents inaccurately labeling an early, possibly premature
trend as a conﬁrmed uptrend. When an index has only one higher high and one
higher low, the newborn uptrend has a greater chance of failure because it has not been
established for a long enough period of time. Figure 3.4 is a daily chart of the Dow
in which an attempted uptrend failed because it had two higher highs but only one
higher low, equivalent to just two anchor points. Note that the failure of the uptrend
occurred when a lower low was formed. This was after the Dow broke below the lower
boundary of its annotated uptrend line. The long candle that immediately follows the
break of the trendline marks the lower low that formed in the second week of July.
If any of the major indexes passes the trendline test, you next use the 20- and
50-day simple MAs to look for conﬁrmation of the trends. Whether to use simple

FIGURE 3.3 Daily Chart of Nasdaq Composite in a Downtrend: Two Lower Highs and Two

Lower Lows
$COMPX – Daily
First
lower high

2,350.00
2,300.00
Second
lower high

2,250.00

Nasdaq Composite in
steady downtrend

2,200.00
2,150.00
First
lower low

2,100.00
Second
lower low

2,050.00
2,800,000
2,512,171
2,034,969
1,200,000

Apr

Source: TradeStation

May

Jun

Jul

36

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 3.4 Daily Chart of the Dow in a Failed Uptrend: Two Higher Highs and Only One

Higher Low
$DJIA – Daily
11,600,000
The Dow failed to confirm an uptrend because it
formed two higher highs, but only one higher low.
Notice how sharply it broke down afterward.

11,500,000
11,400,000
11,300,000
11,200,000
11,100,000
11,000,000
10,900,000
10,800,000

6,500,000
4,500,000
2,350,907
Jun

Jul

Aug

Source: TradeStation

MAs or exponential moving averages (EMAs) is largely a matter of personal choice.
Simple MAs give an equal weighting to every interval of the MA’s time period, while
EMAs give a higher weighting to more recent price movement. The debate continues
about which one is better to use, but it really comes down to personal preference.
Frankly, I’ve found there usually isn’t much difference between the prices calculated
using simple or exponential MAs.
To conﬁrm the formation of trendlines as deﬁned above, the major indexes should
also be trading above both their 20-day and 50-day MAs. The opposite is true of
downtrends. If a quick glance ﬁnds this is the case, your work of determining if an
intermediate-term trend exists is completed. Move on to step 2 of the top-down strategy, which is to ﬁnd the individual indexes with the most strength or weakness relative
to the major indexes. This step is covered thoroughly in the next chapter.
Often, the major indexes will rapidly attempt to break out from an extended
period of sideways, range-bound trading and form a new trend, either up or down.
When this occurs, clearly deﬁned trendlines with three anchor points may form, but
the MAs may not necessarily conﬁrm the formation of the new trend.
In steady uptrends, the prices of the main stock market indexes should be above
the 20-day MA, which should always be above the 50-day MA. In downtrends, the
prices of the major indexes should be on the bottom, the 20-day MA in the middle,
and the 50-day MA above. Any variation of this scenario can provide warning signs
that the current trend may not be as stable as the initial glance might show.

37

The Top-Down Strategy

First, be on the lookout for instances in which the 20- and 50-day MAs crossed
over each other’s paths in recent weeks. This usually occurs at least once when a new
trend forms or a trend reverses, but you don’t want to see multiple crossovers within
a short period. Further, make sure the 20-day MA is closer to the price of the market than the 50-day MA. This applies both during uptrends and downtrends. The
presence of numerous MA crossovers or the 50-day MA trading closer to the price
than the 20-day MA can be warning signs of a choppy (not steadily trending), rangebound market. This is no problem if you determine that a sideways market exists,
but it’s important not to confuse it with a steadily trending market. Remember that
the broad-based ETFs should be avoided in sideways markets. In steady broad market trends, you should not see any recent crossovers of the MAs and the 20-day MA
should be closer to the price of the market than the 50-day MA.
Figure 3.5 shows an example in which a trendline has been established, as per the
previously discussed criteria, but the 50-day MA is closer to the price of the market
than the 20-day MA. There is also a recent crossover of the 50-day MA below the
20-day MA. This happened because a new uptrend was attempting to establish itself,
but was not yet conﬁrmed by the MAs.
When doing your chart analysis of the major indexes, don’t be surprised if you
ﬁnd the main stock market indexes are commonly not meeting the trendline and
MA tests for a clearly deﬁned trend. Historically, the major indexes spend nearly as
much time in choppy, sideways ranges as they do in steady trends. Averaged over the
years, the major indexes have historically generated solid annualized returns, but that’s
only because the stock market tends to move swiftly higher in the uptrending years,
while doing nothing in the range-bound years. My “relative-strength” trading strategy,

FIGURE 3.5 Major Index, Trendlines, and Late MA Conﬁrmation
$MID.X – Daily S&P Midcap 400 Index
920.00
910.00
900.00
890.00
885.06
880.00
871.86
870.00
862.51
860.00

The S&P MidCap 400 index formed
two higher highs and higher lows on its
daily chart, but notice the 50-day MA
(the dashed line) was not below the
20-day MA (the solid line) until the
uptrend was confirmed in late September.

Jun

Source: TradeStation

Jul

Aug

850.00
840.00
830.00
820.00
810.00
Sept

Oct

38

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

discussed in the next chapter, enables traders and investors to ﬁnd proﬁtable, low-risk
trading opportunities regardless of the overall market’s trend. Nevertheless, initially
identifying the primary direction of the trend prevents you from getting off to the
really bad start that would occur if you were to ﬁght the overall market trend.
Uptrend, Downtrend, or Range-Bound? Now What?

The reason you identify the direction of the market’s overall trend, or lack thereof,
is so that you can position yourself to trade ETFs with the most relative strength in
uptrends, the most relative weakness in downtrends, or both in range-bound markets.
In markets trending either up or down, you can proﬁtably trade both broad-based
and industry sector ETFs with the same amount of ease. But in choppy, range-bound
markets, the sideways trend makes it difﬁcult to proﬁt from trading broad-based ETFs
such as the S&P 500 SPDR (SPY) or the Dow Diamonds (DIA). Therefore, in a
range-bound market you may want to focus on trading other types of ETFs that can
trade independently of the broad market. These include speciﬁc industry sector, international, commodity, or other specialized ETFs.
To determine whether or not broad-based ETFs should be traded, look for at least
two of the three major indexes to be in a conﬁrmed trend, as deﬁned in this chapter.
Sometimes one index lags due to weakness in a key industry sector, but that’s okay.
Simply avoid trading in the ETF corresponding to that index. Knowing which of the
broad-based ETFs to select in trending markets is covered in the next chapter, which
discusses relative strength.
Sometimes, only one of the major indexes is trending steadily, but the other two
are not. This is usually due to an anomaly resulting from relative strength within one or
two industry sectors that institutions are accumulating. If, for example, mutual funds,
hedge funds, and other institutions are heavily buying the semiconductor sector, but
little else, the Nasdaq will likely show a lot of bullish divergence (relative strength).
This is because the Nasdaq is heavily weighted with semiconductor stocks. When this
occurs, you still label the broad market as being “choppy” and just focus on the industry sector or specialty ETFs with the most relative strength or weakness. But as long
as at least two of the three major indexes are in conﬁrmed trends, you can trade the
broad-based ETFs efﬁciently.

Trading ETFs: Gaining an Edge with Technical Analysis, Second Edition
by Deron Wagner
Copyright © 2012 Deron Wagner

CHAPTER 4

Finding Indexes with the
Most Relative Strength
When the major indexes are in smooth and steady uptrends or downtrends, the broadbased exchange-traded funds (ETFs) can be very efﬁcient trading vehicles. To proﬁt
in a smoothly trending broad market, you only need to identify which of the broadbased ETFs have the most relative strength and then initiate positions in the same
direction as the trend. Over the course of an average year, the major indexes are not
trending steadily a signiﬁcant percentage of the time, but the top-down strategy works
effectively either way.
If the major indexes are stuck in range-bound periods, avoid new trade entries in
the broad-based ETFs. Attempting to trade them in such conditions will inevitably
lead to a high percentage of trades hitting your predetermined stop-loss prices while
you watch the positions subsequently move in the direction you originally anticipated.
The losses of each individual trade will be minor, but there will be an abnormally
higher percentage of losing trades. The end result is churning of your brokerage
account. Getting “chopped up,” of course, makes your broker happy, but it will eventually make you broke.
If the broad market lacks a steady trend, focus on determining which industry sectors or other specialized indexes (international, commodity, currency) are still trending steadily, despite the lack of direction in the major indexes. Those trending higher
while the major indexes move sideways are identiﬁed as having “relative strength.”
Sectors with “relative weakness” are those that trend lower while the broad market
moves sideways to higher.
Whether the broad market is in a conﬁrmed trend or range-bound, the next step
in the top-down process—ﬁnding relative strength—is basically the same. The difference is that if there is a conﬁrmed trend, you can look for relative strength anywhere in
the overall market, but if the broad market is range-bound, you have to exclude those
ETFs that are tied to the main stock market indexes. Again, any major type of ETF
can be efﬁciently traded in steadily trending markets, but broad-based ETFs should
be avoided in choppy or range-bound markets.
