
Download at www.wowebook.com

Acknowledgments

xxv

To my children, Abby, Andy, Bear, and Bradlee, for their love and support.
And to my grandchildren, India and Mila, who didn’t do anything for the book but who
pleaded to be mentioned.
I thank you and all the many others from my lifetime of work in technical analysis for
your support, friendship, and willingness to impart your knowledge of trading markets.
Charles Kirkpatrick
Kittery, Maine

The assistance and support of many people contributed to turning the dream of this book into a
reality. Fred Meissner was the one who initially introduced me to my coauthor, Charlie, at a Market Technicians Association chapter meeting. After I worked with Charlie on several projects and
we served together on the Market Technicians Association Educational Foundation Board, he
bravely agreed to a partnership in writing this book. Charlie has been the ideal coauthor—positive, patient, and persistent. It has been an honor to work with someone so knowledgeable and an
incredible experience to work with someone so willing to share his knowledge.
The faculty and staff in the Department of Finance at the University of Texas at San Antonio College of Business have been a pleasure to work with over the past couple of years while
this book has been in process. Keith Fairchild, Lula Misra, and Robert Lengel have been especially supportive.
The expertise of the dedicated team at Pearson Education has been invaluable in helping
Charlie and me get our ideas into this final format. Thanks to Jim Boyd, Pamela Boland, Betsy
Harris, Karen Annett, and the entire Pearson Education team for their gentle prodding, their continued encouragement, and their tireless commitment to this project.
My husband, Richard Bauer, assisted in more ways than can ever be counted. He graciously wrote the Basic Statistics appendix for this book. He served as a sounding board for
many of the ideas in this book. He read drafts and made many helpful suggestions to the manuscript. However, his support goes far beyond his professional expertise. Richard untiringly took
care of many household tasks as I spent time working on this project. His help made it easy for
me to travel to meet with Charlie and work on this project. I am blessed to receive his unwavering emotional support and encouragement.
My two children have also been a source of blessing and inspiration. They demonstrated
extreme patience through this entire process. They also reminded me of the need for fun, laughter, and a good hug whenever I was tempted to work too hard. Discussing stock charts with my
eleven-year-old son, Sepp, made this project much more interesting than it would have otherwise
been. Writing next to my fourteen-year-old daughter and budding author, Katherine, made the
countless hours of tedious work much more enjoyable.
Julie Dahlquist
San Antonio, TX

Download at www.wowebook.com

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Charles D. Kirkpatrick II, CMT, is
President, Kirkpatrick & Company, Inc., Kittery, Maine—a private firm specializing
in technical research; editor and publisher of the Market Strategist newsletter.
Adjunct Professor of Finance, Brandeis University International School of Business.
Director and Vice President, Market Technicians Association Educational Foundation, Cambridge Massachusetts—a charitable foundation dedicated to encouraging
and providing educational courses in technical analysis at the college and university
level.
Past editor, Journal of Technical Analysis, New York, New York—the official journal
of technical analysis research.
Past director, Market Technicians Association, New York, New York—an association
of professional technical analysts.
In his life in the stock and options markets, Mr. Kirkpatrick has been a hedge fund manager, investment advisor, advisor to floor and desk traders and portfolio managers, institutional
stock broker, options trader, desk and large-block trader, lecturer and speaker on aspects of technical analysis to profesional and academic groups, expert legal witness on the stock market,
owner of several small businesses, owner of an institutional brokerage firm, and part owner of a
CBOE options trading firm. His research has been published in Barron’s and elsewhere. In 1993
and 2001, he won the Charles H. Dow Award for excellence in technical research, and in 2009,
he won the MTA award for his contributions to technical analysis. Educated at Phillips Exeter
Academy, Harvard College (A.B.) and the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
(M.B.A.), he was also a decorated combat officer with the 1st Cavalry Division in Vietnam. He
currently resides in Maine with his wife, Ellie, and their various domestic animals.

Download at www.wowebook.com

About the Authors

xxvii

Julie R. Dahlquist, Ph.D., received her B.B.A. in economics from University of Louisiana at
Monroe, her M.A. in Theology from St. Mary’s University, and her Ph.D. in economics from
Texas A&M University. Currently, she is a senior lecturer, Department of Finance, at the University of Texas at San Antonio College of Business. Dr. Dahlquist is a frequent presenter at national
and international conferences. She is the coauthor (with Richard Bauer) of Technical Market
Indicators: Analysis and Performance (John Wiley & Sons). Her research has appeared in Financial Analysts Journal, Journal of Technical Analysis, Managerial Finance, Applied Economics,
Working Money, Financial Practices and Education, Active Trader, and in the Journal of Financial Education. She serves on the Board of the Market Technicians Association Educational
Foundation, on the editorial board of the Southwestern Business Administration Journal, and as
a reviewer for a number of journals, including the Journal of Technical Analysis. She resides in
San Antonio with her husband, Richard Bauer, and their two children, Katherine and Sepp.

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

P A R T

I

INTRODUCTION
C HAPTER 1

I NTRODUCTION TO T ECHNICAL A NALYSIS

C HAPTER 2

T HE B ASIC P RINCIPLE OF T ECHNICAL
A NALYSIS —T HE T REND

C HAPTER 3

H ISTORY OF T ECHNICAL A NALYSIS

C HAPTER 4

T HE T ECHNICAL A NALYSIS C ONTROVERSY

1

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

1

INTRODUCTION TO TECHNICAL
ANALYSIS

Technical analysis—these words may conjure up many different mental images. Perhaps you
think of the stereotypical technical analyst, alone in a windowless office, slouched over stacks of
hand-drawn charts of stock prices. Or, maybe you think of the sophisticated multicolored computerized chart of your favorite stock you recently saw. Perhaps you begin dreaming about all the
money you could make if you knew the secrets to predicting stock prices. Or, perhaps you
remember sitting in a finance class and hearing your professor say that technical analysis “is a
waste of time.” In this book, we examine some of the perceptions, and misperceptions, of technical analysis.
If you are new to the study of technical analysis, you might be wondering just what technical analysis is. In its basic form, technical analysis is the study of prices in freely traded markets
with the intent of making profitable trading or investment decisions. Technical analysis is rooted
in basic economic theory. Consider the basic assumptions presented by Robert D. Edwards and
John Magee in the classic book, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends:
• Stock prices are determined solely by the interaction of demand and supply.
• Stock prices tend to move in trends.
• Shifts in demand and supply cause reversals in trends.
• Shifts in demand and supply can be detected in charts.
• Chart patterns tend to repeat themselves.
Technical analysts study the action of the market itself rather than the goods in which the
market deals. The technical analyst believes that “the market is always correct.” In other words,
rather than trying to consider all the factors that will influence the demand for Gadget International’s newest electronic gadget and all the items that will influence the company’s cost and
supply curve to determine an outlook for the stock’s price, the technical analyst believes that all
of these factors are already factored into the demand and supply curves and, thus, the price of the
company’s stock. We find that stock prices (and prices for any security in freely traded markets)

3

Download at www.wowebook.com

4

Part 1 Introduction

are influenced by psychological factors as well, most of them indecipherable. Greed, fear, cognitive bias, misinformation, expectations, and other factors enter into the price of a security, making the analysis of the factors nearly impossible. The technical analyst, thus, disregards all these
imponderables and studies how the marketplace is accepting the multitude of exogenous information and beliefs with the intention of finding secrets in that action that have predictive potential.
Students new to any discipline often ask, “How can I use the knowledge of this discipline?” Students new to technical analysis are no different. Technical analysis is used in two
major ways: predictive and reactive. Those who use technical analysis for predictive purposes
use the analysis to make predictions about future market moves. Generally, these individuals
make money by selling their predictions to others. Market letter writers in print or on the Web
and the technical market gurus who frequent the financial news fall into this category. The predictive technical analysts include the more well-known names in the industry; these individuals
like publicity because it helps market their services.
On the other hand, those who use technical analysis in a reactive mode are usually not well
known. Traders and investors use techniques of technical analysis to react to particular market
conditions to make their decisions. For example, a trader may use a moving average crossover to
signal when a long position should be taken. In other words, the trader is watching the market
and reacting when a certain technical condition is met. These traders and investors are making
money by making profitable trades for their own or clients’ portfolios. Some of them may even
find that publicity distracts them from their underlying work.
The focus of this book is to explain the basic principles and techniques for reacting to the
market. We do not attempt to predict the market, nor do we provide you with the Holy Grail or a
promise of a method that will make you millions overnight. Instead, we want to provide you with
background, basic tools, and techniques that you will need to be a competent technical analyst.
As we will see when we study the history of technical analysis, the interest in technical
analysis in the United States dates back over 150 years, when Charles H. Dow began to write
newsletters that later turned into the Wall Street Journal and developed the various Dow averages
to measure the stock market. Since that time, much has been written about technical analysis.
Today, there are entire periodicals, such as the Technical Analysis of Stock and Commodities and
the Journal of Technical Analysis, devoted to the study of the subject. In addition, there are many
articles appearing in other publications, including academic journals. There are even a number of
excellent books on the market. As you can see from this book’s extensive bibliography, which is
in no way a complete list of every published item on technical analysis, a massive quantity of
material about technical analysis exists.
So, why does the world need another book on technical analysis? We began looking
through the multitude of materials on technical analysis a few years ago, searching for resources
to use in educational settings. We noticed that many specialized books existed on the topic, but
there was no resource to provide the student of technical analysis with a comprehensive summation of the body of knowledge. We decided to provide a coherent, logical framework for this
material that could be used as a textbook and a reference book.
Our intent in writing this book is to provide the student of technical analysis, whether a
novice college student or an experienced practitioner, with a systematic study of the field of technical analysis. Over the past century, much has been written about the topic. The classic works of

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 1 Introduction to Technical Analysis

5

Charles Dow and the timeless book by Edwards and Magee still contain valuable information for
the student of technical analysis. The basic principles of these early authors are still valid today.
However, the evolving financial marketplace and the availability of computer power have led to
a substantial growth in the new tools and information available to the technical analyst.
Many technical analysts have learned their trade from the mentors with whom they have
worked. Numerous individuals who are interested in studying technical analysis today, however,
do not have access to such a mentor. In addition, as the profession has advanced, many specific
techniques have developed. The result is that the techniques and methods of technical analysis
often appear to be a hodgepodge of tools, ideas, and even folklore, rather than a part of a coherent body of knowledge.
Many books on the market assume a basic understanding of technical analysis or focus on
particular financial markets or instruments. Our intent is to provide the reader with a basic reference to support a lifelong study of the discipline. We have attempted to provide enough background information and terminology that you can easily read this book without having to refer to
other references for background information. We have also included a large number of references
for further reading so that you can continue learning in the specialized areas that interest you.
Another unique characteristic of this book is the joining of the practitioner and the academic. Technical analysis is widely practiced, both by professional traders and investors and by
individuals managing their own money. However, this widespread practice has not been matched
by academic acknowledgment of the benefits of technical analysis. Academics have been slow to
study technical analysis; most of the academic studies of technical analysis have lacked a thorough understanding of the actual practice of technical analysis. It is our hope not only to bring
together a practitioner-academic author team but also to provide a book that promotes discussion
and understanding between these two groups.
Whether you are a novice or experienced professional, we are confident that you will find
this book helpful. For the student new to technical analysis, this book will provide you with the
basic knowledge and building blocks to begin a lifelong study of technical analysis. For the more
experienced technician, you will find this book to be an indispensable guide, helping you to
organize your knowledge, question your assumptions and beliefs, and implement new techniques.
We begin this book with a look at the background and history of technical analysis. In this
part, we discuss not only the basic principles of technical analysis but also the technical analysis
controversy—the debate between academics and practitioners regarding the efficiency of financial markets and the merit of technical analysis. This background information is especially useful to those who are new to technical analysis and those who are studying the subject in an
educational setting. For those with more experience with the field or with little interest in the
academic arguments about market efficiency, a quick reading of this first part will probably suffice.
In the second part of the book, we focus on markets and market indicators. Chapter 5, “An
Overview of Markets,” provides a basic overview of how markets work. Market vocabulary and
trading mechanics are introduced in this chapter. For the student who is unfamiliar with this terminology, a thorough understanding of this chapter will provide the necessary background for
the remaining chapters. Our focus in Chapter 6, “Dow Theory,” is on the development and principles of Dow Theory. Although Dow Theory was developed a century ago, much of modern-day

Download at www.wowebook.com

6

Part I Introduction

technical analysis is based on these classic principles. A thorough understanding of these timeless principles helps keep the technical analyst focused on the key concepts that lead to making
money in the market. In Chapter 7, “Sentiment,” we focus on sentiment; the psychology of market players is a major concept in this chapter. In Chapter 8, “Measuring Market Strength,” we
discuss methods for gauging overall market strength. Chapter 9, “Temporal Patterns and Cycles,”
focuses on temporal tendencies, the tendency for the market to move in particular directions during particular times, such as election year cycles and seasonal stock market patterns. Because the
main fuel for the market is money, Chapter 10, “Flow of Funds,” focuses on the flow of funds. In
this chapter, we look at measures of market liquidity and how the Federal Reserve can influence
liquidity.
The third part of the book focuses on trend analysis. In many ways, this part can be thought
of as the heart of technical analysis. If we see that the market is trending upward, we can profitably ride that trend upward. If we determine that the market is trending downward, we can even
profit by taking a short position. In fact, the most difficult time to profit in the market is when
there is no definitive upward or downward trend. Over the years, technical analysts have developed a number of techniques to help them visually determine when a trend is in place. These
charting techniques are the focus of Chapter 11, “History and Construction of Charts.” In Chapter 12, “Trends—The Basics,” we discuss how to draw trend lines and determine support and
resistance lines using these charts. In Chapter 13, “Breakouts, Stops, and Retracements,” we
focus on determining breakouts. These breakouts will help us recognize a trend change as soon
as possible. We also discuss the importance of protective stops in this chapter. Moving averages,
a useful mathematical technique for determining the existence of trends, are presented in Chapter 14, “Moving Averages.”
The fourth part of this book focuses on chart pattern analysis—the item that first comes to
mind when many people think of technical analysis. In Chapter 15, “Bar Chart Patterns,” we
cover classic bar chart patterns; in Chapter 16, “Point-and-Figure Chart Patterns,” we focus on
point-and-figure chart patterns. Short-term patterns, including candlestick patterns, are covered
in Chapter 17, “Short-Term Patterns.”
Part V, “Trend Confirmation,” deals with the concept of confirmation. We consider price
oscillators and momentum measures in Chapter 18, “Confirmation.” Building upon the concept
of trends from earlier chapters, we look at how volume plays a role in confirming the trend, giving us more confidence that a trend is indeed occurring. We also look at oscillators and indexes
of momentum to analyze other means of confirming price trend.
Next, we turn our attention to the relationship between cycle theory and technical analysis.
In Chapter 19, “Cycles,” we discuss the basic principles of cycle theory and the characteristics of
cycles. Some technical analysts believe that cycles seen in the stock market have a scientific
basis; for example, R. N. Elliott claimed that the basic harmony found in nature occurs in the
stock market. Chapter 20, “Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann,” introduces the basic concepts of Elliott
Wave Theory, a school of thought that adheres to Elliott’s premise that stock price movements
form discernible wave patterns.
Once we know the basic techniques of technical analysis, the question becomes, “Which
particular securities will we trade?” Selection decisions are the focus of Chapter 21, “Selection
of Markets and Issues: Trading and Investing.” In this chapter, we discuss the intermarket relationships that will help us determine on which market to focus by determining which market is

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 1 Introduction to Technical Analysis

7

most likely to show strong performance. We also discuss individual security selection, measures
of relative strength, and how successful practitioners have used these methods to construct portfolios.
As technical analysts, we need methods of measuring our success. After all, our main
objective is making money. Although this is a straightforward objective, determining whether we
are meeting our objective is not quite so straightforward. Proper measurement of trading and
investment strategies requires appropriate risk measurement and an understanding of basic statistical techniques. The last couple of chapters help put all the tools and techniques we present
throughout the book into practice. Chapter 22, “System Design and Testing,” is devoted to developing and testing trading systems. At this point, we look at how we can test the tools and indicators covered throughout the book to see if they will make money for us—our main objective—in
the particular way we would like to trade. Finally, Chapter 23, “Money and Risk Management,”
deals with money management and avoiding capital loss.
For those who need a brushup in basic statistics or want to understand some of the statistical concepts introduced throughout the book, Richard J. Bauer, Jr., Ph.D., CFA, CMT (Professor
of Finance, Bill Greehey School of Business, St. Mary’s University, San Antonio, TX), provides
a tutorial on basic statistical techniques of interest to the technical analyst in Appendix A, “Basic
Statistics.”
For those who are unfamiliar with the terms and language used in trading, Appendix B,
“Types of Orders and Other Trader Terminology,” provides brief definitions of specific order
types and commonly used terms in order entry.
As with all skills, learning technical analysis requires practice. We have provided a number
of review questions and problems at the end of the chapters to help you begin thinking about and
applying some of the concepts on your own. The extensive bibliography will direct you to further
readings in the areas of technical analysis that are of particular interest to you.
Another way of honing your technical skills is participating in a professional organization
that is focused on technical analysis. In the United States, the Market Technicians Association
(MTA) provides a wide variety of seminars, lectures, and publications for technical analysis professionals. The MTA also sponsors the Chartered Market Technician (CMT) program. Professionals wanting to receive the prestigious CMT designation must pass three examinations and
adhere to a strict code of professional conduct. More information about the MTA and the CMT
program may be found at the Web site: www.mta.org. The International Federation of Technical
Analysts, Inc., (IFTA) is a global organization of market analysis societies and associations.
IFTA, and its member associations worldwide, sponsor a number of seminars and publications.
IFTA offers a professional certification, the Certified Financial Technician, and a masters-level
degree, the Master of Financial Technical Analysis. The details of these certifications, along with
contact information for IFTA’s member associations around the world, can be found at their Web
site: www.ifta.org.
Technical analysis is a complex, ever-expanding discipline. The globalization of markets,
the creation of new securities, and the availability of inexpensive computer power are opening
even more opportunities in this field. Whether you use the information professionally or for your
own personal trading or investing, we hope that this book will serve as a stepping-stone to your
study and exploration of the field of technical analysis.
