on the underlying futures market. The wider and faster the price movements are, the higher the volatility level is, and the higher the volatility,
the higher the premium for the option, other things being equal. Implied
volatility is a figure used to rank the volatility percentage that explains
the current market price of an option. It is considered the common denominator of option pricing as it helps compare an option’s theoretical
value under different market conditions. Historical volatility refers to
the measure of the actual price change of the futures product during a
specified time period. Using mathematical calculations, historical volatility is the annualized standard deviation of daily returns during the
period.
Other variables are also used to calculate an option’s value such as interest rates and demand for the option itself. For instance, if you bought a
call option and if the underlying futures market is moving up toward your
strike price, then the option’s premium may increase in value as option
writers or sellers will want more money and buyers will have to pay more
for the option.
One of the first things to know about buying options on futures is that
you do not need to hold them until expiration. Option buyers may sell their
position at any time during market hours when the contracts are trading on
the exchange. Options may be exercised at any time before the expiration
date during regular market hours by notifying your broker. This is called
the American style of option exercising. The European style of option exercising means you can only exercise your option on the day the option
expires. This method usually refers to equity options traded overseas. The
references in this book are only to options on futures that are traded in the
United States.
You also need to know that most options on deliverable futures expire
about a month before their respective futures contract months. For example, a July call option on corn futures will expire around June 20. Cash settlement products such as stock index futures have their options expire on
the same day as the main underlying quarterly contract months: March, June,
September, and December. Stock index futures also have off-month options
that expire on the third Thursday of every month.
If you buy an option and the market moves in the direction of your strike
price, then the value may increase to the point where you may realize a profit
after commissions and fees. If you are long a call or a put option, all you need

Options 101

221

to do is sell it. If you believe that market conditions have changed and your
opinion has changed, or if you think the option has gained about as much
as it can, then get out. Provided there is a liquid market for the option, you
should receive at least some premium back if there is time value left and if
the strike price is still close to the underlying futures price.
The purpose of this chapter is to give you a better understanding of the
mechanics of options trading. I want to acquaint you with the everyday relevance of options trading for the individual trader and include my experiences and observations. I would rather help you understand when and how
to use options than try to explain the complex details of the formulas and
mathematical computations that determine the theoretical value of an options premium. The Black–Scholes model incorporates the current underlying futures price, expected volatility, time until expiration, interest rates,
strike price, and so on. That type of computation is what computer programs
are for, and we’ll leave that for the brokers and software vendors who provide these services and can tell you the effect of different scenarios for
volatility, time, and the magnitude of the price move.
Although some elements of options pricing may seem to be complex,
you should be familiar with what are known as the Greeks:
• Delta is the amount by which an option’s value will change relative to
the change in value of the underlying futures contract.
• Beta is a measure of an option’s price movement based on the overall
movement of the option market.
• Theta is the estimate of the price depreciation from time decay.
• Vega is the measure of the rate of change in an option’s theoretical value
for a certain percentage change in the volatility rate.
• Gamma is the rate of change in an option’s delta based on a certain percent change in the underlying futures contract.
Options and option strategies can be made simple or extremely complex because options are an extremely versatile investment instrument.
What has made options trading so popular is that investors are now realizing that there are a wide variety of strategies and combinations that can
offer the ability to maximize leverage and define risk parameters. Options
can be used as a surrogate futures position, or they may be implemented as
a hedge against a futures position, which, in turn, could be a hedge against a
cash position.
The complex options strategies usually involve spreading two or more
positions and are considered a multiple-leg spread strategy. Generally speaking, the more complex the strategy, the more legs that are involved. That
complexity can mean more transaction or commission costs as well. You
need to examine and include these costs in a trading strategy to weigh

222

OPTIONS: A Primer

whether the trade is worth initiating. Consider it like evaluating whether
the cost of doing business is worth the effort. If there is not a lot of room for
profit and the risks outweigh the rewards, then reconsider initiating the
trade. Once you learn to understand this simple concept of weighing your
alternatives, I believe trading in options can be a lot less stressful, and the
result might be a more rewarding trading experience.
After determining a trend direction or a price move in the underlying
futures contract, I like to explore the different avenues to discover which
strategy works for me to capitalize on my opinion. For example, I will look
at the costs, the risk, and the potential reward. Unless you try to figure what
is the best method, you won’t know how to get the most bang for your
buck. Analyze what will work best for you.
Education provides enlightenment and helps give you the confidence
you need to experience new things. Humans seem to have an inherent natural tendency to be afraid to try new things due to fear of the unknown.
What can cause more fear than investing in an industry that claims that 80
percent to 90 percent of investors lose money? But let me show you how to
examine the markets and formulate your own opinion before you invest
using options. Then you can make an educated, rational business decision
on your own before you place an order using options.

OPTIONS TRADING STEPS
To begin with, you have to have an opinion about what you expect the underlying market to do. Simple. You have three choices: up, down, or sideways. Now all you have to do is your homework, analyzing support and
resistance, technical indicators, or whatever you want to use in your analysis to arrive at a decision. After doing your homework, you decide you want
to go long, say, coffee futures. You arrive at this conclusion based on the
fact that the price is at a 30-year low and your technical indicators are generating a buy signal. You expect a move from the 40-cent level back to at
least the 80-cent price range, which would be a 50 percent correction level
derived from a 2-year high. You conclude that it may take at least 6 months
to see the trade mature.
Great, this is the first step in planning a trade. Now let’s see how you
can trade a plan by exploring the alternatives incorporating the use of options. I like to use options combined with futures as a hedge or insurance
against adverse moves. This is one situation where that may be a good
choice.
First, you need to know what it takes as a good-faith deposit to margin
a futures contract. You see that the initial requirement for coffee at that time

Options Trading Steps

223

is $2,450 (may change with market conditions) and the maintenance margin
requirement is $1,750. Every point move in coffee is $3.75. A move from 45
to 46 cents is a 100-point move, which is equivalent to $375.
An at-the-money 45 March put has a price of 280 points so, with each
point worth $3.75, the cost of the put is $1,050 before commissions and related fees. The March put expires on February 8, providing 72 days of protection from today’s date, November 28. If you buy a futures contract at
46.60 cents and pay a premium of 280 points, the cost of the option and the
difference between the strike price and the futures price is 440 points
(times $3.75 equals $1,650). Until the expiration of the option, that is your
risk and your margin requirement. To break even at expiration, you need
coffee futures to be at 49.40 cents.
If coffee falls to, let’s say, 10 cents for the first time in 30 years, all you
could lose is the initial dollar amount of $1,650. This is, in essence, a limited
loss/unlimited profit spread position. The only way you can lose is if coffee
goes down or does not move at all for the next 72 days. The profit opportunity that exists, if coffee rallies, is unlimited if the price reaches above 49.40
during the next 72 days.
All right, that is scenario number one. Or, as I tell investors, start playing the Monte Hall television game show, “Let’s Make a Deal.” That is what
is behind door number one. Let’s start looking behind doors number two
and three.
You now know what the costs are, what the risks are, and what the potential rewards are. Let’s shop around and see what is behind door number
two. First, you’ll price call options. You are trying to figure out what you
can get for the same amount of money with the same or better returns if the
price of coffee rises—within the realm of reality, of course. For example, you
do not want to buy a call with a strike price of 100. That is not in the realm
of reality. Prices could reach that level, but it would mean the price of coffee
futures would have to more than double in a relatively short period of time.
You will also compare how much a May call option is versus a July call
option. Another determining factor that I use is the amount of time there is
until expiration on the option and the price difference between the same
contract month of the futures contract and the options month. Also, are
May and July futures and options a liquid month? Would an options spread
be beneficial?
Start working the math on the different costs associated with different strategies and watch what the parameters of the option strategies are.
The characteristics like limited risk/unlimited reward or limited reward/
unlimited risks should be explored and understood.
When trading a futures contract, you need to analyze which direction
the market may go and when it is going to move. When dealing in options,

224

OPTIONS: A Primer

especially when buying calls and paying premium, you need to know not
only which direction the market may go and when it is going to move, but you
also need to add another factor, an estimate how far the market will move.
Remember, when buying call options, you need to cover the cost of the
premium plus commissions and transaction fees to make a profit at expiration. This is a situation where you could be right about the direction of
prices but still lose money if the market does not move beyond your strike
price at expiration.
For this example, though, a July 55 call option seems to be a better
choice, weighing all the factors of cost, leverage, and risk/reward ratios.
These options expire on June 14, providing 198 days until expiration. The
premium is 500 points so, at $3.75 per point, the cost of the call is $1,875.
The underlying futures contract is at 50.55 cents, which is 445 points out of
the money. So you can use a call to buy an equal amount of coffee that will
give you about the same amount of leverage and risk parameters as entering the market with one futures contract combined with a put option. The
benefits are you have 2.75 times more life until the option expires using the
outright long July 55 call option instead of the March futures and options
strategy.
In doing the math and analyzing your costs, look at what the probability is that the market will hit your targets and look at the possibility of the
market moving in your direction. Now look at the risks and ask yourself if
you can afford to lose if you are wrong. And then ask if the trade is worth
the reward. If you follow this line of thinking, then you may have a better
understanding of what you are doing.
Because options on deliverable futures contracts generally expire the
month before the month of the futures contract itself, it is a good idea to
use the half-and-half rule when buying options outright. If half of the time
value or half of the premium value erodes, reevaluate the position. Either
get out of the options or salvage some premium by liquidating a portion of
your position. You could also adjust your position by adding on more of the
same options to lower your average premium price or you could buy other
options that have more time value. This approach could be considered cost
averaging, but some pundits consider it throwing good money after bad.
Sometimes it pays not to give up on the product or the investment idea; just
admit the timing was wrong and reevaluate.

OPTIONS STRATEGIES
There are so many different option strategies available that it would be difficult to cover them all. I explain here a few of the more common strategies

Options Strategies

225

that individual investors use, and you can see both the advantages and disadvantages for yourself. Again, some strategies use the concept of spreading,
which involves the act of simultaneously buying and writing or selling multiple option positions. Remember, the more legs or combinations involved,
the more commissions and fees are involved, and you need to include these
costs in your calculations for risk and reward parameters.
Most of the following strategies can be combined with different strike
prices and even options with different calendar months. I hope the names
will help you identify the different characteristics associated with each strategy so you can use them for a quick future reference.

Bull Call Spreads or Debit Spreads
The terms bull and call imply a bias toward an upward price direction, so you
can assume this strategy involves a spread that goes long the market by
using calls. Debit implies that you are paying for the trade and that the costs
are being debited from your account.
Other courses or books may refer to this as a vertical bull call spread.
What is usually involved in this strategy is the purchase of a close-to-themoney or an in-the-money call and at the same time the sale of a further
away strike price call option of the same expiration date. The close-to- or
in-the-money call option may cost a great deal of money as it is near or
lower to where the underlying futures contract price is trading, especially
if there is substantial time remaining until the option’s expiration. Traders
spread this cost off by selling or writing a further out-of-the-money call option. When you sell or write a call, you collect premium or receive a credit
to your account. This credit reduces the cost of the close-to- or in-themoney call option.
The profit/loss profile for this strategy is a limited risk and a lower expense for the investor as premium costs are reduced by the sale of the
higher strike price call. The short call is covered by the long call so there is
a predetermined risk factored in this trade and no unnecessary risks associated with option writing. The profit potential is limited to the level between
the two strike prices minus the premium costs, the commission, and fees.
For example, if March silver futures were trading at $4.10 on November
28 and you expected the market price to rise to at least $4.75 by January,
then you might look at buying a March 425 call and at the same time selling
the March 475 call. The strike price difference is 50 cents. If each penny
move in silver futures equals $50, then this is a $2,500 maximum spread difference. If the cost of doing this trade is, say, a net of $500 for the premium,
$65 per option (times two) for commissions, and $5 per option for fees, then
your total cost is $640. That is your risk and maximum loss amount. Your
maximum profit is $2,500 – $640, or $1,860.

226

OPTIONS: A Primer

Your risk/reward ratio is almost 1 to 3 in this scenario. If silver settles
below $4.25 at expiration, then you would lose $640. If silver does move and
settles above $4.75 at expiration, then your net profit is $1,860. If silver really took off to $10 per ounce, you are still limited to the $1,860 profit.
Because this is a spread, you can leg into or out of a position. If, on the
one hand, the silver market fell to, say, $3.50 first, both the 425 and the 475
calls would decline in value. If it is financially beneficial and if there is a
good amount of time remaining, then you may consider buying back the
short 475 call and staying long the 425 call, provided that you have enough
free equity in your account to pay the difference of the 425 call. If this is
possible, then you are now in an unlimited profit potential situation and are
not locked into a defined profit situation. If, on the other hand, the market
exploded up to $4.75 first and you sold the 425 call, that would leave you
net short a 475 call with unlimited risk and you would be subject to a margin requirement. Most traders buy the spread and liquidate the spread, but
the opportunity to leg out of a spread does exist.

Bear Put Spreads or Debit Spreads
The terms bear and put imply a bias toward a downward price move, so you
can assume this strategy involves a spread that goes short the market by
using puts. Again, debit spread means that you are paying for the trade and
the costs are being debited from your account.
Other courses or books may refer to this as a vertical bear put spread.
What is usually involved in this strategy is the purchase of a close-to-themoney or an in-the-money put and at the same time the sale of a further away
strike price put option of the same expiration date. As mentioned previously,
the close-to- or in-the-money put option may cost a great deal of money as it
is near to the price of the underlying futures contract price, especially if there
is substantial time remaining until the option’s expiration. Traders spread
this cost off by selling or writing a further out of the money put option. When
you sell or write a put, you collect premium or receive a credit in your account. This credit reduces the cost of the close-to- or in-the-money put.
The profit/ loss profile for this strategy is a limited risk and a lower expense for the investor as premium costs are reduced by the sale of the higher
strike price call. The profit potential is limited to the level between the two
strike prices minus the premium costs, the commission, and fees. It is the exact
opposite of the bull call spread in the sense of trading market direction.

Vertical Calendar Spreads
Vertical calendar spreads are very similar to the bull call and bear put
spreads except that the word calendar means that the strategy has to do

Options Strategies

227

with different calendar months. The parameters involved in this strategy require that an investor be accurate not only for the direction of the price
move, but also for the magnitude of the move and the time frame for which
that move occurs. Because it involves similar but not the exact same months,
there is a higher degree of risk associated with this strategy. As a result of
this increased risk factor, there may be—and usually is—a margin deposit
required in addition to the premium, commission, and fees involved if it is
a debit spread.
Many combinations can be used for calendar spreads. Buying a further
out contract month and selling an option with less time until expiration is
generally how you initiate this spread. Some reasons for using this spread
are that there could be disparities between the call options and futures
prices of the respected contract months, volatility levels may vary between
calendar months, or a trader may simply think he or she can time the market. In any one of these situations, a trader could take advantage of these
disparities by selling the close-to-the-money and close-to-expiration call
options and at the same time buying further out-of-the-money call options
with more time value.
Let’s say you expect silver to move higher between November 28 and
the time March options expire in February. You believe the market could
rally up to the $4.50 level by then, but could go as high as $5.00 by maybe
March or April. A good example of a calendar spread would be to sell the
March 450 calls and to buy the May 475 calls. If prices do not move, then the
rapid time decay of the close-to-expiration March calls will offset the cost
of the longer-term May calls. Another feature is you can leg out of the short
450 call option if it becomes profitable to do so. This strategy requires that
you monitor the underlying futures contract regularly.

Bull Credit Spreads
You could utilize bull credit spreads if you have a neutral or bullish bias on
the underlying futures market. In this strategy you sell a close-to-the-money
put and buy a further out-of-the-money put. The idea is to collect premium
in a steady or rising market as time decay decreases the option’s value. The
purpose for doing a spread is to limit your risk in case an extremely unpredictable adverse market move occurs. By selling the closer-to-the-money
put, you will be collecting more premium than you pay for the out-of-themoney put you are buying.
Your risk is limited to the difference between the two strike prices minus
the premiums that you collected. The profit potential is also limited to the
net premium that you collect minus the commissions and related fees.
Again, it is important to know these fees so that you can work them into
your profit/loss calculations.

228

OPTIONS: A Primer

For those who believe in income-generating trades, a good example is
to use this strategy with stock index futures where options expire nearly
every month. Stock index futures attract these option strategists because it
is necessary to sell premium in an option market that has expensive values
to make the risk worth the reward. The higher the volatility, the higher the
premium is, especially for close-to-the-money puts. Stock index options
meet that criteria. In a slowly uptrending market, a trader can put on these
positions and collect premium, knowing what the risk and rewards are.
There is no need for precise timing to execute this trade strategy, only a
conviction that the futures market will remain at or above the same level by
the options expiration day. A margin requirement or good-faith deposit may
be required for this strategy.
