
50

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

of the loss of getting stopped out at the 20-day low. The net result of a
higher number of losing trades with a sharply lower size of losing trades
equals a big boost to our bottom line.
Alternately, you could put on a position five times larger than you
would normally. Okay, perhaps not that aggressive. But you could easily
double or triple the size of your position and still take on less risk than
you would using the normal channel breakout method. You would take the
normal $1,000 risk on your position but receive double or triple the profits
on winning trades!
Let’s look back at Figure 3.7. Find the day before the actual breakout.
The market was very close to the 55-day high so we could put in an order to
buy at 3 pips higher than the 55-day high. Where will the initial stop be? We
know that we are going to put in a stop at the 20-day low but we also know
that we will be getting out at a much higher price should the rejection rule
kick in. In this case, we need to determine where we would be stopped out
should the rejection rule kick in. Of course, we never know where it will
kick in but we need to estimate this so that we can figure out the size of
our upcoming positions.
Let’s say that we figure that we will be stopped out no lower than
1.9850 should the rejection rule be triggered. That is about one-third the
dollar risk of actually trading down to the 20-day low. So, we can say that
the dollar risk using the rejection rule is one-third of the risk of using the
20-day low. However, we will be stopped out on a slightly larger number
of trades so we need to scale the dollar risk higher to take into account
the additional number of stop-outs. So, let’s estimate that we will lose
50 percent less using the rejection rule than using the 20-day low. We must
now decide whether we want to reduce our risk by 50 percent and only
trade one contract or trade two contracts, which would boost the risk to
100 percent of the 20-day low but would double our profits should the trade
work. In order to make this decision, the background environment must be
taken into consideration. For example, is this trade in the direction of the
long-term trend? What are the expected seasonal price tendencies? Do you
have a fundamental bias? Are there any conflicting or supporting technical
indicators?
If the bias from these other factors is bearish, then you should probably
just put on the one contract and cut your risk while maintaining the normal profits potential. If the bias is bullish from these other environmental
factors, then you should probably double the size of the position, take the
normal level of risk, but have double the profit potential.
Once again, you now have the flexibility of either cutting risk and leaving the profit potential the same or keeping the risk the same and making
more money. This is a major enhancement to the classic channel breakout.

Channel Breakouts

51

Adding the rejection rule adds significantly to the classic channel
breakout. But there are two drawbacks. The first is that we don’t really
know where the risk is. We don’t really know at what price the rejection
rule will be triggered. This makes risk management a problem. Second, the
rejection rule only covers the first two days we are in a trade. Do we really
want to let our stop drop down to the 20-day low after the first two days in
the trade? What if we were aggressive and bought a double-size position?
Now the risk has ramped up dramatically and we may have a much larger
position than we would want with a stop loss at the 20-day low.

THE LAST BAR TECHNIQUE
The solution to this risk management problem is the last bar technique.
I originally got this idea from ace trader Peter Brandt. I had the opportunity to interview him and read his book Trading Futures with Classical Chart Patterns (Advanced Trading Seminars, 2000). He used classical
chart formations such as head and shoulders and trendlines. He used the
chart patterns as outlined in Magee and Edwards’ excellent book Technical
Analysis of Stock Trends (AMACOM, 1997). There is actually a chapter on
trading futures in that book. The problem with Magee and Edwards is that
they suggested that you enter, for example, a head and shoulders top on a
break of the neckline with a stop above the right shoulder. This would be
a very wide stop and Brandt felt that proper risk management would mean
that he would never be able to enter any trades.
So what Brandt did was to put his stop, to carry on this example, above
the high of the last bar in the formation. His concept was that the market
had broken below support. It should be unlikely that the market would
trade back up through the neckline and even go further and break the high
of the last day in the formation. That would be two levels of resistance that
should cap any rallies, particularly if the trade was going to be a winner.
Brandt is using the principle of instant gratification here.
Following Brandt’s idea, I apply it to the channel breakout technique.
Let’s keep looking at our British Pound example in Figure 3.7. In this case,
the market broke the 55-day high on July 15. Note that the bar of the 15th
is the last bar with any portion still under the 55-day level. We set our stop
loss at the bottom of this bar.
Let’s assume for a moment that we are not using the rejection rule.
That means that our initial stop loss in this trade would be the low of the
bar of July 15, or about 1.9940. We would have been stopped out three days
later at that level for a loss of about 80 pips. No big deal.

52

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

I will use the second-to-last bar if the last is barely below the breakout level or it gaps above the breakout level. We are trying to find the last
bar or near-last bar that defines where support will come in if the market
sets back into the range. There is a certain level of discretion necessary to
determine the best “last bar.” Most of the time, we can simply use the true
last bar as our stop. We look for the bar that was the breakout bar. That
should be the last bar 98 percent of the time. Only rarely are we going to
look back one more bar to be the last bar.

TACTICS
There are four different exit strategies for the channel breakout method.
Let’s assume that we have bought the British Pound. We will look at the
rejection rule as our stop on the first two days we are in the trade. We will
then shift to the last-bar method after the first two days. We will look at
the Bishop starting from the first day and will keep it in mind every day we
have the trade open. Finally, we will use the 20-day low once the 20-day low
is higher than the low of the last bar. To repeat: First look at the rejection
rule, then the last bar, then the 20-day low, in that order. We are looking at
the Bishop every day.
You should be putting in both buy and sell orders every day if you have
no position. Once you are in a position, you need to put in your protective
stops depending on the method you are following.

TAKING PROFITS
One of the key advantages of these enhancements is that it allows you to
sometimes exit positions near the high of moves. I showed you how the
Bishop enabled us to exit with a huge profit in September. Let’s look at
some other trades.
Refer back to Figure 3.3. I had previously marked the Bishop exit. That
was a great exit and created a huge profit. We get short at the beginning
of October. Notice that the rejection rule kicks in on the second day in the
trade and we take a microscopic loss. But we enter short on the third day
as we break down again. This trade has no five-day condition so there is no
opportunity for the rejection rule to come into play. So we get short and
use the last-bar technique as our initial stop loss. We never get stopped out
so we shift from using the last bar to the 20-day high near the beginning of
November when the 20-day high finally moves to below the level of the last
bar. But before that, we get another breakdown in the middle of October.

Channel Breakouts

53

There is a five-day condition in place so there is a potential rejection rule.
However, prices slam lower and the rejection rule is never triggered. But
it does cause a new lower last bar, which could become our new stop loss
but I prefer to use the 20-day high.
I prefer to use the 20-day high after I have a nice profit because it is
best to give a profitable trade lots of room to make more money. You may
want to move the stop on part of the position to the new last bar. Still, this
should be a small percent of the total position. Use the 20-day high to make
sure that you are maximizing the big money. So we remain short.
But take a look in the lower-right corner of the chart. Note that there
is a five-day condition in place on that breakdown two bars from the end
of the chart. Notice that rejection rule kicks in and we exit the trade. At
this point, we got short in early October near 1.7400 and exit near 1.4750
for a monster profit. More important, the rejection rule gets us out of the
position on the absolute low bar on the chart. What perfect timing! There
are few techniques that can get us out of positions so close to the absolute
low of the move. So the rejection rule, and the last bar, will help to get us
out of trades and take profits near the lowest or highest price in the move.
This is a huge enhancement of the classic channel breakout.
Basically, we have taken probably the most powerful profit-generating
system in trading and added some strong enhancements that reduce the
risk, enhance profitability, and allow us to often take profits near highs
rather than waiting for the trend to reverse.

THE BOTTOM LINE
If you only use one technique from this book, use the channel breakout
method. But make sure that you use my enhancements, too! I believe that
more money has been made using this technique in futures and forex than
any other technique. The technique can be used plain vanilla or easily enhanced using the methods discussed in this chapter.

CHAPTER 4

The Conqueror

his chapter discusses the Conqueror, which is a clever method that
encourages some truly original thinking. I am a big fan of trading
through multiple time frames (see Chapter 10 for more information
on diversifying through time). This particular method looks at three different time frames before entering a trade.
Most methods use the same method for entering and exiting trades.
For example, you buy when the 20-day moving average crosses above the
50-day moving average and sell when the 20-day moving average crosses
below the 50-day moving average. However, the Conqueror actually uses a
different exit technique from the entry technique. This is rare in the world
of trading.
In previous chapters we’ve covered ways to exit a trade that are different from the entry point. This uncommon approach leads to much higher
profits than the basic method that most people use to trade. The Conqueror
uses one method to enter and another method to exit. They are related to
each other but are separate. In addition, the stop loss is adaptive. That is, it
looks at current market conditions and adapts to those conditions to create
the exit strategy.

T

THE BEGINNINGS OF THE CONQUEROR
The idea originated back in 1991 when Bruce Babcock created a system
called the Currency Conquistador. Bruce was one of the pioneers of futures
trading. He was the founder of Commodity Traders Consumer Report
55

56

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

(CTCR, which is now Web-only at www.ctcr.investors.net), which I bought
from him in 1996 when he was diagnosed with cancer. He was the author
of one of the most popular books on trading, Dow Jones-Irwin Guide to
Trading Systems, and designed many profitable systems.
Perhaps his greatest contribution to futures trading was a sense of integrity and cutting through the hype that fills the futures and forex world.
CTCR allowed no advertising so Bruce could be totally honest in his reviews of products.
Bruce fiddled with the Currency Conquistador for a few years and then
released Currency Conquistador II. This presented a more sensitive stop
loss method than the first version.
At this point, ace researcher Nelson Freeburg enters the story. Nelson
publishes an amazing newsletter called Formula Research (see Appendix:
Suggested Reading for more information). Nelson develops trading methods and systems for trading most markets. He has a clever mind and has
come up with some great systems. I highly recommend his publication.
Nelson published an enhancement for the Conquistador at the end of
1994. One key enhancement was that the original Currency Conquistador
was only for trading currencies. Nelson broadened the testing to other futures contracts and found that his modifications made it profitable for a
broad list of futures. We are only looking at forex in this book, but knowing that the method works on many more markets gives confidence that
this is a strong method.
Nelson also simplified the system, which is almost always a good thing.
In this case, it was a good thing because Nelson-simplified systems outperformed the basic Babcock system.

WHAT IS TRUE RANGE?
Before I get into the mechanics of the system, let me first discuss true
range as we will be using this concept in the calculation of the Conqueror.
One of the advantages of the forex market is that the opening price is
basically the same as the closing price of the previous day. We close at one
price and the opening price is simply the next tick. The only exception is
the close on Friday going over to the open on Monday. Here, it is possible
for a gap to be created by the change in price occurring over the weekend.
In this case, we need to adjust for the potential gap in figuring out the true
range on Monday. We will know what the actual range is by simply looking
at the chart or a table and seeing what your chart service tells you what the
range is. Good enough. The problem comes in when there is a gap between
the range on Friday and the range on Monday.

The Conqueror

57

In this case, the reported range doesn’t really represent the range of the
day. Let’s say that the price gapped down and the high on Monday is below
the low of Friday. The range that is reported is not reflective of what implicitly happened. Although no trading occurred between the high of Monday
and the close of Friday, it can be said that the true high for Monday should
have been the close of Friday.
Here is how Nelson defined it in CTCR in 1995:
To begin with, a day’s true high is the higher of today’s high or
yesterday’s close. The true low is the lower of today’s low or yesterday’s close.
The true range is simply the true high minus the true low. The
true range is designed to better measure the totality of price movement in cases where yesterday’s close lies beyond today’s price range.
Table 4.1, reproduced from Commodity Traders Consumer Report,
shows the results of Nelson’s final modification of the Conquistador.
As you can see, the method is very profitable. In fact, here is what Nelson stated in his issue of Formula Research devoted to the Conquistador:
The self-adjusting stop is perhaps the most innovative element in
this versatile trading system. The wealth of applications inherent in
the logic is a tribute to the analyst who designed it. We are in Bruce
Babcock’s debt for sharing Currency Conquistador, which, in terms
of sheer dollars gained, is the most profitable futures system Formula
Research has published thus far. (Commodity Traders Consumer
Report, 1991)

ENHANCING THE CONQUISTADOR
Now I enter the story. I took Nelson’s profitable modifications of the Conquistador and modified them. I’ve created two different versions. One is
very long term and the other is short term. To differentiate the results
from the excellent work of Bruce and Nelson, I changed the name to the
Conqueror.
Let’s now take a look at the rules. First, we define several conditions.
A positive number is bullish and a negative number is bearish.
1. Today’s close minus the 10-day moving average (MA) of the close
2. Today’s 10-day MA minus the 10-day MA 10 days ago
3. Today’s close minus the close 40 days ago

58

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

TABLE 4.1 Currency Conquistador Version by Nelson Freeburg (Study Shows
Proﬁts/Losses from August 1, 1972, to July 9, 1998)
Swiss
Franc

British
Pound

D-mark

Japanese
Yen

Average

Total Net Proﬁt

$167,062

$177,688

$112,675

$212,437

$167,466

Total Number of
Trades
Number Winning
Trades
Number Losing
Trades
Percent Proﬁtable

97

124

104

102

107

45

46

52

53

49

52

78

52

49

58

46 percent

37 percent

50 percent

51 percent

46 percent

Largest Winning
Trade
Largest Losing Trade
Average Winning
Trade
Average Losing
Trade
Ratio Average
Win/Average Loss
Average Trade (Win &
Loss)

$19,450

$32,018

$20,187

$32,662

$26,079

$(2,787)
$5,669

$(3,019)
$7,140

$(3,987)
$3,633

$(3,087)
$5,327

$(3,220)
$5,442

$(1,693)

$(1,933)

$(1,467)

$(1,426)

$(1,630)

3.34

3.69

2.47

3.73

3.31

$1,722

$1,433

$1,083

$2,082

$1,580

Maximum
Consecutive
Winners
Maximum
Consecutive Losers
Average Number of
Bars in Winners
Average Number of
Bars in Losers

5

4

7

4

5

5

9

4

3

5

110

104

94

99

102

23

15

25

21

21

$(8,000)

$(26,468)

$(7,475)

$(8,162)

$(12,526)

$(8,162)

$(26,725)

$(8,175)

$(9,237)

$(13,075)

2.89
$11,162

2.17
$29,725

2.47
$11,175

4.03
$12,237

2.89
$16,075

1,496
percent

597
percent

1,008
percent

1,735
percent

1,209
percent

Max Closed-Out
Drawdown
Max Intra-Day
Drawdown
Proﬁt Factor
Account Size
Required
Return on Account

Source: Commodity Traders Consumer Report, 1991.

The Conqueror

59

Go long if all three conditions are positive. Go short if all three conditions are negative. Stand aside on any other condition. I’ll get to the protective stop in a minute.
Let’s consider this entry situation. Basically, we are looking at three
different time horizons. First, we are looking at the price action over the
last 10 days when we look at condition one. Condition two is really looking
at the price action of the last 20 days. Finally, condition three is looking at
the last 40 days.
We do not go long or short until all three trends in the market are congruent. The concept of applying three different time frames is unusual in
trading. I had kind of a “doh” moment when I first saw it because it is so
obvious yet never really done.
Basically, we are making sure that whatever trend is in place is powerful enough to turn all three directions bullish or bearish. A sideways
market will not trigger the three conditions and we will stand aside in
those situations, which is perfect. Only when the market really starts to
move in one direction or another will the three trends line up and we
will enter the market. Otherwise, one or more of the three conditions
will be positive or negative and we will look for opportunities in other
markets.
It is, therefore, difficult to get a buy or sell signal from the Conqueror.
Most of the time it sits out of the market. It stubbornly waits for the market
to really get going in one direction or another before it jumps in with a
long or short position. This is one of the most important features of the
Conqueror. It sits out when the market is drifting sideways or has only
a slight trend. This saves a lot of money in whipsaw losses. It is also a
significant improvement over most trading methods!
Let’s take a look at an example. Let’s pick up the action in the middle
of September. The three conditions are mixed at that point. Let’s follow the
flow of the trade to see how it develops.
I’ve marked three arrows in Figure 4.1. The first arrow shows that condition three is negative. The close that day is below the close of the market
40 days previously.
Three days later, the price closes below the 10-day moving average,
turning this condition negative. That’s two conditions that are negative. We
still can’t go short because we need to have all three conditions negative
before we can go short.
Take a look at the chart. At this point, the market has had a down
move from the upper left of the chart. There was a rally in mid-September.
At this point, we don’t know if this is the beginning of a new bull market or
simply a countertrend rally in the down trend. The market should probably
be considered as roughly neutral. At this point, we have two conditions
negative and one positive.

60

FIGURE 4.1 British Pound with Conditions Marked

The Conqueror

61

The Conqueror sits back and waits until the trend is conclusively in
one direction before entering. At this point, there are two negatives and
one positive for only a net negative of one. This is not conclusive enough
for the Conqueror.
The one condition that is not cooperating is the 10-day MA because it is
still not below itself 10 days previously. It is not until early October before
the 10-day MA drops enough. At that point, as the third arrow indicates, the
third condition turns negative.
We go short on the close of trading on the day that the third condition
triggers. If we don’t know if the third condition has triggered until after
the close of trading, then we go short on the open the following day. Okay,
we are now short. All three conditions have been triggered. Where is our
protective stop? Now it gets really interesting. We are going to use several
different methods to determine the protective stop.
The first stop is a simple money management stop. For a standard contract, place a stop that would be a $2,000 loss. In other words, figure out
how many pips represents $2,000 and place a stop that many pips away
from the entry price. Fortunately, this stop will rarely be triggered. The
other forms of stop will be triggered far more often. Still, we want some
disaster insurance in place.
I’ve added another panel to the chart (see Figure 4.2). The new lower
panel shows the average true range (ATR) over the past 40 days. This is
simply the 40-day average of the ATR. You can see that the ATR was about
0.024 on the day we went short. That is really 240 pips. You can also see that
the market was becoming more volatile from August through November.
The ATR was slowly moving higher during this period showing that the
average range for the day was increasing. In fact, it increased from about
150 pips per day to 350 pips per day.
This is the point where we create the two different versions of the
Conqueror. Conqueror I will create a stop two times the ATR away from
the current close while Conqueror II will create a stop 12 times the ATR
away from the current close. Let’s look closer at the current situation as
an example.
Let’s say that we get short at 1.7400. The ATR on that day is 0.0240, or
240 pips. Conqueror I will place a protective stop loss 480 pips above the
