
41

Figure 2.20 S&P 500 Index (60-minute bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 2.21 S&P 500 Index (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

42

Figure 2.22 S&P 500 Index (weekly bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 2.23 S&P 500 Index (monthly bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

43
will note these same repetitive phenomena. The closer the daily close is to the high of a bar, especially if
there are several such bars together, the closer we are to a market high.
Market lows, in all time frames are just the reverse: the closer the closes of the bars are to the low then
the closer we are to a market upturn. This is market reality; this is how the world of speculation works,
always has, always will.

Chapter 3
The Real Secret to Short-Term Trading

The "secret" is the shorter your time frame of trading the less, money you will make.

Sad but true. Think about any investment you have ever been in. Did you make a killing in one day?
And, if you were so lucky, how many times were you able to repeat it' Not many. That is because the
universal rule of life. Of ain, is the same as the universal rule of speculation:
It takes time for profits to grow.

Successful traders know that a market can only move so far in 1 minute that a market can move
further in 5 minutes, even more in 60 minutes and a heck of a lot more in a day or a week. Losing traders
want to trade in a very short time frame and thus automatically limit their profit potential.
By definition, they have limited their profits and kept an unlimited loss scenario. It is no wonder so
many have done so poorly at this of short-term trading. They have boxed themselves into a no-win situatio
under the guise, often promoted by brokers or system sellers. That money can be made calling market highs
and low’s during the day. The merit is bolstered with the seemingly rational statement that by tading within
just one day and never holding anything overnight. you cannot be exposed to news or major changes; thus
you limit your risk.

45

46
That's flat-out wrong, for two reasons.
First, your risk is under your control. The only control we have in this business is to set a stop-loss
point, a level at which we exit the trade, all trades. Yes, a market could gap beyond your stop the following
morning, but that is a rare experience, and even then we are still able to limit our loss with our stop-loss and
absolute willingness to get out of losing trades. Losers hold on to losses, winners don't.
Once you establish a position with stops, you can only lose about that much money. No matter when or
how you got into the trade, your stop limits your risk. Your risk is the same if you buy at an all-time new
market high, or low.
Not holding overnight limits the amount of time your investment has to grow. While sometimes the
market will open against you, if we are on the right track even more of the time the market will open in our
favor.
More importantly, by ending our trading at the end of the day, or worse yet at some artificial cutoff
point such as a 5- or 10-minute chart, we have drastically limited the potential for profits. Remember I said
the difference between losers and winners is losers hold on to their losses? Another difference is that
winners hold onto their winning positions while losers get out "too early." It is almost as if losers can't stand
being in a winning trade. they are so damn happy to get a winner, they bail out of it far too early (usually, by
getting out during the day of entry).
You will never make big money until you learn to hold on to your winners, and the longer you hold the
more potential you have for making a profit. Successful farmers don't plant a crop and then dig it up every
few minutes to see how it is doing. They let it germinate, let it grow. We traders could learn a great deal
from this natural process of growth. Our success as traders is no different; it takes time to create winners.

It Is All about Time
What I have just told you is an absolute unequivocal investment truth. It takes time to make money
regardless of the activity. Thus short-term traders, by very definition, are limiting their opportunities.
The fallacy of day traders is their belief that they can actually call the short-term swings of the market,
tell where price is going the vast majority of the time, predict the highs and lows as well as the precise time
markets will top and bottom. Sorry to tell you this, folks, but it cannot be done with any consistency. It is a
day trader's dream, a pipe dream at that.
But don't give up hope, my years of market analysis and trading have revealed one fundamental truth
about market structure, which is the secret to making "short term" trading profitable.

47
By now you understand that (1) short-term swings are very difficult to predict; (2) we must limit
losses; (3) as short-term traders, we will only do well when there is an explosive move in our favor; (4)
time is an ally because we need time to create profits.
To make significant money as short-term traders, we have to be able to sense how long the most
profitable short-term swings usually last. This is not just a question of time, it is also one of price. Just as
there are no straight paths to heaven, price can only go straight up, or down, to a certain point. The question
I needed to answer was, What usually represents that balance of price and time? Note I said usually; many
times, price swings will go further and take longer than you could ever imagine; and just as often, they
falter and fizzle out just when you think you finally have outwitted the market.
Keeping all this in mind, I am now going to reveal my biggest shortterm secret of trading to balance
the trade-offs of price and time swings. This secret consists of two components:
1. We only make money on large-range days.
2. Large-range days usually close at or near the high, if an up day, the low if a down day.
I am willing to let the fancy dancing day traders figure out the machinations of interday swings. I
doubt they can do it, but even if they can, it is very hard, frustrating, and demanding work. Despite the two
old codgers' knowledge of tape reading and years of market wisdom, they had no more ability to correctly
call market moves from tape watching than any of the rest of us. We have gone from tape reading to quote
machines, but the game, or myth is the same, and so is the degree of difficulty. It is pressure city to sit in
front of a quote machine for 7 hours a day battling, guessing, and being proven wrong more often than not.
About twice 1 year, I get talked into bankrolling some hotshot trader who thinks he or she can profit
from these short-term swings. Let's see, two traders a year for 35 years, that's 70 times I should have
learned the lesson I am teaching right here, right now. I just don't think it can be done. The only caveat I
would put here is that it cannot be done with a system or mechanical approach. I have seen traders with a
"feel" succeed at this, but that feel often deserts them and is something they cannot pass on to another
person. Therein my work is different: you or anyone can repeat what I do.
I place my trade knowing only one of three types of days will develop: a small-range day that will
produce a small loss or gain; a day that reverses against my position; or a large-range day that, if I am on
the correct side, means I will finish the day very near the high of an up day or the low of a down day.
Although no one can predict what will be the high or low of a large-range day, I can predict that such days

48
will most often close at their extreme-thus there is no need to try to play any silly technical games of
wiggling and waggling buying and selling during the day.
I can prove my point about large-range days with the following charts. Figures 3.1 through 3.6 show
different time periods of Copper, Cotton, Soybeans, Pork Bellies, Gold, and T-Bonds, a pretty wide diversity
of markets. Carefully go through each chart, note the large-range days, and then notice where they opened
and closed.
In the vast majority of the large-range, up close days you should have noted that price opened near the
low of the day and closed near the high. The down close, large-range days reveal just the opposite trading
pattern; openings near the highs and closes near the low of the day.
What this all means to short-term traders is that, to catch a winning
trade, the most profitable strategy is to hold to the close.
I cannot emphasize this enough. The most profitable short-term trading strategy I know and use is to
enter the trade, place my protective stop, then shut my eyes, hold my breath, quit looking at the market, and
wait to get out on the close. Or later! If I am lucky enough to get a large-range day I will

Figure 3.1 High grade copper (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

49

Figure 3.2 Cotton #2 (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 3.3 Soybeans (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

50

Figure 3.4 Pork Bellies (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 3.5 Comex Gold (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

51

Figure 3.6 Day T-Bonds (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).
have captured a major move that can pay off the small-range days. If I try to dance in and out, I will
invariably not make as much money as holding to the close. The truth is whenever I have tried fancy
dancing, I have had to pay the piper a stiff fee.
To further prove this point, Figures 3.7 through 3.9 show the results of a simple little system for trading
the S&P 500. The rule is simply to buy on the open every Monday if that open is lower than Friday's close.
This is the start of short-term system building, so don't get enamored with the results or the system quite yet.
My point here is to show you the tremendous advantage of knowing you can make more money if you hold
until the close.
Figure 3.7 depicts what most short-term traders want to do, make about $500 a day trading so the
results reflect a stop of $3,000 (large, but that's what this volatile market requires) and an automatic $500
profit. Although the accuracy is high at 59 percent, the speculator loses money ... $8,150 to be specific.
The next set of data reflects all the same rules except a $1,000 target. This time we make money,
$13,737, again on the same number of trades, 389, giving us a small average profit per trade of $35. I have
deducted $50 for commissions (as all results shown in this book do). To make our $13,737, we were down
$8,897 at one point, and had 55 percent winning trades.

52

Figure 3.7 A trade with a $500 target.

Finally, we are able to turn the corner and make money by following my basic rule of holding until the
close and then exiting the position. What a difference, we actually clean up, banking $39,075 of profits,
with a $100 average profit per trade, 3 times better than when taking an automatic $1,000 profit. Our
drawdown, how much we had to lose during our worst run to make what we did, was less at $6,650; the
$500 target trader had a $12,837 drawdown. The facts speak for themselves. Traders can argue all day long
about what works and what does not work, but what you have just seen settles

Figure 3.8 A trade with a $1,000 target.

53

Figure 3.9 A trade that follows the basic rule: $100 profit per trade.
the argument for me. It is sitting tight, not trading in and out that will make for profits.
I hold to the close, at least, for an exit point. Until someone can do the impossible, call all short-term
fluctuations, there will be no better strategy for a short-term trader, as you will capture the large-range days
where serious money is to be made. The only difference in the preceding results was how long the trade was
held: the shorter the holding period, the less opportunity for profits. Never forget that rule.
There is even more money to be made holding over, past the close, but that should be true if what I
said earlier is valid, that it takes time for profits to accrue. As we discuss individual markets, I will give you
more specific rules of how to further capitalize on this phenomenon of profitable trading.
As final proof for my thesis, Figure 3. 10 shows the same system we just looked at, buying on
Mondays when the market opens below Friday's close. But this time, we are going to hold the position in the
first example until the next close; that is, the first close after our entry day or until we are stopped out,
whichever comes first. The product of this strategy nets $68,312, making an additional $30,000 and
increasing our net profit per trade by $7 1.
Finally, look at Figure 3.11, which depicts holding for the close 6 days after entry or being stopped
out. Following this strategy proves my point and should cure you of the notion that big easy money can be
made catching small swings. We now make $71,600, almost doubling the exit on close results boosting our
average trade up to a now respectable $251. Remember, the only difference in these results is how long we
stayed in the trade, all the other rules are the same.

54

Figure 3.10 Using timing to increase our profits.
The legendary Jesse Livermore said it best, "It was never my thinking that did it for me, it was my
sitting that made the big money. My sitting!"
He added, "Men who can be right and sit tight are uncommon."
What I am trying to get across to you is that catching the big swing (within the time frame you are
trading) is the only way I have been able to make millions of dollars trading. I finally figured out that I had
to let my profits run to be able to pay off the losses that are as natural to this game as breathing is to life.
Losses will most absolutely come to you. That is a given,

Figure 3.11 The timing makes all the difference.

55
it will happen, which gives rise to the obvious question, what can we do to offset these chunks out of our
rear end? There are only two ways to overcome this negative, we must either have a very low percentage of
losing trades and/or a substantially higher average profit than loss. Time, and time alone, will give you
larger profits, not thinking, not fancy dancing, not trying to buy and sell every top and bottom. That is a
fool's game. It is not a matter of opinion-it is provable, as the simple system presented in this chapter so
clearly demonstrates.
By now, you should have learned how the market moves, the three most dominant time cycles, and be
developing a sense, or feel, for the underlying order in what appears to be chaos. But most of all, you
should have learned to hold on to winners to the end of the time frame you are trading for. In my case, I'm
trading for 2-to 5-day swings. Whenever my greed factors have convinced me to take a quick profit-or
overstay my time period-I have paid dearly.

Chapter 4

Volatility Breakouts
The Momentum Breakthrough

Necessity may, or may not, be the mother of nvention, but for sure it is the fatber of taking chances.

Momentum is one of the five concepts that can bring us short-term trading profits. It is what Newton
was talking about when he said an object once Set in motion tends to stay in motion. So it is with stocks
and commodities: once price starts to move, it will most likely keep going that direction. There are almost
as many ways to measure momentum as there are traders. I will not delve into all of them, just the ones I
have found to work, and the concept, I trade with. There are other approaches; any one with a fertile mind
should be able to go past where I have. Mathematicians, this is the chapter where you can bring all your
techniques, concepts, and formulas to play. This is where you have a distinct advantage over those of us
limited to basic addition. multiplication, and subtraction.
I doubt that anyone fully understood how the markets work until the mid-1980s. Sure, we knew about
trend; about overbought and oversold markets; about a few patterns, seasonal influences, fundamentals,
and the like But we really did not know what caused trend or, more correctly put. how it began and ended.

57

58
We do now and it is time for you to learn this fundamental truism of price structure and movement.
Trends are set in motion by what I call "explosions of price activity." Succinctly, if price, in one hour,
day, week, month (pick your time frame for trend identification) has an explosive move up, or down, the
market will continue in that direction until there is an equal or greater explosive move in the opposite
direction. This has come to be known as an expansion in volatility and verbally captured by the phrase
coined by Doug Brie "volatility breakout," based on my early 1980 work.
It gets down to this, price has an explosive breakout, up or down, from a center point. That is what sets
or establishes the trend. Thus we have two problems; first, what do we mean by an explosive breakout (how
much of an up or down move), and second, from what point do we measure this expansion in price?
Let's start with the beginning, what set of data should we use to measure the expansion?
Since my working thesis is that we need a very quick explosion of price change I like to use daily range
values-the difference between the day's high and close. This value shows how volatile the market has been
each and every day. It is when this volatility increases out of recent proportion that trends change.
There are several ways of taking this measure. You might use the average range for the last X
number of days, various swing points, and the like. Bi and large though, I have found that using just
yesterday's range as my cornparison of volatility works wonders. Let's say yesterday's range was 12 cents in
Wheat. If today's range exceeds that range by some percentage. the trend probably changed, at least that is
the way to wager. This would be a clear in dication price has had a new impetus driving it in a direction, and
price. Like any object once set in motion, tends to stay in the direction of that motion.
It is really as simple as that, a pickup in range, substantially greater than yesterday's range implies a
change in the current market direction.
That also leads to the second problem: From what point do we measure the expansive move, up or
down? most traders think we should measure from today's closing price. That is typical thinking; we usually
compare price change from close to close. But it is not the correct answer. I will get to that in a moment, but
first let's consider points from which to measure this expansion: we could use the close, the average price of
the current day, or perhaps today's high for a buy or today's low for a sell.
Let's look at the very best results of several nonrelated commodities using a variety of points for
measuring the explosion. Table 4.1 shows buying tomorrow at a percentage of today's range added to
today's close. The data, listed in order, shows the commodity, percentage of range, dollar profit. accuracy,
and average profit per trade.

59

In this table I have even provided the best percent of the previous day's range to add to the close for a
buy and to subtract for a sell. In this, and all data shown, no stop was used and you were always long short.
This table shows only the best percent volatility add-ons for buys and subtracts for sells; and again in
the data for Table 4.1, we added the volatility factor or filter to the previous day's close. Using cattle as an
example, if price rallied 70 percent of the previous day's range above the close, we bought and sold short at
50 percent of the day's range subtracted from the close.
Next, look at buying tomorrow at a percentage of yesterday's range added to yesterday's high or
subtracting that same amount from yesterday's low for a sell signal (see Table 4.2).

60
Although this concept makes money, again on the best-fit basis, it does not do as well as adding or
subtracting a value from the close. A simple way to compare the results is to determine the size of the
average profit per trade. In the add-to-the-close method, it is $327 a trade and $313 for the add-to-the-high
and subtract-from-the-low technique.
The next set of data adds a percentage of today's range to tomorrow's open and buys there for a long
entry or subtracts a percentage of today's range from the opening for a sell. The results appear in Table 4.3.
A careful look at the data shows us the average profit per trade is higher at $389 and the accuracy is
also higher; five commodities in this test showed an accuracy of 50 percent or higher while none of them did
in the first two tests.
My conclusion is that the best point to add or subtract a volatility expansion value to is tomorrow's
open. I have always traded this technique with the open, but in preparation for this book, I did the preceding
tests to see whether my judgement was right and was pleased to see facts fit my intuitive conclusion.
As short-term traders, we can use this concept to tell us there is a high probability of a further extension
of price we can capitalize on. I will not trade just because of such an entry but will use this as my entry
technique when the time and conditions are correct.
Of all the trend entry approaches I am aware, from moving averages to trendlines, oscillators to Ouija
boards, and fancy math to simple charts; I have never seen a more consistently profitable mechanical entry
technique than volatility breakouts. It is the most consistent of all entries I have ever traded, researched or
seen. Now let's look at some ways of using this basic concept.

61

Simple Daily Range Breakouts
From the preceding we have learned that we should add our breakout value to tomorrow's opening.
Now the questions begin; What's the best value?. There are several good ones, but the simplest is to take
today's range adding a portion of it to tomorrow's opening. Just that simple approach has been a consistent
moneymaker since I first discovered it almost 20 years ago.
It is now time to go a bit beyond these results and create a trading model that is actually tradable (i.e.,
it makes money in an acceptable fashion). Figure 4.1 shows the result of buying and selling bonds on the
open every day at a distance of 100 percent of the previous day's range above the open for a buy and 100
percent below the open for a sell.
A protective stop of $1,500 or 50 percent of the previous day's range subtracted from our entry is used
as our protective stop while our exit is the Bail Out or the first profitable opening after entry technique.
This does make money, $73,468 with 80 percent accuracy on 651 trades. On average, the system makes
$7,000 a year and would require a $13,000 bankroll to net the 70 percent a year gain. The drawdown of
only $10,031 is quite good for such a basic system. A problem can be seen in that the average profit per
trade is only $112.86; this needs to be higher. The data set is from 1990 through August 1998.
Any idea how we might accomplish such a lofty goal? For now, let's try our basic TDW (Trade Day
of Week) strategy to see what happens if we only
