
Candlesticks with Volume and Open Interest

EXHIBIT 15.3. Silver-July1990, Daily (OBV with Candlesticks)

OBV with Candlesticks

As illustrated in Exhibit 15.3, the June 13 heavy selloff of silver was followed by a small real body. This harami pattern converted the strong
downtrend into a lateral trend. The market traded sideways for the next
few weeks. During that time, OBV was ascending reflecting a bullish
accumulation. June 25 saw new price lows. These lows did not hold as
evidenced by the hammer line formed on that session. The positive
divergence in OBV, the failure of the bears to hold the new lows, and the
hammer line supplied signs of a near-term bottom.

TICK VOLUME '"
In the futures market, volume is reported a day late. As a way to circumvent this problem, many technicians use tick volumeTM to get a "feel" for
volume on an intra-day basis. Tick volumeTM shows the number of trades
per intra-day period. It does not show the number of contracts per trade.

245

246

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

It would indicate, for instance, a tick volume of 50 trades per hour. We
do not know how many contracts were in each trade. They could have
been 50 single-lot orders or 50-100 lot orders. In this sense, tick volume
is not a true volume figure. It is useful, though, because it is the only
means of measuring the volume on a more timely, albeit less accurate,
basis.
Tick VolumeTM with Candlesticks
The hourly intra-day chart in Exhibit 15.4 shows the usefulness of tick
volumeTM. After a bullish hammer late in the session on May 4, prices
moved higher. However, these advancing prices were made on declining tick volumeTM. This was one sign of lack of conviction by buyers. The
other was the short white real bodies. In the first three hours of May 8,
there was a sharp price break. These made new lows for the move. The
intra-day action late on May 8 provided clues this early morning selloff
was to be short lived. After the third hour's long black line, a doji materialized. These two lines formed a harami cross. Then a white body
appeared a few hours later which engulfed the prior two black bodies.

EXHIBIT 15.4. Cocoa-July 1990, Intra-day (Tick Volume with Candlesticks)
TM

Candlesticks with Volume and Open Interest

This was a bullish engulfing pattern that had extra significance since it
engulfed two black bodies. The lows made by the white engulfing line
also formed a tweezers bottom.
Just in case, another hint of a bottom was needed, tick volume " substantiated that the buyers were taking control. Prices rose after the aforementioned bullish engulfing pattern. During this rally, volume
expanded as did the height of the real bodies. A shooting star and resistance near $1,340 from the prior week, temporarily put a damper on the
price ascent. Once the market pushed above the $1,340 resistance level
via a window, there was no doubt the bulls were in control.
In Exhibit 15.5, the hammer hour on June 19 furnished a sign that the
market may be searching for a bottom. The first hour of June 20 made a
new low at $16.62 (line 1). Tick volumeTM on this hour was a brisk 324
trades. Another move down to that level, via a long black candlestick
(line 2), was made later that session. This time tick volumeT" was only
262 trades. The next session, June 21, is the one of the most interest. On
the third hour of trading, prices made a new low for the move at $16.57.
This new low was made on lighter tick volumeT" (249 trades) then the
prior two tests (lines 1 and 2). This meant selling pressure was easing.
Prices then sprung back and made an hourly hammer line. (From the
T

EXHIBIT 15.5. Crude Oil-August 1990, Intra-day (Tick VolumeTM with Candlesticks)

247

248

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

previous discussion on springs in Chapter 11, you know to look for a
retest of the recent high near $17.24.)

OPEN INTEREST
In the futures markets, a new contract is created when a new buyer and
a new short seller agree to a trade. Because of this, the number of contracts traded in the futures market can be greater than the supply of the
commodity which underlies that futures contract. Open interest is the
total number of long or short contracts, but not a total of both, which
remain outstanding.
Open interest assists in gauging, as does volume, the pressure
behind a price move. It does this by measuring if money is entering or
exiting the market. Whether open interest rises or falls is contingent on
the amount of new buyers or sellers entering the market as compared to
old traders departing.
In this section, our focus will be on the importance of price trends
accompanied by rising open interest. The major principle to keep in
mind is that open interest helps confirm the current trend if open interest increases. For example, if the market is trending higher and open
interest is rising, new longs are more aggressive than the new shorts.
Rising open interest indicates that both new longs and new shorts are
entering the market, but the new longs are the more aggressive. This is
because the new longs are continuing to buy in spite of rising prices.
A scenario such as building open interest and falling prices reflects
the determination of the bears. This is because rising open interest
means new longs and shorts entering the market, but the new short sellers are willing to sell at increasingly lower price levels. Thus, when open
interest rises in an uptrend, the bulls are generally in charge and the
rally should continue. When open interest increases in a bear trend, the
bears are in control and the selling pressure should continue.
On the opposite side, if open interest declines during a trending
market it sends a signal the trend may not continue. Why? Because for
open interest to decline traders with existing positions must be abandoning the market. In theory, once these old positions are exited, the driving force behind the move will evaporate. In this regard, if the market
rallies while open interest declines, the rally is due to short covering
(and old bulls liquidating). Once the old shorts have fled the market, the
force behind the buying (that is, short covering) should mean the market is vulnerable to further weakness.
As an analogy, let's say that there is a hose attached to a main water

Candlesticks with Volume and Open Interest

line. The water line to the hose can be shut off by a spigot. Rising open
interest is like fresh water pumped from the main water line into the
hose. This water will continue to stream out of the hose while the spigot
remains open (comparable to rising open interest pushing prices higher
or lower). Declining open interest is like closing the spigot. Water will
continue to flow out of the hose (because there is still some water in it),
but once that water trickles out, there is no new source to maintain the
flow. The flow of water (that is, the trend) should dry up.
There are other factors to bear in mind (such as seasonality), which
we have not touched upon in this brief review of open interest.

Open Interest with Candlesticks
Exhibit 15.1 on June bonds showed a wealth of information about volume. It also illustrates the importance of rising open interest to confirm
a trend. Look again at this bond chart, but this time focus on open interest. Refer to Exhibit 15.1 for the following analysis.
A minor rally in bonds started March 13 and lasted until March 22.
Open interest declined during this rally. The implication was that short
covering caused the rally. When the short covering stopped, so would
the rally. The rally stalled at line 1. This was a rickshaw man session that
saw prices fail at the late February highs near 94. Open interest began to
rise with the selloff that began on April 9. A rising open interest increase
meant that new longs and shorts were entering the market. The bears,
however, were the more aggressive in their desire since they were still
selling at progressively lower prices. Open interest continued higher
throughout the late April decline. When the two doji, on April 27 and
May 2, emerged at the 88 V2 level, open interest began to level off. This
reflected a diminution of the bears' selling pressure.
Ascending open interest and prices throughout May were a healthy
combination as seen in Exhibit 15.6. Not so healthy was the fact that
June's rising prices were being mirrored by declining open interest. The
implication is that June's rally was largely short covering. This scenario
does not bode well for a continuation of higher prices. The shooting star
spelled a top for the market and the market erased in four sessions what
it had made in about a month.
If there is unusually high open interest coinciding with new price
highs it could presage trouble. This is because rising open interest means
new short and longs are entering the market. If prices are in a gradual
uptrend, stop losses by the new longs will be entered along the price
move at increasingly higher prices. If prices suddenly fall, a chain reaction of triggered sell stop loss orders can cause a cascade of prices.

249

250

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

CTZO DAILY BAR
O 1990 CQG INC.
5
,5..'..
...................................................................................................................................
8000
17
.
..
..

......l.+.
r.:.................
.......................................................................................................................

-:O= 7/12/90
.
7215
.

. H= 7355
-L=

7207
LC= 7349

C

.

..

..

..
..
..

..

..
CT DAILY VOL/OI

.

EXHIBIT 15.6. Cotton-December 1990, Daily (Open Interest with Candlesticks)

EXHIBIT 15.7. Sugar-July 1990, Daily (Open Interest with Candlesticks)

Candlesticks with Volume and Open Interest

Exhibit 15.7 is a good case in point. Sugar traded in the $. 15 to $.I6 range
for two months from early March. Open interest noticeably picked up
from the last rally that commenced in late April. It reached unusually
high levels in early May. As this rally progressed, sell stops by the new
longs were placed in the market at increasingly higher levels. Then a
series of doji days gave a hint of indecisiveness and a possible top. Once
the market was pressed on May 4, stop after stop was hit and the market plummeted.
The second aspect of this open interest level was that new longs who
were not stopped out were trapped at higher price levels. This is because
as open interest builds, new longs and shorts are entering the market.
However, with the precipitous price decline, prices were at a two-month
low. Every one who had bought in the prior two months now had a loss.
The longs who bought anywhere near the price highs are in "pain." And
judging from the high open interest figures at the highs near $.16, there
were probably many longs in "pain." Any possible rallies will be used
by them in order to exit the market. This is the scenario that unfolded in
mid-May as a minor rally to $.I5 meet with heavy selling.

251

CANDLESTICKS
WITH ELLIOTT WAVE
$a,iQ$ki~3+tfa ~ f t u
"Like both wheels of a cart"

T h e Elliott Wave Theory of market analysis is employed by a broad
spectrum of technical analysts. It is as applicable to intra-day charts as it
is to yearly charts. In this introductory section I only scratch the surface
of Elliott. Describing Elliott Wave methodology can be, and is, a book in
itself.

ELLIOTT WAVE BASICS
The Wave principle was discovered by R. N. Elliott early in this century.
He noted that, among other aspects, price movements consists of a fivewave upmove followed by a corrective three-wave downmove. These
eight waves form a complete cycle as illustrated in Exhibit 16.1. Waves
1, 3, and 5 are called impulse waves while waves 2 and 4 are called corrective waves. Although Exhibit 16.1 reflects an Elliott Wave count in a rising
market, the same concepts would hold in a falling market. Thus, the
impulse waves on a downtrending market would be sloping downward
and the corrective waves would be upward bounces against the main
trend.
Another major contribution of Elliott was his use of the Fibonacci
series of numbers in market forecasting. Wave counts and Fibonacci

254

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

EXHIBIT 16.1. The Basic Elliott Wave Form

ratios go hand in hand since these ratios can be used to project price targets for the next wave. Thus, for example, wave 3 could be projected to
move 1.618 times the height of wave 1; a wave 4 could correct 38.2% or
50% of the wave 3 move; and so on.

Elliott Wave with Candlesticks
This chapter illustrated how candlesticks can lend verification to Elliott
Wave termination points. The most important waves to trade are waves
3 and 5. Wave 3 usually has the most powerful move. The top of wave
5 calls for a reversal of positions. The wave counts below are with the
help of my colleague, John Gambino, who focuses closely on Elliott.
Elliott Wave counts are subjective (at least until the wave is over) and as
such the wave counts below may not be the same as derived by someone else.
A five-wave count (see Exhibit 16.2a) is discussed wave by wave in
the following text. Impulse wave 1 started with the dark-cloud cover in
late February. Wave 1 ended at the harami pattern in mid-March. This
harami implied that the prior downward pressure was abating. A minor
bounce unfolded. Corrective wave 2 was a bounce that ended with
another dark-cloud cover. Impulse wave 3 is the major leg down. The
extent of this move can be estimated by using a Fibonacci ratio and the
height of wave 1. This gives a wave 3 target of $17.60. At $17.60, look
for a candlestick signal to confirm a bottom for this wave 3 count. This
occurred on April 11. For visual details about April 11, refer to Exhibit
16.2(b) which is the intra-day chart of crude.
On April 11, crude broke in the first hour as it falls $1 from the prior
close. At that point, the selloff looks unending. Then some interesting
price events occur. The selloff abruptly stops at $17.35-very close to the
Elliott count of $17.60. Second, the hourly chart (see Exhibit 16.2(b))
shows that the first hour of trading on this selloff ended as a classic
hammer. This potentially bullish indicator is immediately followed by a

255

Candlesticks with Elliott Wave

7:38

@

CLMO DAILY BAR

o=
H=
L=
. L=

.

.

.

1990 CQG ItIC.

..

A=

Dark-cloud
Cover

Cover

.1
...............

- .........................

-

..

,

(a)
Shooting

.............

,

:

(c)
Harami
and
Tweezers
.. Top

.@.

....................

.!

Harami

.

.

.

:

:

..............................................................................

Piercing

.
. o=

.................

.

.

Morning

. Star
. (b)

5/23/90

. H=

EXHIBIT 16.2. Crude Oil-June 1990: (a) Daily and (b) Intra-day (Elliott Wave with Candlesticks)

256

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

series of strong long white bodies. On this hourly chart the bullish hammer and the ensuing white lines confirmed a bottom for the wave 3
count. The daily chart also provided a bottom reversal signal with a
piercing pattern based on the price action of April 10 and 11. We now
look for a wave 4 rally.
Corrective wave 4's top should rally but should not move above the
bottom of the prior wave 1 according to Elliott Wave theory. In this
example, that would be the $19.95. Approaching that level, look for a
bearish candlestick cue. That is, indeed, what unfolded. On May 14 and
15, the market stalled under $20 via the harami cross and tweezers top.
The wave 4 top was hit.
Interestingly, by breaking wave 4 into its (a), (b), and (c) subcompon e n t ~ ,corroboration by candlestick indicators is apparent. At (a), a
shooting star whose highs stopped at a window from early April
appears. A morning star at (b) called the bottom. Subcomponent (c) was
also the top of wave 4 with its attendant bearish harami cross and tweezers top.
Exhibit 16.3 illustrates that the five impulse waves down began in
late December 1989 from 100.16. The wave counts are shown. The bottom of wave 1 formed a harami pattern. The top of wave 2 formed a

9:39
O= 9407

CI=9
41C:..

.

.

.

BDMO DAILY BAR
"
. .

0
'

.

'

.

"

1989 CQG INC.
. .

-

, ,

Doji and Tweezers
'
'
L= 9406 .
C= 9414 Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Jun
rn
127 14 111 118 126 12 18 115 122 129 15 112 120126 15 112 119 126 12 19 116 123 130 17 114 121 129

EXHIBIT 16.3. Bonds-June 1990, Daily (Elliott Wave with Candlesticks)

Candlesticks with Elliott Wave

dark-cloud cover. Wave 3 did not give a candlestick indication. Wave 4
constituted a harami. The most interesting aspect of this Elliott pattern is
the fifth and final downwave. The fifth wave target is derived by taking
the height of the third wave and a Fibonacci ratio. This provides a target
of 88.08. At the end of April, the low of the move was 88.07. At this low,
the candlesticks sent a strong bullish signal based on a tweezers bottom
and two doji at this tweezers bottom. Volume also confirmed this bottom. Please refer to Exhibit 15.1 to receive a more detailed description of
what happened at this low vis-a-vis the candlesticks and volume.

257

CANDLESTICKS
WITH MARKET PROFILE@
?m%%
"Existing together, thriving together"

Market Profile@,used by many futures traders, presents information
about the markets that was previously only available to those in the
trading pits. Market Profile@helps technicians understand the internal
structure of the markets. It offers a logical, statistically based analysis of
price, time, and volume. This section examines only a few of the many
tools used by followers of the Market Profile@.Topics such as different
types of profile days (that is, normal, trend, neutral, long-term market
activity charts, and so on), or the Liquidity Data Bank@will not be discussed here. The goal of this brief introduction is to alert the reader to a
few of the unique insights of the Market Profile@and how it can be used
in conjunctionwith candlesticks.
A few of the elements underlying the Market Profile@are:
1. The purpose of all markets is to facilitate trade.
2. The markets are self regulating. The regulating constraints include
price, time, and volume.

3. The markets, as they attempt to facilitate trade, will use price probes
to "advertise" for sellers or buyers. The reaction to these probes provides valuable clues about the strength or weakness of the market.

The Market Profile@organizes daily action into half-hour periods and
assigns a letter to each half-hour period. Thus the " A period is from

260

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

9
B

Selling Extreme

B

Initial
Balance

Selling
Range
Extension

.
.

Area

:

:. :)
Buying Extreme
L
EXHIBIT 17.1. Example of the
Market Profile@

Source: Market Profile is a registered trademark of the Chicago Board of
Trade Copyright Board of Trade of the City of Chicago 1984.
A L L RI G HT S R ES ERVED

8:00 to 8:30 A . M . (Chicago time), "B" is from 8:30 to 9:00 A.M., and so
forth. For markets that open before 8:00 A.M. (such as bonds, currencies,
and metals), the first half hours are usually designated "y" and "z."
Each letter is called a TPO (Time-Price Opportunity). The half-hour segment represents the price range that developed over that time period.
This is displayed in Exhibit 17.1.
The first hour of trading is labeled as the initial balance. This is the
time period when the market is exploring the range of trading. In other
words, it is the market's early attempt to find value. A range extension is
any new high or low made after the first hour's initial balance. Exhibit
17.1 establishes a selling range extension, but since there are no new
highs after the initial balance, there is no buying range extension.
Value, to those who follow Market ProfileB, is defined as the market's
acceptance of price over time and is reflected in the amount of volume
traded at that price. Thus, time and volume are the key ingredients in
determining value. If the market trades briefly at a price, the market is
indicating rejection of that price. That is, the market has not found
"value." If prices are accepted for a relatively extended time with good
volume, it connotes market acceptance. In such a scenario, the market
found value. The market's acceptance of price is where 70% of the day's
volume occurred (for those familiar with statistics, it is one standard
deviation which has been rounded up to 70%). This is defined as the
day's value area. Thus, if 70% of the volume for trading wheat took place
in a $3.30 to $3.33 range, that range would be its value area.

Candlesticks with Mavket Profile@

A price probe is the market's search for the boundaries of value. How
the trading and investing community acts on such price probes can send
out important information about the market to Market Profile@users.
One of two actions occur after a price probe. Prices can backtrack to the
value area or value can relocate to the new price. Acceptance of a new
price as value would be confirmed by increased volume and the time
spent at that level.
If prices backtrack to value, the market shows a rejection of those
prices that are considered unfairly high or low. Quick rejection of a price
can result in what is called an extreme. An extreme is defined as two or
more single TPOs at the top or bottom of the profile (except for the last
half hour). Normally, an extreme at the top of the profile is caused by
competition among sellers who were attracted by higher prices and a
lack of buyers. A bottom extreme is caused by an influx of buyers
attracted by lower prices and a dearth of sellers. Buying and selling
extremes are noted in Exhibit 17.1.
How the market trades compare to the prior value area also discloses
valuable information. Market Profile followers monitor whether there is
initiating buying or selling, or responsive buying or selling. This is identified by determining where the current day's extreme and range extensions are occurring with respect to the prior day's value area.
Specifically, buying below the prior day's value area is deemed responsive buying because prices are below value and buyers are responding to
what they perceive to be undervalued prices. These buyers expect that
prices will return to value.
Sellers at prices below the prior day's value area are said to be initiating sellers. This means they are aggressive sellers since they are willing
to sell at prices under value. The implication of this is that they believe
value will move down. Buying above the prior session's value area is
initiating buying. These aggressive buyers are convinced that value will
move up to price. Otherwise why buy above what is now perceived is
as value? Sellers at prices above the prior day's value area are responsive
sellers. They are responsive to higher prices and expect prices to return
to value.
Trading should go in the direction of the initiating group unless price
is quickly rejected. Thus, if there is initiating selling activity (extremes
and/or range extension), under the previous day's value area on expanding volume, it should have bearish implications.
Q
