
80

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

sonally experienced the waves of regret, fear, anxiety, and
anger that come with every tick of the tape when it goes
against your position. How helpful would it be if you could
ﬁnd a way to negate these emotional waves, and thus free
yourself to follow your system strictly and proﬁtably!
Now imagine that you have written down somewhere
near your trading station a list of your commitments as a
trader. As for me, I have a number of bright yellow sticky
notes pasted to my monitor with pithy, bold, all-caps statements on them. These include:
• Trade only your own picks!
• Never average down!
• Let winners run!
• Cut losses short!
• No impulse buys or sells!

You can probably guess that behind each of these
statements lies a terribly embarrassing, losing trade that
motivated me in absolute horror to write out a maxim and
slap it to the monitor. You can also likely imagine that
behind each of these commitment statements lies a particular value, something that I highly honor and desire as a
trader. My own list of trading values looks something like
this:
• Your trading systems are sound and proﬁtable.
• You are in control of your impulses.
• Trade with integrity at all times.
• Trade responsibly for your family’s ﬁnancial

future.

DEVELOPING A TRADER’S MIND

81

• Trading is only a means to an end.
• Proﬁts come with the system, not with hunches.

Now imagine that these and other trading values were
to govern my every trading decision—how much better a
trader I would be! Thus, regardless of what I am feeling
emotionally, as I detach myself from those impulsive feelings that so often foul up my trading decisions I am free to
follow a structured road map of my own design, hammered
out by the hard-won experience of years of trading. This
is the promise of ACT when applied to trading: its tools
help me to clear and focus my mind so that I can commit
myself to following my system despite how I’m feeling
about a particular trade.
So what if you don’t have a set of trading rules or values for yourself ? What if you are not sure what personal
psychological frame of thinking is most suited to active
trading? This is where the Douglas and Tharp books are
helpful. Together, they will provide for you that emotional
blueprint you need to follow as you construct your trader’s
mind.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
4

the 10 habits of
highly successful
traders

B

ACK in the winter of 2003 I held an online seminar for

several hundred of our clients, most of whom were relatively new to trading. In two grueling four-hour sessions
we covered the basics of chart reading, candlesticks, and
trend trading. I also included a full explanation of two
never-before-taught trend trading setups that I had been
working on the previous year. During the question-andanswer period, however, I was surprised to ﬁnd that most
of the concerns of the audience had little to do with the
logistics of trend trading and more to do with the speciﬁc
details of my trading approach. In order to answer those
questions as precisely as possible, I promised my clients that
I would write up my trading rules and send them each a
copy.
The following list is a replica of that original set of
rules I sent my clients. None of the rules have changed
since then, though some of their applications have gotten
a bit more sophisticated. As always with trading, there are
exceptions allowed, as dictated by current market conditions.

83

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

84

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

THE 10 HABITS OF HIGHLY
SUCCESSFUL TRADERS
1. Follow the Rule of Three. There are many indicators a technical analyst uses to determine whether or not to
take a particular trade. There are patterns the price bars
make on the chart; there are moving averages of price;
there are various momentum and overbought/oversold
indicators as well. Together, these form a pictorial description of where a stock’s current price is, relative to its price
history. My Rule of Three says that I will not enter any
trade unless I can carefully articulate three reasons from
among my list of technical indicators for doing so. Three
is the minimum, and more is better. So often young traders take a trade for only one reason: a double bottom, for
example, or overbought stochastics. These indicators need
to be conﬁrmed by others working in tandem. Conﬂicting
indicators signal a confused market. We don’t want that.
We want to enter on conviction, not confusion. So always
wait until you can satisfy the Rule of Three (at least).
Remember, trading is a game of probabilities, and you
should always stack the odds in your favor.
2. Keep losses small. Bernard Baruch, the great Wall
Street speculator from the turn of the last century, once
said, “Even being right three or four times out of ten
should yield a person a fortune if he has the sense to cut
his losses quickly.” Baruch was right. It is important to keep
losses to a minimum, as most large losses started out as
small ones, and large losses can end your trading permanently. Normally, we keep our losses small by setting stoplosses on all open trades. We do this on all trades that we

THE 10 HABITS OF HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL TRADERS

85

are not monitoring on a minute-by-minute basis; otherwise, we will keep a mental stop in place and exit the position once that price level is violated. Remember Warren
Buffett’s Rule #1: “Don’t Lose Money!” Buffett also made
a second rule: “Don’t forget Rule #1!” So take a tip from
the world’s greatest investor and always strive to keep your
losses small.
3. Adjust stops and targets at the end of the day. At
the end of each trading day, on a high-watermark basis,
adjust your stop-loss or target price as needed. Here “high
water mark” means you adjust either the stop or target only
if the closing price sets a new high or low from the point
of entry. This is how it works: raise your stop-loss price at
each new closing high since entry (or new low if the trade
is a short). And if you are using a target price as an exit,
lower your target price at each new low if the trade goes
against you (or raise at each new high if short). Don’t get
complacent with your trades. Monitor them each day at
least once near the close, and adjust your stops and targets
accordingly. It is also a good idea to take off your stops
overnight to avoid the wide ﬂuctuations of after-hours trading. But do keep your target orders in place. I like to break
down my target limit order into smaller bits and set them
one penny apart. Occasionally, one or more of these get
ﬁlled overnight in the sort of erratic, widely ranging trading that characterizes the after-hours market.
4. Keep commissions low. Use a discount broker of
your choice that charges a maximum of $10 per trade.
There are several online brokers (OLBs) that charge as little as, or even less than, $0.01 per share per trade. You
should not be paying more than this. The qualitative dif-

86

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

ferences between an OLB charging $30 per trade and one
charging $1 per trade are minimal at best. Both will offer
you fast ﬁlls, occasional price improvement between the
spread, frills like automatically trailing stops, boxing and
basket orders, and the ability to trade funds, options, and
futures. Why pay a premium for a brand name? Remember, commissions are part of your overhead costs—and
when running any business, the lower you can keep your
overhead costs, the more proﬁts you get to take to the
bank!
5. Amateurs at the open, pros at the close. What this
familiar trading adage means is that, in general, the wellfunded institutional traders often fade (or trade against) the
morning momentum, happily handing shares to anxious
amateurs, before going off to gorge themselves on a highfat lunch. When they get back to their desks around 2:30
p.m. EST, they fully expect to be able to pick up the same
shares at a better price. They are usually right. That’s why
they are professionals. They get paid to be right about
things like that. So if you must trade in the morning, be
sure to ease into your trades in smaller portions. Yes, you
might miss out on some nice moves, but in the long run
you will save yourself money. Even better: look to enter
your trades within the last two hours of trading. In that
way you are more likely to be in sync with the larger and
more determinative moves caused by professional trading.
6. Know the general market trend, and trade accordingly. This is more easily said than done, but it is absolutely
essential to successful trend trading. You need to know
each day what kind of market you are currently trading in.
We will say more about this in Chapter 5. Here the gen-

THE 10 HABITS OF HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL TRADERS

87

eral rule can be stated that the type of market we are in will
determine the type of trade you put on. There are ﬁve general types of market trends: weak uptrend, strong uptrend,
weak downtrend, strong downtrend, and range-bound. In
weak uptrends and downtrends, you should focus on continuation plays; in strong uptrends and downtrends, you
should focus on breakout plays; and in range-bound markets, you should look for reversal setups. Again, these terms
will be discussed in the next chapter.
You should also ask whether the current trend or
range-bound condition is relatively new or relatively old.
The longer a market persists in its current condition
(uptrend, downtrend, or range-bound), the shorter your
time frame should be for new positions. For example, if we
are in the early weeks of a new bull market, you should feel
comfortable setting a higher target on your long positions.
But if you are long during an overbought market (an older
bull market), you should aim to take quick proﬁts when
given. One quick and easy way to determine the kind of
market we are in is to apply the 50-day moving average of
closing prices to a chart of the S&P 500. Then simply look
at the slope. Is its slope upward (weakly or strongly), downward (weakly or strongly), or ﬂat (range-bound)? Has it
been this way for a while (prolonged), or did it just turn
(new)? And so on.
7. Write down every trade. We keep track of so many
other things in life—the checks we write, the groceries we
need, the donations to charity we make, our golf scores,
the last time we changed the oil in the car—but how many
of us write down the details of every trade we make? In
reading the Market Wizards books by Jack Schwager (which

88

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

I highly recommend, by the way), you learn that nearly all
of the wizards keep trading journals. I suggest you do the
same. Make a spreadsheet that records the date of each
trade entry and exit, the symbol of the market traded, the
price of your entry and exit, the size of the trade, the proﬁt
or loss, a running total of proﬁts/losses, and a comment
section where you describe as speciﬁcally as possible why
you entered and exited the trade. If you are adept at working with spreadsheets, you can even program columns to
keep track of your stop-losses, target prices, and position
size.
Analyze these trades at the end of each month. Are
you consistently losing with one particular setup? Are your
breakout plays working better than your reversal plays?
Are your stops set too tight? Use this journal to learn
about your weaknesses as a trader. Awareness of those
weaknesses should soon lead to overcoming them. If you
have any trouble setting up your spreadsheet, e-mail me
at support@befriendthetrend.com, and my staff will be
happy to send you the one I use.
8. Never average down on a losing position. Let’s say
you buy a stock, expecting it to take off like a rocket, and
instead it drops like a rock. What do you do? Answer: you
do nothing. You stick with your plan. You keep your stoploss in place, lower your target at the end of the day, and
wait patiently. Do not buy more shares at a lower price to
make your average cost lower. That is a loser’s game. You
already own shares at that price; why buy more? Why
throw good money after bad? Just sit on your hands and let
the market do what it wants. Now the one exception to this
rule is when you are positioning yourself into a trade and

THE 10 HABITS OF HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL TRADERS

89

on your entry day you take advantage of a small dip in share
price. But in this case you must still be favorable toward
the chart, far away from your stop price, and price is showing signs of recovering from its slight dip.
9. Never overtrade. You know the feeling: you’ve
closed out all your overnight trades for a tidy proﬁt and you
say to yourself, hey, I’m on a winning streak, let’s take
advantage of it. So you put on a few more trades. But these
don’t go well, and now you are back to breakeven. You want
those morning proﬁts back, so you put on a few more
trades, only now you go with the e-minis or a few, deep inthe-money options to leverage your position. These don’t
go well either, and you close the day with a loss. Or perhaps you start the day by closing out losing positions, and
you overtrade to try to get the money back, only to deepen
your losses on the day. This is the obsessive-compulsive
disorder known as overtrading. It is a problem familiar to
all traders and is rooted in deep-seated feelings of fear and
greed.
The best way to overcome this behavior is to set limits on yourself: when you reach a certain proﬁt point during the day, either reduce your position size or just quit.
Better yet, when you reach a certain number of trades during the day, just quit. Reward yourself then for your disciplined behavior: go sit by the pool, read a good book, take
a bike ride in the woods—just do something nice to reinforce this discipline until it becomes a habit.
10. Give at least 10 percent of all trading earnings to
charity. The children of John D. Rockefeller were taught
ﬁve basic rules regarding money: (a) work for all you get,
(b) give away the ﬁrst 10 percent, (c) invest the next 10 per-

90

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

cent, (d) live on the rest, (e) and account for every penny.
The Rockefellers believed that giving away their money
was essential to their wealth. And so should you. The secret
is that money multiplies fastest when it’s divided. It’s all
God’s money, in any case. We are merely temporary stewards of a small portion of God’s abundance. And when this
portion is shared freely with those less fortunate, we prime
the economic pump of the universe.
I encourage you to establish a legacy that will outlive
you. Plant money trees from which others will harvest the
fruit. Ultimately, the only purpose for having wealth is to
help others less fortunate. Wealth shared is true wealth
indeed. The way I see it, God in His grace gave me the
undeserved talent to make money by simply sitting in front
of a computer and clicking a mouse every now and then.
As a result of that gift, we as a family have been able to
travel the world, build a large home, and enjoy some of the
ﬁner things in life. The least I can do is give a healthy portion of the fruits of that gift back to God’s work in the
world.

PA R T
TWO

trend-trading
basics

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
5

what is trend
trading?

T

REND trading is a form of trading that seeks to maxi-

mize trading proﬁts and minimize risk by entering and exiting strategic price chart setups. While the trend-trading
systems outlined here can be applied to any time frame—
from multimonth position trades to multiminute day
trades—most trend trades are held from 3 to 30 trading
days. It is called trend trading because it seeks to enter
already established trends (for the most part) and ride them
as they swing up or down to new highs or lows. But before
we further deﬁne what trend trading is, let’s ﬁrst separate
the idea from what it is not.

WHAT TREND TRADING IS NOT
Trend Trading Is Not
Buy-and-Hold Investing
Buy-and-hold investing involves the fundamental or economic analysis of market cycles, business sectors, and individual companies with the intent of buying solid companies,
or funds of such companies, when valuations are attractive
93

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

94

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

or when growth prospects are strong, or, ideally, both. The
aim of this strategy is to realize long-term capital gains
with a minimum of portfolio turnover. Buy-and-hold
investors are not traders. They normally pay little attention to even the basics of technical analysis. A price chart
trend either up or down matters little to them. What matters instead is, in Warren Buffett’s terms, “buying a great
company at a fair price.” The holding time of a buy-andhold position is usually measured in years. In some cases
buy-and-hold investments can last a lifetime.

Trend Trading Is Not Position Trading
Position traders are indeed traders inasmuch as they normally rely on the technical analysis of price charts rather
than the fundamental analysis of companies. Rather than
positioning themselves within already established trends,
however, their aim is to get in on the beginning of new
trends, or even in anticipation of a trend prior to its beginning. In other words, position traders like to buy bottoms
and sell tops, two things that trend traders are forbidden
to do except in a very limited sense (e.g., buying the bottom of a dip to support in an established uptrend). Compared to trend trading, position trading requires quite a bit
more patience. Position trades are normally measured in
months and can last a year or longer. The primary chart of
the position trader is the weekly chart, with the daily chart
being used to time entries and exits. If a position trade is
entered too soon, the trader is forced to sit through sometimes lengthy drawdowns.

WHAT IS TREND TRADING?

95

Trend Trading Is Not Overnight Trading
The overnight trader is someone who relies on technical
analysis and tape-reading skills, along with (sometimes)
intraday news breaks, to take a quick two-day position in a
stock. The overnight trader normally enters the position
late in the trading day and sells before the close of the day
following. The overnight trader’s aim is to capture three
phases of movement: the afternoon run, the overnight gap,
and the next-day continuation. This is a very proﬁtable
form of trading for someone with sound trading strategies
and a keen understanding of what prompts a stock’s
momentum, but it can be very time consuming, and trading the exit requires as much focused attention as day trading. While trend-trading skills can be used in overnight
trading, it is a multifaceted discipline and thus goes beyond
the normal range of trend trading.

Trend Trading Is Not Scalping
Scalping is a form of day trading inasmuch as positions are
held for only one trading day and all positions are exited
prior to or at the close of the trading day. As a day trader,
a scalper always goes home ﬂat (completely in cash) at the
end of each trading session, with no open positions held
overnight. But scalping differs from ordinary day trading
(which can be a subspecies of trend trading) in that positions are normally held for only a few seconds, or at most
a few minutes. And while day traders usually rely on their
chart-reading skills, scalpers play only on the tape. They
isolate the stocks that are moving sharply that day—

96

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

usually in response to unexpected news, an earnings
announcement, an upgrade or downgrade, or the like—and
scrutinize the tape (Level I and II quotes) for opportunistic, quick-turn in-and-out trades. Scalpers put on lots of
trades each day, sometimes in the hundreds, with the aim
to make only a small proﬁt on each (a scalp). These small
proﬁts are leveraged into larger proﬁts by increasing both
the volume of trades and the position size. Because scalpers
make little reference to price charts, they are technically
not trend traders.

WHAT TREND TRADING IS
In terms of time frame, trend trading occupies the range
of holding periods between the multimonth position trader
at the one extreme and the multisecond scalper at the other.
The primary aim of the trend trader is to capture the bulk
of major moves in trending stocks, entering after the trend
has begun and normally exiting before the trend concludes.
Trend traders use the price chart in a time frame that best
ﬁts their intended holding period. If the trend-trading system is applied to swing trading (see later discussion), for
example, then the trade will likely be held from 5 to 30
trading days. In swing trading, the daily chart is used primarily. But the trend-trading systems outlined here can
also be used for day-trading purposes, in which case an
intraday chart like the ﬁve-minute period is most commonly used and the position held for only minutes or a few
hours at most.
Thus, it is important to think of trend trading as a set

WHAT IS TREND TRADING?

97

of trading systems and not a trading style. Your particular
trading style (position trader, swing trader, day trader, etc.)
has to be determined by, among other things, your trading
objectives, the limits of your time, your temperament and
skills (e.g., unless you have quick reﬂexes, don’t even think
about scalping), and your income expectations. Further clariﬁcation of the different types of trading styles can be found
later in this chapter. (Note that only swing trading and day
trading, as deﬁned here, are forms of trend trading.)
Buy-and-Hold Investing
• Aim: Long-term capital gains
• Style: Fundamental analysis of sectors and
companies
• Holding time: One year or longer
• Time investment: A few hours each month
• Turnover rate: One to ﬁve trades per year
• Commission costs: Minimal
• Expected annual return: A gain of 15 percent or
more
Position Trading
• Aim: Quarterly income
• Style: Technical analysis of weekly/daily charts
• Holding time: Three to six months
• Time investment: A few hours each week
• Turnover rate: One to ﬁve trades per quarter
• Commission costs: Moderately low
• Expected annual return: A gain of 25 percent or
more

98

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Swing Trading—(Can Be a Form of
Trend Trading)
• Aim: Monthly income
• Style: Technical analysis of daily/hourly charts
• Holding time: Five to thirty trading days
• Time investment: One to three hours each day
• Turnover rate: Five to ﬁfteen trades per month
• Commission costs: Moderately high
• Expected annual return: A gain of 40 percent or
more
Overnight Trading
• Aim: Weekly income
• Style: Technical analysis of daily/hourly charts
• Holding time: Two days maximum
• Time investment: Six to eight hours each day
• Turnover rate: Two to ﬁve trades per day
• Commission costs: Moderately high
• Expected annual return: A gain of 50 percent or
more
Day Trading (Can Be a Form of
Trend Trading)
• Aim: Daily income
• Style: Technical analysis of intraday charts
• Holding time: Minutes to hours, one day maximum
• Time investment: Eight to twelve hours each day
• Turnover rate: Five or more trades per day
• Commission costs: Very high
• Expected annual return: A gain of 60 percent or
more
