
de Nevers. Fendille appears to have been not only an inexpert swordsman, but a thorough
coward; one who, like Cowley, might have heaped curses on the man,
"-------(Death's factor sure), who brought Dire swords into this peaceful world."
On the very first encounter he was thrown from his horse, and, confessing on the ground
all that his victor required of him, slunk away ignominiously from the arena.
One is tempted to look upon the death of Henry II as a judgment upon him for his perjury
in the matter of duelling. In a grand tournament instituted on the occasion of the marriage
of his daughter, he broke several lances in encounters with some of the bravest knights of
the time. Ambitious of still further renown, he would not rest satisfied until he had also
engaged the young Count de Montgomeri. He received a wound in the eye from the lance
of this antagonist, and died from its effects shortly afterwards, in the forty-first year of his
age.
In the succeeding reigns of Francis II, Charles IX, and Henry III, the practice of duelling
increased to an alarming extent. Duels were not rare in the other countries of Europe at
the same period; but in France they were so frequent, that historians, in speaking of that
age, designate it as "l'epoque de la fureur des duels." The Parliament of Paris
endeavoured, as far as in its power lay, to discourage the practice. By a decree dated the
26th of June 1559, it declared all persons who should be present at duels, or aiding and
abetting in them, to be rebels to the King, transgressors of the law, and disturbers of the
public peace.
When Henry III was assassinated at St. Cloud, in 1589, a young gentleman, named L'isle
Marivaut, who had been much beloved by him, took his death so much to heart, that he
resolved not to survive him. Not thinking suicide an honourable death, and wishing, as he
said, to die gloriously in revenging his King and master, he publicly expressed his
readiness to fight anybody to the death who should assert that Henry's assassination was
not a great misfortune to the community. Another youth, of a fiery temper and tried
courage, named Marolles, took him at his word, and the day and place of the combat
were forthwith appointed. When the hour had come, and all were ready, Marolles turned
to his second, and asked whether his opponent had a casque or helmet only, or whether he
wore a sallade, or headpiece. Being answered a helmet only, he said gaily, "So much the
better; for, sir, my second, you shall repute me the wickedest man in all the world, if I do
not thrust my lance right through the the middle of his head and kill him." Truth to say,
he did so at the very first onset, and the unhappy L'isle Marivaut expired without a groan.
Brantome, who relates this story, adds, that the victor might have done as he pleased with
the body, cut off the head, dragged it out of the camp, or exposed it upon an ass, but that,
being a wise and very courteous gentleman, he left it to the relatives of the deceased to be
honourably buried, contenting himself with the glory of his triumph, by which he gained
no little renown and honour among the ladies of Paris.
On the accession of Henry IV that monarch pretended to set his face against duelling; but
such was the influence of early education and the prejudices of society upon him, that he

never could find it in his heart to punish a man for this offence. He thought it tended to
foster a warlike spirit among his people. When the chivalrous Crequi demanded his
permission to fight Don Philippe de Savoire, he is reported to have said, "Go, and if I
were not a King, I would be your second." It is no wonder that when such were known to
be the King's disposition, his edicts attracted but small attention. A calculation was made
by M. de Lomenie, in the year 1607, that since the accession of Henry, in 1589, no less
than four thousand French gentlemen had lost their lives in these conflicts, which, for the
eighteen years, would have been at the rate of four or five in a week, or eighteen per
month! Sully, who reports this fact in his Memoirs, does not throw the slightest doubt
upon its exactness, and adds, that it was chiefly owing to the facility and ill-advised
good-nature of his royal master that the bad example had so empoisoned the court, the
city, and the whole country. This wise minister devoted much of his time and attention to
the subject; for the rage, he says, was such as to cause him a thousand pangs, and the
King also. There was hardly a man moving in what was called good society, who had not
been engaged in a duel either as principal or second; and if there were such a man, his
chief desire was to free himself from the imputation of non-duelling, by picking a quarrel
with somebody. Sully constantly wrote letters to the King, in which he prayed him to
renew the edicts against this barbarous custom, to aggravate the punishment against
offenders, and never, in any instance, to grant a pardon, even to a person who had
wounded another in a duel, much less to any one who had taken away life. He also
advised, that some sort of tribunal, or court of honour, should be established, to take
cognizance of injurious and slanderous language, and of all such matters as usually led to
duels; and that the justice to be administered by this court should be sufficiently prompt
and severe to appease the complainant, and make the offender repent of his aggression.
Henry, being so warmly pressed by his friend and minister, called together an
extraordinary council in the gallery of the palace of Fontainebleau, to take the matter into
consideration. When all the members were assembled, his Majesty requested that some
person conversant with the subject would make a report to him on the origin, progress,
and different forms of the duel. Sully complacently remarks, that none of the counsllors
gave the King any great reason to felicitate them on their erudition. In fact, they all
remained silent. Sully held his peace with the rest; but he looked so knowing, that the
King turned towards him, and said:-- " Great master! by your face I conjecture that you
know more of this matter than you would have us believe. I pray you, and indeed I
command, that you tell us what you think and what you know." The coy minister refused,
as he says, out of mere politeness to his more ignorant colleagues; but, being again
pressed by the King, he entered into a history of duelling both in ancient and modern
times. He has not preserved this history in his Memoirs; and, as none of the ministers or
counsellors present thought proper to do so, the world is deprived of a discourse which
was, no doubt, a learned and remarkable one. The result was, that a royal edict was
issued, which Sully lost no time in transmitting to the most distant provinces, with a
distinct notification to all parties concerned that the King was in earnest, and would exert
the full rigour of the law in punishment of the offenders. Sully himself does not inform us
what were the provisions of the new law; but Father Matthias has been more explicit, and
from him we learn, that the Marshals of France were created judges of a court of chivalry,
for the hearing of all causes wherein the honour of a noble or gentleman was concerned,

and that such as resorted to duelling should be punished by death and confiscation of
property, and that the seconds and assistants should lose their rank, dignity, or offices,
and be banished from the court of their sovereign. [Le Pere Matthias, tome ii. livre iv.]
But so strong a hold had the education and prejudice of his age upon the mind of the
King, that though his reason condemned, his sympathies approved the duel.
Notwithstanding this threatened severity, the number of duels did not diminish, and the
wise Sully had still to lament the prevalence of an evil which menaced society with utter
disorganization. In the succeeding reign the practice prevailed, if possible, to a still
greater extent, until the Cardinal de Richelieu, better able to grapple with it than Sully
had been, made some severe examples in the very highest classes. Lord Herbert, the
English ambassador at the court of Louis XIII repeats, in his letters, an observation that
had been previously made in the reign of Henry IV, that it was rare to find a Frenchman
moving in good society who had not killed his man in a duel. The Abbe Millot says of
this period, that the duel madness made the most terrible ravages. Men had actually a
frenzy for combatting. Caprice and vanity, as well as the excitement of passion, imposed
the necessity of fighting. Friends were obliged to enter into the quarrels of their friends,
or be themselves called out for their refusal, and revenge became hereditary in many
families. It was reckoned that in twenty years eight thousand letters of pardon had been
issued to persons who had killed others in single combat. ["Elemens de l'Histoire de
France, vol. iii. p. 219.]
Other writers confirm this statement. Amelot de Houssaye, in his Memoirs, says, upon
this subject, that duels were so common in the first years of the reign of Louis XIII, that
the ordinary conversation of persons when they met in the morning was, "Do you know
who fought yesterday?" and after dinner, "Do you know who fought this morning?" The
most infamous duellist at that period was De Bouteville. It was not at all necessary to
quarrel with this assassin to be forced to fight a duel with him. When he heard that any
one was very brave, he would go to him, and say, "People tell me that you are brave; you
and I must fight together!" Every morning the most notorious bravos and duellists used to
assemble at his house, to take a breakfast of bread and wine, and practise fencing. M. de
Valencay, who was afterwards elevated to the rank of a cardinal, ranked very high in the
estimation of De Bouteville and his gang. Hardly a day passed but what he was engaged
in some duel or other, either as principal or second; and he once challenged De Bouteville
himself, his best friend, because De Bouteville had fought a duel without inviting him to
become his second. This quarrel was only appeased on the promise of De Bouteville that,
in his next encounter, he would not fail to avail himself of his services. For that purpose
he went out the same day, and picked a quarrel with the Marquis des Portes. M. de
Valencay, according to agreement, had the pleasure of serving as his second, and of
running through the body M. de Cavois, the second of the Marquis des Portes, a man who
had never done him any injury, and whom he afterwards acknowledged he had never
seen before.
Cardinal Richelieu devoted much attention to this lamentable state of public morals, and
seems to have concurred with his great predecessor, Sully, that nothing but the most
rigorous severity could put a stop to the evil. The subject indeed was painfully forced

upon him by his enemies. The Marquis de Themines, to whom Richelieu, then Bishop of
Lucon, had given offence by some representations he had made to Mary of Medicis,
determined, since he could not challenge an ecclesiastic, to challenge his brother. An
opportunity was soon found. Themines, accosting the Marquis de Richelieu, complained,
in an insulting tone, that the Bishop of Lucon had broken his faith. The Marquis resented
both the manner and matter of his speech, and readily accepted a challenge. They met in
the Rue d'Angouleme, and the unfortunate Richelieu was stabbed to the heart, and
instantly expired. >From that moment the Bishop became the steady foe of the practice of
duelling. Reason and the impulse of brotherly love alike combined to make him detest it,
and when his power in France was firmly established, he set vigorously about repressing
it. In his "Testament Politique," he has collected his thoughts upon the subject, in the
chapter entitled "Des moyens d'arreter les Duels." In spite of the edicts that he published,
the members of the nobility persisted in fighting upon the most trivial and absurd
pretences. At last Richelieu made a terrible example. The infamous De Bouteville
challenged and fought the Marquis de Beuoron; and, although the duel itself was not fatal
to either, its consequences were fatal to both. High as they were, Richelieu resolved that
the law should reach them, and they were both tried, found guilty, and beheaded. Thus
did society get rid of one of the most bloodthirsty scoundrels that ever polluted it.
In 1632 two noblemen fought a duel, in which they were both killed. The officers of
justice had notice of the breach of the law, and arrived at the scene of combat before the
friends of the parties had time to remove the bodies. In conformity with the Cardinal's
severe code upon the subject, the bodies were ignominiously stripped, and hanged upon a
gallows, with their heads downwards, for several hours, within sight of all the people.
[Mercure de France, vol. xiii.] This severity sobered the frenzy of the nation for a time;
but it was soon forgotten. Men's minds were too deeply imbued with a false notion of
honour to be brought to a right way of thinking: by such examples, however striking,
Richelieu was unable to persuade them to walk in the right path, though he could punish
them for choosing the wrong one. He had, with all his acuteness, miscalculated the spirit
of duelling. It was not death that a duellist feared: it was shame, and the contempt of his
fellows. As Addison remarked more than eighty years afterwards, "Death was not
sufficient to deter men who made it their glory to despise it; but if every one who fought
a duel were to stand in the pillory, it would quickly diminish the number of those
imaginary men of honour, and put an end to so absurd a practice." Richelieu never
thought of this.
Sully says, that in his time the Germans were also much addicted to duelling. There were
three places where it was legal to fight; Witzburg, in Franconia, and Uspach and Halle, in
Swabia. Thither, of course, vast numbers repaired, and murdered each other under
sanction of the law. At an earlier period, in Germany, it was held highly disgraceful to
refuse to fight. Any one who surrendered to his adversary for a simple wound that did not
disable him, was reputed infamous, and could neither cut his beard, bear arms, mount on
horseback, or hold any Office in the state. He who fell in a duel was buried with great
pomp and splendour.

In the year 1652, just after Louis XIV had attained his majority, a desperate duel was
fought between the Dukes de Beaufort and De Nemours, each attended by four
gentlemen. Although brothers-in-law, they had long been enemies, and their constant
dissensions had introduced much disorganization among the troops which they severally
commanded. Each had long sought an opportunity for combat, which at last arose on a
misunderstanding relative to the places they were to occupy at the council board. They
fought with pistols, and, at the first discharge, the Duke de Nemours was shot through the
body, and almost instantly expired. Upon this the Marquis de Villars, who seconded
Nemours, challenged Hericourt, the second of the Duke de Beaufort, a man whom he had
never before seen; and the challenge being accepted, they fought even more desperately
than their principals. This combat, being with swords, lasted longer than the first, and was
more exciting to the six remaining gentlemen who stayed to witness it. The result was
fatal to Hericourt, who fell pierced to the heart by the sword of De Villars. Anything
more savage than this can hardly be imagined. Voltaire says such duels were frequent,
and the compiler of the "Dictionnaire d'Anecdotes" informs us, that the number of
seconds was not fixed. As many as ten, or twelve, or twenty, were not unfrequent, and
they often fought together after their principals were disabled. The highest mark of
friendship one man could manifest towards another, was to choose him for his second;
and many gentlemen were so desirous of serving in this capacity, that they endeavoured
to raise every slight misunderstanding into a quarrel, that they might have the pleasure of
being engaged in it. The Count de Bussy Rabutin relates an instance of this in his
Memoirs. He says, that as he was one evening coming out of the theatre, a gentleman,
named Bruc, whom he had not before known, stopped him very politely, and, drawing
him aside, asked him if it was true that the Count de Thianges had called him (Bruc) a
drunkard? Bussy replied, that he really did not know, for he saw the Count very seldom.
"Oh! he is your uncle!" replied Bruc; "and, as I cannot have satisfaction from him,
because he lives so far off in the country, I apply to you." "I see what you are at," replied
Bussy, "and, since you wish to put me in my uncle's place, I answer, that whoever
asserted that he called you a drunkard, told a lie !" "My brother said so," replied Bruc,
"and he is a child." "Horsewhip him, then, for his falsehood," returned De Bussy. "I will
not have my brother called a liar," returned Bruc, determined to quarrel with him; "so
draw, and defend yourself!" They both drew their swords in the public street, but were
separated by the spectators. They agreed, however, to fight on a future occasion, and with
all regular forms of the duello. A few days afterwards, a gentleman, whom De Bussy had
never before seen, and whom he did not know, even by name, called upon him, and asked
if he might have the privilege of serving as his second. He added, that he neither knew
him nor Bruc, except by reputation, but, having made up his mind to be second to one of
them, he had decided upon accompanying De Bussy as the braver man of the two. De
Bussy thanked him very sincerely for his politeness, but begged to be excused, as he had
already engaged four seconds to accompany him, and he was afraid that if he took any
more, the affair would become a battle instead of a duel.
When such quarrels as these were looked upon as mere matters of course, the state of
society must have been indeed awful. Louis XIV very early saw the evil, and as early
determined to remedy it. It was not, however, till the year 1679, when he instituted the
"Chambre Ardente," for the trial of the slow poisoners and pretenders to sorcery, that he

published any edict against duelling. In that year his famous edict was promulgated, in
which he reiterated and confirmed the severe enactments of his predecessors, Henry IV
and Louis XIII, and expressed his determination never to pardon any offender. By this
celebrated ordinance a supreme court of honour was established, composed of the
Marshals of France. They were bound, on taking the office, to give to every one who
brought a well-founded complaint before them, such reparation as would satisfy the
justice of the case. Should any gentleman against whom complaint was made refuse to
obey the mandate of the court of honour, he might be punished by fine and imprisonment;
and when that was not possible, by reason of his absenting himself from the kingdom, his
estates might be confiscated till his return.
Every man who sent a challenge, be the cause of offence what it might, was deprived of
all redress from the court of honour--suspended three years from the exercise of any
office in the state--was further imprisoned for two years, and sentenced to pay a fine of
half his yearly income. He who accepted a challenge, was subject to the same
punishment. Any servant, or other person, who knowingly became the bearer of a
challenge, was, if found guilty, sentenced to stand in the pillory and be publicly whipped
for the first offence, and for the second, sent for three years to the galleys.
Any person who actually fought, was to be held guilty of murder, even though death did
not ensue, and was to be punished accordingly. Persons in the higher ranks of life were to
be beheaded, and those of the middle class hanged upon a gallows, and their bodies
refused Christian burial.
At the same time that Louis published this severe edict, he exacted a promise from his
principal nobility that they would never engage in a duel on any pretence whatever. He
never swerved from his resolution to pursue all duellists with the utmost rigour, and
many were executed in various parts of the country. A slight abatement of the evil was
the consequence, and in the course of a few years one duel was not fought where twelve
had been fought previously. A medal was struck to commemorate the circumstance, by
the express command of the King. So much had he this object at heart, that, in his will, he
particularly recommended to his successor the care of his edict against duelling, and
warned him against any ill-judged lenity to those who disobeyed it. A singular law
formerly existed in Malta with regard to duelling. By this law it was permitted, but only
upon condition that the parties should fight in one particular street. If they presumed to
settle their quarrel elsewhere, they were held guilty of murder, and punished accordingly.
What was also very singular, they were bound, under heavy penalties, to put up their
swords when requested to do so by a priest, a knight, or a woman. It does not appear,
however, that the ladies or the knights exercised this mild and beneficent privilege to any
great extent; the former were too often themselves the cause of duels, and the latter
sympathised too much in the wounded honour of the combatants to attempt to separate
them. The priests alone were the great peacemakers. Brydone says, that a cross was
always painted on the wall opposite to the spot where a knight had been killed, and that in
the "street of duels" he counted about twenty of them. [Brydone's " Tour in Malta."
1772.]

In England the private duel was also practised to a scandalous extent, towards the end of
the sixteenth and beginning of the seventeenth centuries. The judicial combat now began
to be more rare, but several instances of it are mentioned in history. One was instituted in
the reign of Elizabeth, and another so late as the time of Charles I. Sir Henry Spelman
gives an account of that which took place in Elizabeth's reign, which is curious, perhaps
the more so when we consider that it was perfectly legal, and that similar combats
remained so till the year 1819. A proceeding having been instituted in the Court of
Common Pleas for the recovery of certain manorial rights in the county of Kent, the
defendant offered to prove by single combat his right to retain possession. The plaintiff
accepted the challenge, and the Court having no power to stay the proceedings, agreed to
the champions who were to fight in lieu of the principals. The Queen commanded the
parties to compromise; but it being represented to Her Majesty that they were justified by
law in the course they were pursuing, she allowed them to proceed. On the day appointed,
the Justices of the Common Pleas, and all the council engaged in the cause, appeared as
umpires of the combat, at a place in Tothill-fields, where the lists had been prepared. The
champions were ready for the encounter, and the plaintiff and defendant were publicly
called to come forward and acknowledge them. The defendant answered to his name, and
recognised his champion with the due formalities, but the plaintiff did not appear.
Without his presence and authority the combat could not take place; and his absence
being considered an abandonment of his claim, he was declared to be nonsuited, and
barred for ever from renewing his suit before any other tribunal whatever.
The Queen appears to have disapproved personally of this mode of settling a disputed
claim, but her judges and legal advisers made no attempt to alter the barbarous law. The
practice of private duelling excited more indignation, from its being of every-day
occurrence. In the time of James I the English were so infected with the French madness,
that Bacon, when he was Attorney-general, lent the aid of his powerful eloquence to
effect a reformation of the evil. Informations were exhibited in the Star Chamber against
two persons, named Priest and Wright, for being engaged, as principal and second, in a
duel, on which occasion he delivered a charge that was so highly approved of by the
Lords of the Council, that they ordered it to be printed and circulated over the country, as
a thing "very meet and worthy to be remembered and made known unto the world." He
began by considering the nature and greatness of the mischief of duelling. "It troubleth
peace -- it disfurnisheth war -- it bringeth calamity upon private men, peril upon the state,
and contempt upon the law. Touching the causes of it," he observed, "that the first motive
of it, no doubt, is a false and erroneous imagination of honour and credit; but then, the
seed of this mischief being such, it is nourished by vain discourses and green and unripe
conceits. Hereunto may be added, that men have almost lost the true notion and
understanding of fortitude and valour. For fortitude distinguisheth of the grounds of
quarrel whether they be just; and not only so, but whether they be worthy, and setteth a
better price upon men's lives than to bestow them idly. Nay, it is weakness and disesteem
of a man's self to put a man's life upon such liedger performances. A man's life is not to
be trifled with: it is to be offered up and sacrificed to honourable services, public merits,
good causes, and noble adventures. It is in expense of blood as it is in expense of money.
It is no liberality to make a profusion of money upon every vain occasion, neither is it
