
The second factor was that much of the trade began to be financed by notes
of personal credit. Therefore, not only were the bulbs not changing hands,
neither was physical money. Transactions were made on simple promises to
deliver money in the future.
It should be clear to the innovative investor that the delusion of value here
was created by the frenzy of a crowd. As Chancellor points out, “By the later
stages of the mania, the fusion of the windhandel with paper credit created the
perfect symmetry of insubstantiality: most transactions were for tulip bulbs
that could never be delivered because they didn’t exist and were paid for with
credit notes that could never be honored because the money wasn’t there.”
Cheap credit often fuels asset bubbles, as seen with the housing bubble that
led to the financial crisis of 2008. Similarly, cryptoasset bubbles can be created
using extreme margin on some exchanges, where investors are effectively gambling with money they don’t have.
Back to tulips. At that time, the guilder served as currency in the Dutch
Republic. Paper money didn’t exist; instead, metal that held real value was
used. Each guilder contained 0.027 ounces of gold. Therefore, 37 guilders held
an ounce of gold, and 592 guilders contained a pound of gold. The highest

Burniske 02.indd 143

9/9/17 1:46 PM

144 CRYPTOASSETS

recorded amount paid for a tulip was 5,200 guilders, or the equivalent of nearly
nine pounds of gold.17 At that time, an average year’s work yielded 200 to 400
guilders, and modest town houses could be bought for 300 guilders. The tulip
that fetched nine pounds of gold was worth the equivalent of 18 modest town
houses: speculators were paying for single tulips with what would take them
over a decade to pay off, and with money they didn’t have.
It all came crashing down in February 1637. Spring was approaching, and
tulips would be blossoming soon. Contractual dates would soon require the
conversion of the notes of credit into real money. The merchants that drove
the economic machine were largely unaffected, because they had “continued
investing their trading profits in town houses, East India stock, or bills of
exchange.”18 While it was the wealth of these merchants that caused the masses
to yearn for similar riches, the merchants were unscathed by the crash they
precipitated. The crash did not set off a recession throughout the economy,
which was one saving grace of Tulipmania.
It was the common people, less experienced in investing, that had been
swept up in the madness of the crowd who were the hardest hit. Fights over
the amount due per contract ensued. A little over a year after the bubble burst,
the Dutch government stepped in to declare that the contracts could be settled
for 3.5 percent of their initial value. While a marked improvement over paying
the full contract, 3.5 percent of the most expensive tulip would still require a
year’s work for some unlucky citizens.

The Speculation of Crowds Comes to Cryptoassets
As with Tulipmania, cryptoassets are vulnerable to the speculation of crowds.
This is especially true as people fixate on the incredible returns some early
bitcoin investors enjoyed and hope that the latest cryptocurrency, cryptocommodity, or cryptotoken will make them rich too.
However, remember that just because the unfettered enthusiasm of a crowd
takes an asset to unreasonable highs doesn’t mean the asset itself is flawed.
Tulips are still enjoyed and sold worldwide. And as we saw with the tech and
telecom boom, there were gems such as Amazon and Salesforce that would
reward their patient investors spectacularly for years to come. The investors
who got burned were the ones who bought because everyone else was buying,
and then sold because everyone else was selling. The best way to avoid getting
burned in this manner is to do proper due diligence and have an investment

Burniske 02.indd 144

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

145

plan that is adhered to. If the urge is to buy the asset because everyone else is
buying it and it keeps going up, then it’s likely best to walk away from any consideration of that investment. Speculative bubbles are particularly dangerous
when there is no underlying long-term value proposition to the asset. In these
cases, it’s as bad as gambling (or worse, as there’s an illusion of value).
We sometimes hear skeptical investors warn of the dangers of bitcoin. Nout
Wellink, the former president of the Dutch Central Bank, is famous for saying,
“This is worse than the tulip mania. At least then you got a tulip, now you get
nothing.”19 While we understand that some may have a hard time grasping
that something with no physical form could have value, at this point in its life,
bitcoin is a far cry from tulips.
The key to understanding bitcoin’s value is recognizing it has utility as
“Money-over-Internet-Protocol” (MoIP)—allowing it to move large amounts
of value to anyone anywhere in the world in a matter of minutes—which drives
demand for it beyond mere speculation. While tulips have aesthetic appeal, it
is a stretch to argue that their utility is on par with MoIP in the digital age. It’s
important to investigate the underlying utility of any other cryptoasset that the
innovative investor may be considering.
That said, bitcoin has had periods when crowds momentarily overtook the
markets. These times are worthwhile to examine and learn from, and it’s important to note that bitcoin has always recovered from these periods of mass speculation, a major differentiator from tulips. There are six periods over the last eight
years when the crowd temporarily controlled the bitcoin market. The innovative investor will take note that the power of crowds to move bitcoin’s markets
has been moderating over time. We include this dive into bitcoin’s speculative
past to help inform future investigation of cryptoassets as they come to market
and inevitably get swept up in periods of mass speculation.

Bitcoin Bubbles
When Mt. Gox was established, bitcoin finally became accessible to the mainstream. Prior to this point, bitcoin holders had mostly been computer and
cryptography wizzes, acquiring bitcoin as a function of running the computers
that supported the network. Figure 10.1 shows the price action of bitcoin on a
log scale since the start of Mt. Gox. Recall that charts with log scales are good
at showing the percent price appreciation of an asset over time. On a linear
scale, the early years of bitcoin’s price appreciation would be less evident.

Burniske 02.indd 145

9/9/17 1:46 PM

146 CRYPTOASSETS

10000

Price of Bitcoin (USD)

1000
100
10
1
Jul-10
0.1

Jul-11

Jul-12

Jul-13

Jul-14

Jul-15

Jul-16

0.01

Figure 10.1 n Bitcoin’s price action from Mt. Gox until early 2017
Data sourced from CoinDesk

What is immediately apparent is bitcoin’s price appreciation in the year following the opening of Mt. Gox. When Mt. Gox opened, bitcoin was worth
less than $0.10, and just a year later it was worth over $10. While $10 may not
sound like much, consider that in the period of a year bitcoin increased 100fold, meaning that a $100 investment had turned into $10,000.
Another significant leg up was in November 2013, when bitcoin made its
infamous run past the price of $1,000 per coin for the first time. While many
people new to the space think that was bitcoin’s first bubble, in fact, it had
many bubbles before that. Figure 10.2 shows the percentage change in bitcoin’s
Month-Over-Month Appreciation

Doubling of Value in a Month

800%

Month-Over-Month Appreciation

700%
600%
500%
400%
300%
200%
100%
0%
–100%
Sep-17

Mar-17

Aug-16

Jan-16

Jul-15

Dec-14

Jun-14

Nov-13

May-13

Oct-12

Apr-12

Sep-11

Feb-11

Aug-10

Jan-10

–200%

Figure 10.2 n Bitcoin’s history of doubling price in a one-month period
Data sourced from CoinDesk

Burniske 02.indd 146

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

147

price over 30-day periods, or what is known as month-over-month appreciation. It becomes clear that bitcoin has experienced six one-month periods
when it doubled in price.
Three of these doublings happened in the year after the opening of Mt.
Gox. The last ascent during this period was the most phenomenal, when on
May 13, 2011, the price increased more than 700 percent over the previous
month. While there were respective drivers to these price runs, by and large
they were fueled by the ability of more mainstream users to gain access to
bitcoin through Mt. Gox. Small pieces of information created snowball effects
that took the market by storm.
To understand how these bubbles unfolded, it is helpful to quantify certain
aspects. First, we will define a bitcoin bubble cycle as being recognizable on
the first day that bitcoin’s price has doubled from its price 30 days prior. The
bubble ends when the price stops falling from the month prior, firming up
with month-over-month gains for three straight days. These bubbles are visible
on bitcoin’s price chart in Figure 10.3.
10000
1000
100

#6

#5

#3
#2

#4

10
#1
1
7/18/10
0.1

7/18/11

7/18/12

7/18/13

7/18/14

7/18/15

7/18/16

0.01

Figure 10.3 n Bitcoin’s price bubbles
Data sourced from CoinDesk

Price bubbles after the launch of Mt. Gox peaked at the following prices on
the following dates:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Burniske 02.indd 147

November 6, 2010: $0.39
February 9, 2011: $1.09
June 8, 2011: $29.60
January 8, 2012: $7.11
April 9, 2013: $230
December 4, 2013: $1,147

9/9/17 1:46 PM

148 CRYPTOASSETS

Clearly, the time periods soon after the launch of Mt. Gox were particularly
exciting, but also at times harrowing. On the other side of every peak there is
a dangerous trough, and bitcoin investors in these bubbles were not spared.
Within the period defined as a bitcoin bubble, the average decline from peak
price to trough price was 63 percent. The bubbles that peaked in June 2011 and
December 2013 were particularly devastating, with losses of 93 percent and 85
percent respectively.
More insidious than the precipitous nature of the losses is how they
unfolded compared to the rises. Sharp rises are often characterized by investor
exuberance, quickly escalating as more and more jubilantly pile in. The falls,
on the other hand, are sustained excruciation. The pattern is qualitatively visible in Figure 10.3, as the ascent to the peak of a bubble is like a rocket taking
off, while the decent is more like a parachute drifting to the ground.
The longer duration of descents as opposed to ascents is important for the
innovative investor to keep in mind, as sometimes it may feel like the drop
from the peak of a bubble will never end. Immature investors will typically
cry out in defeat when they can’t tolerate further losses. Sadly, these last cries
of capitulation are often when a bear market is getting ready to turn around.

The Steemit Bubble
A large number of cryptoassets other than bitcoin have gone through similar
stratospheric ascents, fueled by the speculation of crowds, and corresponding
descents. A good example was in the middle of 2016, when the new blockchain architecture Steemit caught everyone’s attention. Its premise was to provide an open publishing or blogging platform on which authors who wrote
good articles and posts were rewarded by readers with the cryptoasset steem.
Steemit served as a decentralized Reddit of sorts, with flavors of the blogging
site Medium mixed in. The architecture was supported by a convoluted, albeit
innovative, flow of monetary policy between miners, content creators, content
curators, and more.
On July 1, 2016, the total network value of Steemit was around $16 million.
Two weeks later it was around $350 million, a more than 20-fold increase.20
Such rapid changes in price are almost always fueled by mass speculation and
not fundamental growth. Behavior changes slowly, and many of the use cases
put forth by cryptoassets will require the mainstream to adapt to these new
platforms. Speculators, on the other hand, move quickly.

Burniske 02.indd 148

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

149

As shown in Figure 10.4, steem’s price in bitcoin terms would fall from its
mid-July peak by 94 percent three months later, and by 97 percent at the end of
the year. This doesn’t mean the platform is bad. Rather, it shows how the speculation and excitement about its prospects fueled a sharp rise and fall in price.
Price of Steem (in Units of BTC)

0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001

Feb-17

Jan-17

Dec-16

Nov-16

Oct-16

Sep-16

Aug-16

Jul-16

Jun-16

May-16

Apr-16

0

Figure 10.4 n Steemit’s speculation-fueled price bubble
Data sourced from CryptoCompare

The Zcash Bubble
One of the most meteoric rises and crashes was the October 2016 rollout of
the new privacy-focused cyptocurrency zcash (ZEC). Few cryptocurrencies
have been more anticipated than this one, and rightfully so, given its strong
engineering team. Ethereum’s Vitalik Buterin was an advisor and described
Zcash as providing the “advantages of using a public blockchain, while still
being sure that their private information is protected.”21 Two well-regarded
cryptoasset investment firms, Pantera Capital and Digital Currency Group,
were involved with Zcash as well. Zcash technology targeted the privacycentric vertical that dash and monero occupied, both of which were in the top
10 of cryptocurrencies in terms of network value when zcash was released. The
excitement was palpable.
Integral to the ensuing price bubble was how the Zcash team structured
the issuance of zcash, which they did with good intention. As we discussed in
Chapter 5, they chose to follow an issuance model similar to bitcoin’s, which

Burniske 02.indd 149

9/9/17 1:46 PM

150 CRYPTOASSETS

meant that upon launch of its blockchain there would be zero units of zcash
outstanding. From zero units outstanding, all units would be issued organically through miners competing to add blocks to Zcash’s blockchain and getting paid with newly minted zcash via coinbase transactions. The Zcash team
had implemented a further tweak, known as a slow-start, that would limit the
initial size of coinbase transactions22 to miners. The slow-start was intended as
a safety feature in case there were any bugs in Zcash’s code. This prudent model
was markedly different from the crowdsale model that many cryptoassets have
been pursuing (which will be discussed further in Chapter 16), but it also drastically limited the initial supply.
Zcash frenzy was stoked further by the recent increase in popularity of
futures trading of cryptoassets. One exchange known as BitMEX began offering futures prior to the launch of zcash, which spiked to 10 bitcoin per zcash.23
The combination of limited initial supply with widespread demand led to
a classic supply shortage that boosted the price of zcash. On the first day of
trading, the coin momentarily achieved a price of 3,300 bitcoin, or more than
$2 million dollars per zcash, on Poloniex.24 Within two days it had crashed
below 1 bitcoin per zcash and continued to fall, closing out 2016 at a price of
.05 bitcoin per zcash, or roughly $48.25 While zcash has since stabilized and
continues to hold great promise as a cryptoasset, its rocky start was caused by
mass speculation.

Words of Warning for the Innovative Investor Tempted by Bubbles
Robert Shiller, author, professor, and Nobel Prize winner, defined a bubble
as “a social epidemic that involves extravagant expectations for the future.”26
We’ve talked much about the expectations for the future of cryptoassets.
However, we also believe innovative investors must be grounded in common sense in order to identify proper investments from improper ones, and
they need to recognize when buying opportunities exist and when the madness of the crowd has taken over. When a cryptoasset is skyrocketing, it can
be hard to resist the urge to jump in and ride the rocket. However, the timing
can be precarious, and spotting the end of a bubble is not easy. By the time
the bubble is popping and the speculation of crowds has turned on itself, it’s
often too late. Alan Greenspan encapsulated the idea nicely: “You can spot a
bubble. They’re obvious in every respect. But it is impossible for the majority
of participants in the market to call the date when it blows. Every bubble by
definition deflates.”27

Burniske 02.indd 150

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

151

“THIS TIME IS DIFFERENT”
When asset markets are taken over by mass speculation and prices reach nosebleed territory, a common refrain can often be heard: “This time is different.”
Typically, the logic goes that the markets have evolved from more primitive
years, and financial engineering innovations have led to robust markets that
can’t possibly crash. Time and again this thesis has been refuted by subsequent market crashes. In their well-regarded book This Time Is Different: Eight
Centuries of Financial Folly, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff deliver a
300-page tour de force to prove that this time is never different.
They describe how “this time is different” thinking was used to justify the
sustainability of jubilant markets prior to the 1929 crash that led to the Great
Depression. Proponents of “this time is different” thinking claimed that business cycles had been cured by the creation of the Federal Reserve in 1913.
The thinking was that the Federal Reserve could use monetary policy to boost
economies when production and consumption were flagging, and they could
reel in markets when they showed signs of overheating. Others pointed to
increasing free trade, declining inflation, and scientific methods being applied
to corporate management that were leading to much more accurate production and inventory levels.28
In the October 16, 1929, issue of the New York Times, Yale economist Irving
Fisher declared, “Stock prices have reached what looks like a permanently high
plateau.”29 His proclamation would go down as the worst stock tip in history,
as eight days later the market dropped by 11 percent. On October 28, it would
fall another 13 percent, and on October 29 another 12 percent. A month after
this declaration was printed in the New York Times, Fisher went broke and the
Dow had lost almost half its value prior to the crash.30
Similar thinking characterized the tech-and-telecom boom in the late 1990s
and early 2000s. As eloquently described by Chancellor:
The 1990s bull market was accompanied by the reappearance
of a new era ideology similar to that of the 1920s. Known as the
“new paradigm,” or the “Goldilocks economy” (like the porridge
in the fairy tale it was neither too hot nor too cold), the theory
suggested that the control of inflation by the Federal Reserve,
the decline in the federal deficit, the opening of global markets,
the restructuring of corporate America, and the widespread use
of information technology to control inventory stock levels had

Burniske 02.indd 151

9/9/17 1:46 PM

152 CRYPTOASSETS
combined to do away with the business cycle. Point for point, this
was a reiteration of the new era philosophy of Irving Fisher’s day.31

Similar to the 1920s, in the 1990s stock analysts and investment managers
rationalized the expensive markets with the claim that the old methods of
valuing companies no longer applied. There were new methods that justified
the nosebleed prices.32

The Same Patterns Persist
The idea of valuation, which we will tackle in the next chapters, is a particularly challenging one for cryptoassets. Since they are a new asset class, they
cannot be valued as companies are, and while valuing them based on supply and demand characteristics like that of commodities has some validity, it
doesn’t quite suffice. As a result, we predict that as the space grows, and likely
to dizzying levels, we’ll once again hear the refrain that old methods of valuation no longer apply. When the innovative investor hears that refrain, it will be
important to stay on high alert and investigate if the new method of valuation
really makes sense.
Throughout this book, we’ve tried to stay on message that the innovative
investor may be a new class of investor, just as cryptoassets are a new asset
class. However, we’ve also been reminding readers of lessons to be learned
from the past and time-tested tools of portfolio and asset analysis. Ignoring
these important lessons will lead people into the trap of thinking that not only
are things different this time, but that they are different from other investors
as well.
Generally, these traps follow a pattern: initially, there may be support for
the underlying price appreciation, as with most fundamental innovations.
But that price appreciation and the story behind it can become a self-fulfilling
prophecy. People become entranced by stories of their friends and family making easy money, even when they knew little about what they bought. In times
like these (as in Tulipmania), many subscribe to the “greater idiot” ideal: people can make money so long as they are able to sell the asset at a higher price
to an idiot greater than them. A key indicator of the unsustainability of mass
speculation is when new and inexperienced entrants stream into the markets.
Bubbles are typically worsened by cheap credit, as financial institutions provide speculators the means to take out loans so they can buy more of the asset
than they could with cash on hand. In this sense, the financial institutions buy

Burniske 02.indd 152

9/9/17 1:46 PM

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time Is Different” Thinking

153

into the speculative bubble as they see the opportunity to make money, just as
the institutions around them are making money off loans to frenzied speculators. Both individual speculators and financial institutions providing cheap
credit fall into the rut of crowd theory and convince themselves that “this time
is different.”
To make matters worse, when markets are overheating is usually when misleading asset issuers, Ponzi operators, and market manipulators come out to
play. For that reason, we’ll turn to these three themes in the next chapter.

Burniske 02.indd 153

9/9/17 1:46 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 02.indd 154

9/9/17 1:46 PM

Chapter 11
“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”
