
Hedging
Futures markets serve an important economic function: they permit commercial
producers and consumers to hedge commodity price risks, giving them a competitive advantage. At the same time, futures offer speculators a gambling palace with
more choices than any casino.
Hedging means opening a futures position opposite to one’s position in the actual
commodity. For example, a major candy manufacturer knows months in advance
how much sugar the firm is going to need. He buys a corresponding number of sugar
futures in NewYork or London when prices are good enough for the firm. They’ll be
needing trainloads of sugar several months from now, but meanwhile they hold sugar
futures, which they plan to sell when they buy their cargoes.
If sugar prices go up and they have to pay more for the raw commodity, they will
offset that loss by making roughly the same profit on their futures position. If sugar
prices fall, they’ll lose money on their futures contracts but make it up in savings on
the raw materials. Their unhedged competitors are taking chances. If sugar prices
fall, they’ll buy on the cheap and reap a windfall, but if prices rise, they’ll be hung
out to dry. Hedged consumers can concentrate on running their core businesses,
insulated from future price swings. Airlines know years in advance how much jet fuel
they’ll need, and buying oil futures protects them from price spikes that often occur
in this volatile market.
Producers of commodities also benefit from hedging. An agribusiness can presell
its wheat, coffee, or cotton when prices are high enough to assure profits. They sell
short enough futures contracts to cover the size of their prospective crop. From that
point on, they have no price risk. If prices go down, they’ll make up their losses on
cash commodity by profits on short futures trades. If prices go up, they’ll lose money
on their short futures positions but make it back selling the actual commodity at
higher prices.
Hedging removes price risk from planning to buy or to deliver a cash commodity.
It allows commercial interests to concentrate on their core businesses, offer stable
consumer pricing, and obtain a long-term competitive advantage.
Hedgers give up a chance of a windfall but insulate themselves from price risks.
Survivors value stability. That why the Exxons, the Coca-Colas, and the Nabiscos

190

TRADING VEHICLES

of the world are among the major players in commodity markets. Hedgers are the
ultimate insiders, and a good hedging department not only buys price insurance, but
also serves as a profit center.
Hedgers transfer price risks to speculators who enter the markets, lured by the
glitter of potential profits. It’s ironic that hedgers, who have inside information, are
not fully confident about prices, while crowds of cheerful outsiders plunk down
money to bet on futures.
The two largest groups of speculators are farmers and engineers. Farmers
produce commodities, while engineers love to apply scientific methods to the
futures game. Many farmers enter futures markets as hedgers but catch the bug
and start speculating. It never ceases to amaze me how many farmers end up trading stock index futures. As long as they trade corn, cattle, or soybeans, their feel
for the fundamentals gives them an edge over city slickers. But what’s their edge
in the S&P500?

Supply, Demand, and Seasonality
Major bull and bear markets in futures are driven by supply or demand. Supplydriven markets tend to be fast and furious, while demand-driven markets tend to be
quiet and slow. Why? Think of any commodity, say coffee, which grows in Africa and
South America.
Changes in demand come slowly, thanks to the conservatism of human nature.
The demand for coffee can increase only if drinking becomes more popular, with an
espresso machine in every bar. The demand can fall off if coffee drinking becomes
less popular, due to a deteriorating economy or in response to a health fad. Demanddriven markets move at a leisurely pace.
Now imagine that a major coffee growing area is hit by a hurricane or a freeze.
Suddenly the world supply of coffee is rumored to be reduced by 10% and prices
shoot up, cutting off marginal consumers. Imagine a new OPEC policy sharply curtailing crude oil supply or a general strike in a leading copper-mining country. When
a commodity’s supply is reduced or even rumored to be reduced, its price climbs,
reallocating tight supplies to those best able to afford them.
Grain prices often spike during spring and summer planting and growing seasons,
as dry spells, floods, and pests threaten supplies. Traders say that a farmer loses his
crop three times before harvesting it. Once the harvest is in and the supply is known,
demand becomes the driving force. Demand-driven markets have narrower channels, with smaller profit targets, and lower risks. As seasons change, channels have
to be redrawn, and trading tactics adjusted. A new trader may wonder why his tools
stopped working. A smart trader gets out a new set of tools for the season and puts
old ones in storage until next year—just as he swaps regular and snow tires on his
car.
A futures trader must know the key supply and demand factors of the market he’s
trading. For example, he must keep an eye on the weather during the critical growing and harvesting months in agricultural commodities. Trend traders in the futures
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

46. FUTURES

191

markets tend to look for supply-driven markets, while swing traders can do just as
well in demand-driven markets.
Most commodities fluctuate through the seasons. Freezing spells in the United
States are bullish for heating oil futures. Orange juice futures used to have wild runups during the frost season in Florida, but have become much more sedate due to the
increase of orange production in Brazil in the Southern hemisphere. Seasonal trades
take advantage of such swings, but you have to be careful because those cycles are
seldom identical. Be sure to put your seasonal trades through the filter of technical
analysis.

Floors and Ceilings
Commodities, unlike stocks, rarely trade below certain price floors or above price
ceilings. The floor depends on the cost of production. When the price of a commodity, be it gold or sugar, falls below that level, miners stop digging and farmers stop
planting. Some third-world governments, desperate for dollars and trying to avoid
social unrest, may subsidize production, paying locals in a worthless local currency
and dumping their product on the world market. Still, if enough producers close up
and quit, the supply will shrink, and prices will have to rise to draw in new suppliers.
If you look at a 20-year chart of most commodities, you’ll see that the same price
areas have served as a floor year after year.
The ceiling depends on the cost of substitution. If the price of a commodity rises,
major industrial consumers will start switching away from it. If soybean meal, a major animal feed, becomes too expensive, the demand will switch to fishmeal, and if
sugar becomes too costly, the demand will switch to corn sweeteners.
Why don’t more people trade against those levels? Why don’t they buy near the
floor and short near the ceiling, profiting from what is similar to shooting fish in a
barrel? First of all, neither the floor nor the ceiling is set in stone, and markets may
briefly violate them. Even more importantly, the human nature works against those
trades. Most speculators don’t have the courage to short a market that’s boiling near
record highs or go long a market after it has crashed.

Contango, Inversion, and Spreads
All futures markets offer several contracts for different delivery months. For example, you can buy or sell wheat for delivery in September or December of this year,
March of next year, and so on. Normally, the nearby months are cheaper than the
remote ones, and that relationship is called a contango market.
Higher prices for more remote deliveries reflect the “cost of carry”—financing,
storing, and insuring a commodity. The differences between delivery months are
called premiums, and hedgers closely watch them. When supply tightens or demand
increases, people start paying up for the nearby months, and the premium for the
faraway months begins to shrink. Sometimes the front months become more expensive than faraway months—the market becomes inverted! There is a real shortage

192

TRADING VEHICLES

out there, and people are paying extra to get their stuff sooner. This so-called “inversion” is one of the strongest signs of a bull market in a commodity.
When you look for inversions, keep in mind that there is one market in which inversion is the norm. Interest rate futures are always inverted because those who hold
cash positions keep collecting interest instead of paying finance and storage charges.
Professionals don’t wait for inversions—they monitor the narrowing or widening
of premiums. A good speculator can rattle off the latest prices, but a floor trader will
quote you the latest premiums. A savvy trader knows by heart the normal spreads
between different delivery months.
Hedgers tend to dominate the short side of the markets, most speculators are
perpetual bulls, but floor traders love to trade spreads. Spreading means buying one
delivery month and selling another in the same market. It also means going long one
market while shorting a related one.
If the price of corn, a major animal feed, starts to rise faster than the price of
wheat, at some point ranchers will start using wheat rather than corn.They’ll reduce
their purchases of corn, while buying more wheat, pushing their spread back towards the norm. Spread traders bet against deviations and for a return to normalcy.
In this situation, a spreader will short corn and buy wheat, instead of taking a directional trade in either market.
Spread trading is safer than directional trading and has lower margin requirements. Amateurs do not understand spreads and have little interest in these reliable
but slow-moving trades. There is not a single book on spreads I can recommend, a
sign of how well professionals have sown up this area of knowledge and kept the outsiders out. This is one of a handful of niches in the markets where professionals are
earning high incomes without the benefit of a single good how-to book.

Commitments of Traders
Brokers report their clients’ positions to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), which strips away personal data and releases summaries to the public.
Their Commitments of Traders (COT) reports are among the best sources of information on what the smart money is doing in the futures markets.
COT reports reveal positions of three groups—hedgers, big traders, and small
traders. Hedgers identify themselves to brokers because that entitles them to several advantages, such as lower margin deposits. Big traders are those who hold the
number of contracts above the “reporting requirements,” set by the government.
Whoever is not a hedger or a big trader is a small trader.
In the old days, big traders used to be the smart money. Today, the markets are
bigger, the reporting requirements much higher, and big traders are likely to be commodity funds, most of them not smarter than run of the mill traders. The hedgers
are today’s smart money, but understanding their positions isn’t as easy as it seems.
For example, a COT report may show that in a certain market, hedgers hold 70%
of shorts. A beginner who thinks this is bearish may be completely off the mark if
he doesn’t know that normally hedgers hold 90% of shorts in that market, making
the 70% stance wildly bullish. Savvy COT analysts compare current positions to
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

46. FUTURES

193

historical norms and look for situations where hedgers, or the smart money, and
small traders, many of whom are gamblers, are dead set against each other. If you
find that in a certain market the smart money is overwhelmingly on one side, while
the small specs are mobbing the other, it is time to use technical analysis to look for
entries on the side of hedgers.

Margins and Risk Control
Futures’ low margin requirements make them more rewarding than stocks but also
much more dangerous. When buying stocks in the United States, you must put up
at least half of their cash value with the broker giving you a margin loan for the rest.
If you have $40,000 in your account, you may buy $80,000 worth of stocks, and no
more. This margin limit was implemented after the Crash of 1929 when it became
clear that low margins led to excessive speculation, which contributed to the viciousness of declines. Prior to 1929, speculators could buy stocks on a 10% margin,
which worked great in bull markets but forced them to liquidate when prices slid,
pushing the market lower during bear markets.
Margins of only three to five percent are common in the futures markets, allowing
traders to make huge bets with little money.With $40,000 in your account, you may
control about a million dollars’ worth of merchandise, be it pork bellies or stock
index futures.
For example, if gold trades at $1,500/oz and you buy a 100-oz contract on a
$7,500 margin and catch a $75 price move, you’ll gain 100%. A beginner looks at
these numbers and exclaims, “where have I been all my life?” He thinks he’s found
a royal road to riches. But there is a catch. Before that market rises $75, it may dip
$50. That meaningless blip will trigger a margin call and force a small speculator’s
account to go bust—despite his correct forecast.
Easy margins attract adrenaline junkies who quickly go up in smoke. Futures are
very tradable—but only if you follow strict money management rules and don’t go
crazy with easy margins. Professionals put on small initial positions and pyramid
them if a trade moves in their favor. They keep adding new contracts while moving
stops beyond breakeven.
When you become interested in futures, it’s a good idea to make your first steps in
those markets where you know something about the fundamentals. If you are a cattle
rancher, a house builder, or a loan officer, then cattle, lumber, or interest rate futures
would be logical starting points. If you have no particular interests, make your first
steps in relatively inexpensive markets. In the United States, corn, sugar, and, in a
slow year, copper can be good markets for beginners. They are liquid, volatile, and
not too expensive.
We’ll return to the futures markets in Part 9, “Risk Management.” There you’ll
find which contracts you may or may not trade, depending on their price and volatility as well as your account size.
Futures traders with small accounts sometimes trade mini-contracts. For example, a regular contract of gold represents 100 oz of the yellow metal, but a minicontract covers only 20 oz. Mini-contracts trade during the same hours as regu-

194

TRADING VEHICLES

lar contracts and closely track their prices. Their commissions are similar to those
for regular contracts, taking a proportionately bigger bite from each trade. Their
slippage tends to be bigger due to lower volumes. The exceptions are stock index
futures, where mini contracts have higher volumes than regular ones.

■■47. Forex
The currency market is the largest asset class in the world by trading volume, with a
turnover of over $4 trillion per day. Currencies trade around the clock—from 20:15
GMT on Sunday to 22 GMT on Friday, stopping only on weekends. While some currency trades serve the hedging needs of importers and exporters, most transactions
are speculative.
The United States is the only country in the world where most people don’t think
much about currencies. The moment an American sets foot abroad, he realizes that
everyone, from executives to taxi drivers, watches the exchange rates. When people
outside the United States get their hands on a bit of trading capital, often their first
idea is to trade forex.
The forex market has no central location. Institutions deal in the interbank market, trading with each other using online platforms, such as Bloomberg or Reuters.
Unless you can trade $10 million of spot forex at a pop, you’ll be trading retail, going
through a broker.
Most beginners open accounts at forex shops where they immediately run into a
fatal flaw—your broker is your enemy. When you trade stocks, futures, or options,
your broker is your agent: he executes your trades for a fee, and that’s the end of it.
Not so in most forex (as well as CFD) houses, where your broker is likely to take
the opposite side of every trade.You and the forex house are now against each other:
if you lose, your broker will profit, and if you win, he’ll lose. Since the house holds
most of the cards, it has many ways to achieve the desired result.
Most forex houses “bucket” customer orders—accept them without executing
any trades. They charge spreads, commissions, interest, etc. for non-existent trades.
I received the clearest explanation of their game from a chatty head dealer at a major
European forex house (which is now expanding worldwide, with branches in the
United States—I see their billboards in New York).
That forex house accepts any trade in any currency pair, whether long or short,
but always shifts the bid-ask spread to put itself at an advantage from the get-go.
Those so-called “trades” never go anywhere—they’re only kept as electronic entries
in the firm’s books. The forex house charges interest if its customers take their phantom “positions” overnight, even though there is never any position, since the house
simply holds the opposite side of each trade. The only time the firm goes to the legitimate market is when multiple client orders cluster on the same side of the same
currency pair in excess of a million dollars—that’s when the house hedges its own
exposure in the real market.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

47. FOREX

195

When you trade stocks, options, or futures, your broker buys or sells on your
behalf, earning a commission for this service, and doesn’t care whether you win or
lose. This is great, because he has no incentive to push you into losing. On the other
hand, a forex house that buckets your orders wants you to lose, so that it can win. In
addition to shifting bid-ask spreads and charging interest on non-existent positions,
it may even charge a daily “resettlement fee”—the full bid-ask spread for every day
you hold a trade.
Forex shops help ensure their clients’ demise by offering homicidal leverage. I’ve
seen them offer leverage of 100:1 and even 400:1. A newcomer who scrapes together a $1,000 stake can suddenly control a position worth a hundred thousand dollars. This means that the slightest price wiggle against him is guaranteed to wipe out
his equity. That’s why those shops confidently keep clients’ money in-house, never
transmitting their trades to the real market—why share the loot with anyone else?
They are so certain of their clients’ demise that many compensate employees with
a percentage of the client deposits that they bring in—funds deposited with a forex
house are as good as theirs.
“The market has long been plagued by swindlers preying on the gullible,” according to The New York Times. “The average individual foreign-exchange-trading victim
loses about $15,000, according to CFTC records,” writes The Wall Street Journal. Currency trading “has become the fraud du jour,” according to Michael Dunn of the U.S.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
In August 2008, the CFTC set up a special task force to deal with growing foreign exchange fraud. In January 2010, the CFTC identified a “number of improper
practices” in the retail foreign exchange market, “among them solicitation fraud, a
lack of transparency in the pricing and execution of transactions, unresponsiveness
to customer complaints, and the targeting of unsophisticated, elderly, low net worth
and other vulnerable individuals.” It proposed new rules limiting leverage to 10 to 1.
Frauds may include churning customer accounts, selling useless software, improperly managing “managed accounts,” false advertising, and Ponzi schemes. All the
while, promoters claim that trading foreign exchange is a road to profits.
The real forex market is a zero sum game, in which well-capitalized professional
traders, many of whom work for banks, devote full-time attention to trading. An
inexperienced retail trader has a significant information disadvantage. The retail
trader always pays the bid-ask spread, which lowers his odds of winning. Retail
forex traders are almost always undercapitalized and subject to the problem of
“gambler’s ruin.” Even in a fair game between two players, the one with the lower
amount of capital has a higher probability of going bust in the long run.
Having observed forex shops for decades, I was amused to see what my best student did when he became interested in forex. This multimillionaire stock trader
decided to check out forex houses by opening large accounts and then waiting for
the night, when forex trading was at its thinnest. That’s when he placed his orders,
always of a very unusual and atypical size, and watched the tape.There were only two
houses that showed his orders on tape—the rest, apparently, got bucketed.

196

TRADING VEHICLES

I enjoy trading currencies, but wouldn’t go near a forex house. Instead, I trade
electronic currency futures. That’s what I recommend to anyone interested in trading foreign exchange. Futures brokers work for you, not against you; futures spreads
are more narrow, commissions more reasonable, and no interest is charged for the
privilege of holding a position. There are contracts for most major currency pairs
and even mini-contracts for euro/dollar and yen/dollar.
One of the real challenges of currencies is that they move around the clock. You
may enter a trade, analyze it in the evening, and decide to take profits the following day. When you wake up, there are no profits to be taken. The turning point you
saw coming has already come and gone, only not in the United States, but in Asia or
Europe. Someone had picked your pocket while you slept!
Major financial institutions deal with this problem by using the system of â•›“passing
the book.” A bank may open a position in Tokyo, manage it intraday, and then transfer
it to its London branch before closing for the night. London continues to manage that
and other positions, and in the evening passes the book to New York, which manages
it until it passes it back to Tokyo. Currencies follow the sun, and small traders can’t
keep up with it. If you trade currencies, you either need to take a very long-term
view and ignore daily fluctuations, or else day-trade and avoid overnight positions.
