
YOUR LIFE’S PURPOSE
Successful people live by what they believe not by how they feel. They are
what I call constitution-based versus feeling-based. Successful people have
strong convictions. They are very clear about their personal constitution
and their purpose in life. Constitution-based people will do whatever it

CHAPTER 1

SO YOU WANT TO TRADE FOREX?

15

takes to do the right thing, because it aligns with who they are. They have
their priorities in check and have the right perspective and attitude when it
comes to facing the internal battle between the two wolves that exists in all
of us. Your personal constitution will mirror your trading results.

CONCLUSION
Take the time to answer honestly the previous constitution-based questions
to allow you to build a solid foundation for your long-term success in
trading. You have an obligation to your personal future, happiness, health,
family, and income to establish a solid personal constitution.
Developing a solid personal and trading constitution is the first step of
your journey toward successful trading on Forex. I started this book on
trading by pointing out the importance of creating an emotional and
psychological constitution before teaching you any technical skills. What
good does it do to teach you technical skills if you do not have the courage
to execute them? Why teach you trading rules if you are a rule breaker?
There is no point to teaching you how to take advantage of new trading
opportunities if you cannot let go of your past mistakes and failures.
Developing a solid personal and trading constitution will be the first
step of your journey toward finding your rightful pot of gold in trading.
I look forward to accompanying you on your journey to the end of your
trading rainbow. Let our journey begin… .

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

A

2
P

T

E

R

INTRODUCTION
TO THE FOREX
WILL NEVER FORGET one trip to Australia, back in early 2001. I was
working out of our office in Sydney, preparing for a class, when I
was e-mailed the list of attendees. The registrar told me there were
26 Australians signed up for the class and one Scotsman, named Ian,
who had a very strong Scottish accent.
The next morning I started class the way I always do, asking everyone
their names, their current occupations, why they want to learn trading on
the Forex, and, more importantly, why they chose to get involved with my
company, Market Traders Institute, versus another.
We started going around the room introducing ourselves and
eventually came to Ian. Ian was an older fellow, perhaps in his late fifties, and
in great physical shape. “Hel-ow chief,” he said in an extremely strong Scottish accent. “My name is Ian, and I am from Scotland. I just happened to be
here in Australia for a bit when your advertisements caught my interest.
I called your office and they told me all about you, so I came here because I
was told you could teach me how to trade on the Forex and make money. Is
that true?”
I confidently answered, “I will do my best, Ian.”
He said, “That’s not what I asked. Now pay attention to the question.
Can you teach me how to trade on the Forex and make money?”

I

17
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

18

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

A bit more warily, I responded, “I can inform you all about the Forex
and I am willing to share everything I know, but it will be up to you to learn,
understand, and properly implement all this information with the discipline
I will teach you.”
He said, “Okay, that’s a fair statement.” Then he said, “Chief, I am a
mercenary by profession. Do you know what that is?”
“Ian, I have learned never to assume anything. The term ‘mercenary’
here in Australia could be different, so why don’t you inform the class what
you mean.”
I was absolutely not prepared for what he said next. “Chief, I kill
people for foreign governments, and I am here to tell you that if this is
a scam and if you can’t teach me how to trade on the Forex . . . I will
kill you.”
There is nothing worse than being caught off-guard or put on the
spot in front of a crowd. Everyone’s eyes in the class were now focused
on me. So I threw my hands up in the air and said, “Wow, no pressure,
Ian.” Then I looked at the class and said, “Class, I know we have only
scheduled three days of training, but we may be here for a month because
I am going to go over each and every single detail I know about the Forex.
This will be the best class I have ever given, and, rest assured, if I don’t
know the answer to a question, I will go to the ends of the earth to answer
it before I leave Australia, because I don’t want to have to look over my
shoulder the rest of my life wondering if Ian is near.” The class burst into
loud laughter.
The best way to learn something and remember it is to teach it to someone else, so after I teach a concept for about 45 minutes, I instruct the class
to teach each other. I have the person on the right teach the concept to the
person on their left, and after they are done I have the person on the left
teach the concept to the person on their right. Little did I realize this
teaching technique would potentially save my life.
When I divided the class into pairs that day, I believe God protected me
by having an odd number of students. When I got to Ian, I said, “Ian, I will
be your partner.” Although some of the other students asked to partner with
me, I told them, “Nothing personal, but my life is at stake here, so I am
going to work with Ian.” Thankfully, they all understood.
Looking back, I must say that was one of the most detailed, and perhaps
one of the best, classes I have ever given. Every time someone had a question, I immediately asked, “Ian did you understand the question?” Then I
would follow up with, “Ian, did you understand the answer?” If he said yes,

CHAPTER 2

INTRODUCTION TO THE FOREX

19

I would make him explain it to me and the rest of the class as an insurance
policy against my life. I am happy to report that both Ian and I are still
alive. In fact, Ian is now an active client of ours and has taught me a lot
in return.
Two of the greatest things he taught me were how to perform
under pressure and, more importantly, how to keep things simple with
respect to teaching Forex trading. For example, at one point, Ian could
only recognize and understand uptrends. “I can’t see or understand downtrends, Crown reversals, consolidations, Gartleys, or harmonic vibrations,”
he told me, “but I sure can see an uptrend.” A simple fact about trading on
the Forex is there are six major world currencies traded against the U.S.
dollar; when three go up, the other three go down. They have to move
in opposite directions to keep the world economy in balance. So when the
currency of Ian’s choice stops trending up and begins to reverse and
trend down, Ian goes and finds one of the other three currencies that
have reversed from a downtrend and are now trending up. He keeps his
trading simple.
As I move forward teaching you about the Forex, I will do my best to
explain the concepts in this book as if you are “Ian” and that my life is
dependent on providing you with the most accurate and detailed information
to help you get started.

HISTORY OF THE FOREX MARKET: HOW IT ALL BEGAN
BRETTON-WOODS ACCORD
The modern Forex market was established around 1973. But the BrettonWoods Accord of 1944, which was established to stabilize the global economy after World War II, is generally accepted as the original beginning of
the foreign exchange market. It created the concept of trading currencies
against each other and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Currencies
from around the world were fixed to the U.S. dollar, which in turn was
fixed to gold prices in hopes of bringing stability to global Forex events. All
currencies were allowed to fluctuate around that value but only within a
narrow trading range. Central banks agreed to intervene in the event
that their country’s currency moved or threatened to move outside that trading range. If the fixed value of a country’s currency shifted outside that
trading range, that country had the right under the articles of the agreement
to declare that a fundamental imbalance is in existence. As a result of this

20

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

fundamental imbalance, it created a revaluation or devaluation of the
country’s currency.
In 1971, the accord finally failed, however, it did manage to stabilize major economies of the world, including those of America, Europe,
and Asia.

FREE-FLOATING CURRENCIES
In late 1971 and 1972, two more attempts were made to establish free-floating currencies against the U.S. dollar: the Smithsonian Agreement and the
European Joint Float. To “float” a currency simply means to create a policy
by which a strong economic currency is used, such as the U.S. dollar
(USD), which in turn is anchored to the price of gold as a benchmark (also
known as the gold standard) to bring stability to a volatile global economic
situation. All other weaker economic currencies are then fixed against the
USD and allowed to fluctuate, or float, no more than 1 percent on either
side of the fixed rate. If the fixed rate moved more than 1 percent, the
central bank of that country was required to intervene in the market until
the exchange rate was brought back to within the 1 percent band.
The Smithsonian Agreement and the European Joint Float agreement
were similar to the Bretton-Woods Accord but allowed a greater range of
fluctuation in the currency values and widened the band in which currencies were allowed to trade.
The Smithsonian Agreement was just a modification of the BrettonWoods Accord, with allowances for greater fluctuation, whereas the European
Agreement aimed to reduce the dependence of European currencies on the
U.S. dollar. But after the failure of the three agreements, nations were allowed
to peg their currencies to “freely float,” eventually being mandated to do so in
1978 by the IMF. The free-floating system managed to continue for several
years after the mandate, yet many countries with weaker currency values
incurred major economic devaluation against certain countries that had
stronger currency values.

EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEM
European currencies were among those most affected by the strength of the
U.S. dollar and the British pound (GBP). In July 1978, the European Monetary System was created to counter its dependence on the USD. But by
1993, it was clear that this European Monetary System had failed. Shortly
thereafter, retail currency trading opportunities as we know them today
started to be enjoyed by smaller investors willing to take similar risks as
that of banks and large financial institutions.

CHAPTER 2

INTRODUCTION TO THE FOREX

21

DEVALUATION
By the late 1990s, stability issues arose in Europe, and major financial
problems erupted in Asia. In 1997, there was a major currency crisis in
Southeast Asia, which forced many of the countries’ economic currencies
to float. The devaluation of currencies continued in the Asian currency
markets, and confidence in trading the open Asian Forex markets began to
fail. However, countries with stable currencies, and the concept of trading
currencies, remained unchanged.

THE INTRODUCTION OF THE EURO
By this point, the Europeans were already very comfortable with the concept of Forex trading, but the rest of the world was still unfamiliar. The
establishment of the European Union in 1992 gave birth to the euro seven
years later in 1999. The euro was the first single currency used as legal
tender for the member states of the European Union and became the first
currency to rival the historical leaders—the United States, Great Britain,
and Japan—in the foreign exchange market by providing financial stability
that Europe and the Forex market had long desired.

WHAT IS THE FOREX?
Forex is an acronym for foreign exchange, a market where people exchange
the currency of one country for the currency of another in order to do business internationally. Typical situations in which such currency exchange is
necessary include payments of import and export purchases and the sale of
goods or services between countries. Forex is also called the cash market or
spot interbank market. The spot market means trading on-the-spot, at whatever the price is at that moment.
Prior to 1994, the Forex retail interbank market for small individual
speculative investors or traders was not available. A speculative investor, or
speculative trader, is one who looks to make a profit on price movement in
the market and is not looking to hold onto any currency long-term. But
with the average minimum transaction size of $1,000,000, smaller traders
were all but excluded from participation in this market. Then in the late
1990s, retail market maker brokers (companies that facilitate the trades for
speculative traders) were allowed to break up the large interbank units and
offered individual traders the opportunity to participate in the Forex market
as we know it today.

22

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Forex is considered the largest financial market in the world. The
term market refers to a place where buyers and sellers are brought together
to execute trading transactions. More than $1.5 trillion U.S. dollar is traded
daily on the Forex. By comparison, $300 billion dollars is traded daily on
the U.S. Treasury bond market and $100 billion dollars is traded daily on
the U.S. stock market, for a total of $400 billion dollars per day. Forex
trades nearly four times that volume daily, exceeding the daily combined
activity of all the other financial markets.
Forex has no physical location—transactions are placed via the Internet or telephone—but is composed of approximately 4,500 international
world banks and retail brokers. Individual traders wanting to profit by
speculating on price changes can only access this market through a Forex
broker, such as I-TradeFX.com. It is a good practice of a speculative trader
to only deal with Forex brokers that are regulated by the governmental
bodies in their respective countries.

TYPES OF TRADERS
Trading currencies involves the fluctuation of one currency in relation to
another. That is the main difference between trading currencies and stock
trading—you always have to deal with two instruments, or currency pairs,
whereas in stock trading you only deal with one instrument. The definition
of a currency pair, or currency cross, is trading one currency for another
currency, and you need a currency pair to execute a trade on the Forex.
Speculative currency trading, just like speculative stock trading, involves
exchanging one currency for another in anticipation of a price change in
your favor.
There are two types of traders on the Forex: consumer traders and speculative traders. A consumer trader wants long-term ownership and is not as
concerned with daily price movements, whereas a speculative trader is only
concerned with daily price movement, as that is where the profit potential
is. Speculative traders are also called scalpers—they are trying to scalp a
profit in a small price movement. Long-term position traders enter the market and stay in for a week, a month, or years. Short-term, or day traders,
will enter the market for 5 minutes, 30 minutes, or even 4 hours, and then
exit, but they are usually in and out within a 24-hour period.
Although brokers will assure you that Forex trading is commissionfree, it is important that you understand there still are costs involved. That
cost is called the spread, which is what you will be charged to get access to

CHAPTER 2

INTRODUCTION TO THE FOREX

23

the Forex market. The spread is the difference between the buy price and
the sell price of a specific currency.
Envision attending an auction where there are several buyers for a particular item. The auctioneer hopes to sell the item for $10.00 and has asked for
bids. One bidder offers $4.00. The difference between the $4.00 bid and
$10.00 asking price is $6.00, which is called the spread. As bidding gets closer
to the asking price, the spread tightens up. When the bidding gets to $9.95,
there is a $0.05 spread, and when the bidders agrees to buy it for $10.00 and
the seller agrees to sell it, you have a transaction. There are spreads between
all currency pairs that are traded, and they average 3 to 6 price interest points,
or pips, on the major world currencies (which are considered to be the U.S.
dollar [USD], the British pound [GBP], the Japanese yen [JPY], the European
euro [EUR], and the Swiss franc [CHF]). The value of a pip averages about
$10.00. Currencies from small countries are called off-brand currencies and
can have spreads as much as 500 to 1,000 pips. The broker retains the spread,
which is the difference between the buy and the sell price. This is done when
a trader enters a trade and upon execution of the trade the spread, should the
trade not go your way, is deducted from the trader’s account. Example: If the
sell price is 4 pips lower, or $40.00 less, than the buy price, and you buy a currency and immediately go to sell it without any movement in your favor, you
would lose $40.00, or 4 pips. To break even, the market would need to move
up 4 pips in your direction. To make a profit, the market would need to move
more than 4 pips in your direction.

HOW DO TRADERS GET PAID?
Price interest points, commonly known as pips, are usually expressed in
decimals. Depending on the pair of currencies being traded, pips are usually the last numbers of the decimal. As shown in the EUR/USD example
of Figure 2-1, pips are measured when the fourth digit after the decimal
point moves up or down.
A trader’s financial reward is measured in pips, which are then
converted into dollars. Most traders on the Forex trade with what is called
leverage. This is borrowing or using a broker’s money to trade. You acquire
leverage by posting a bond or a deposit with a Forex broker who then
allows you to trade using the broker’s money. When a trader executes a
trade on the Forex, the trader is buying or selling currency in units referred
to as lots (which is a set quantity of money). There are typically two types
of lots that traders will trade. A $100,000 unit is called a regular lot, and a

24

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

FIGURE 2-1 EUR/USD (One Hour Chart) Time Versus Price

$10,000 unit is called a mini-lot. When you buy and sell a regular lot, you
get paid $10.00 a pip versus $1.00 a pip on the mini-lot.
For example, if we were buying or exchanging one currency lot on
the EUR/USD currency pair at the exchange rate of USD $1.28 for every
1 euro, or 1.2800 price point (see Figure 2-1), we would enter the market at
that point. You will see that the currency moved in our favor to 1.2840, at
which point we decided to exit the market, selling our lot for a profit of 40
pips. To equate the 40 pips with money value, remember the following:
1 pip = approximately $10.00 on a $100,000 transaction or $1.00 on a
mini-lot transaction. If we made 40 pips in profit on this transaction, we
would have made 40 pips ⫻ $10.00 = $400.00 on a $100,000 account or
40 pips ⫻ $1.00 = $40.00 on a $10,000 account.
The average minimum deposit for trading with leverage is 1 percent,
which means that for every $100,000 lot you trade, you must have
$1,000.00 in your margin trading account. For mini-lots, you will need a
minimum of $100.00 in your margin trading account on deposit.
Trading can be a worthy full-time profession or a great way to earn secondary income. Either way, you will need to learn the three basic skills of
trading as you watch price movement against time.

CHAPTER 2

INTRODUCTION TO THE FOREX

25

The three critical skills you must learn are
1.
2.
3.

How to determine the current trend on any time frame
How to develop an entry strategy that works consistently
How to develop an exit strategy that works consistently

Once you master these three skills, you will be in a position to take
advantage of the significant profit potential in this market.

BULLS AND BEARS
The purpose of a broker is to facilitate the trade. After you open a trading
account, the broker gives a trader the right to execute transactions, which
includes certain rights and privileges, including the right to be a bull or a bear.
The terms bull and bear were created by traders in the stock market in the
early 1900s to identify the direction someone was trading in the market. The
term bull was derived from the way in which bulls attack or charge, moving
upward. In contrast, bears move downward when they attack or charge.
Bulls, therefore, resemble a buying market, because they believe prices
will continue to move upward, or rise, whereas bears resemble a selling
market, because they believe prices are going move downward, or fall.
Every trader has to make a decision to be either a bull or a bear before
entering the market. Bulls enter the market buying (first) and exit selling
(second). Bears do the opposite: they enter selling (first) and exit buying
(second). To make a profit in the market, you must always buy low and sell
high. Both bulls and bears are trying to do that; bears just reverse the
transactions (see Figure 2-2).

TYPES OF ORDERS
There are four types of orders used in the market:
●

Market order: This is an order placed to enter or exit the market at
the current market price. Remember, there is a bid price and an ask
price with a 3- to 6-pip spread on the major currencies (the U.S.
dollar [USD], the Japanese yen [JPY], the British pound [GBP], the
Swiss franc [CHF], the European euro [EUR], the Canadian dollar
[CAD] and the Australian dollar [AUD]). Traders buy on the ask
price and sell on the bid price. If we are trading the EUR/USD
currency pair and prices are bid 1.2810 at ask 1.2813, there is a 3-pip

26

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

FIGURE 2-2 EUR/USD (One Hour Chart) Bull and Bear Price Movement

spread. If you want to enter buying, you would pay the ask price of
1.2813 and if you wanted to enter selling, you would sell at 1.2810.
The current bid/ask price is called the market price and entering at
one of those prices is called a market order.
●

Limit orders: Orders used to enter or exit the market at a
predetermined price are called limit orders. You can enter and exit the
market using a limit order, which are orders placed ahead of time to
enter the market buying below where current prices are or selling
above where the current prices are. A limit order is better known as
“the order placed to get out of the market for a profit after you enter.”
