Guarding against false breaks
Breakouts are relatively common events in currency trading, especially in the very short-term. But
not every breakout is sustained. When prices break through key support or resistance levels, but
then stop and reverse course and ultimately move back through the break level, it’s called a false
break.

There’s no way to tell whether any given breakout is going to turn out to be a false break
except in hindsight. To protect against false breaks (as well as maintaining trading discipline
and sound risk management), you also need to follow up your stop-loss entry with a
contingent stop-loss exit order to close out the position if the market reverses course.
Although there’s no surefire way to tell whether a breakout is a false break or a valid one that you
should trade, a few points to keep in mind are:
Time frame of the breakout level: The shorter the time frame you’re looking at, the

greater the potential for a false break. The break of a price range on an hourly chart may
trigger stop losses only from short-term intraday traders. But the break of a daily price
range dating back several weeks is likely to spark greater interest from the market,
especially systematic models.
Significance of the price level: The more important the price level that’s broken, the
more likely it is to provoke a market response and to be sustained. A break of a threemonth daily trend line is more likely to trigger a market response than the break of recent
hourly highs/lows.
Duration of the break: The longer the breakout level is held, the more likely the breakout
is to be valid. Many false breaks are reversed in a matter of minutes. An hourly closing
price beyond the break level increases confidence that it’s a valid breakout, and a daily
close beyond confirms it.
Currency pair volatility: Relatively volatile currency pairs, such as GBP/USD and
USD/CHF, are more prone to false breaks than others, especially in short-term time
frames. Look for confirmation in bigger pairs, like EUR/USD and USD/JPY. If they’re
pressing against similar price levels, the less-liquid pairs could be leading the way.
Fundamental events and news: What’s the fundamental reason for the breakout? Did
someone say something? Have major market expectations on monetary policy, for
example, been disappointed or surprised? Sustained breakouts tend to have a fundamental
catalyst behind them —a significant piece of news that has altered the market’s outlook. If
the news is relatively minor or not entirely “new” news, it increases the chances it’s a
false break.

Trading breakouts is a relatively aggressive trading strategy and is certainly not without
risks. Until you’ve gained some experience in the forex market you’re probably better off
focusing only on breaks of levels identified by trend-line analysis in longer time frames, such
as daily charts, or breaks of longer-term price levels, like daily or weekly highs/lows. They
may not occur as frequently, but they’ll tend to be more reliable.

Making the Trade Correctly
When using an online trading platform, entering a position is as easy as making a few simple
mouse clicks. At the same time, the simplicity and speed of online trading platforms make those
simple mouse clicks a done deal that puts your trading capital at risk.

That’s why it’s important to understand from the get-go that any action you take on a trading
platform is your responsibility. You may have meant to click Buy instead of Sell, but no one

knows for sure except you.

If you do make a mistake, correct it as soon as you discover and confirm it. Don’t try to
trade your way out of it. Don’t try to manage it. Don’t start rationalizing that it may work out
anyway. No trader is error-proof, and you’re bound to make a mistake someday. Just cover
the error and get your position back to what you want it to be. Covering errors immediately is
one of the few hard-and-fast rules I subscribe to in trading any market.

Buying and selling online
I take you through the basic steps of making a trade online in Chapter 4, but here I aim to clue you
in to some of the human and technical aspects common to online trading.
Most every online trading brokerage now provides for click-and-deal trade execution. Click and
deal refers to trading on the current market price by clicking either the Buy button or the Sell
button in the trading platform. Before you can click and deal, you have to:
1. Select the right currency pair.
This may sound silly, but make sure you’ve selected the currency pair that you actually want to
make a trade in. When the market gets hectic, and you’re switching between your charts and the
trading platform, you could easily mistake EUR/USD for EUR/CHF if you’re not careful. This
can also happen when different currency pairs are trading around similar price levels. If
EUR/USD is trading at 30/33 and USD/JPY is trading at 31/34, it’s easy to home in on the
price and overlook the big figures, which would tell you you’re in the wrong pair.
2. Select the correct trade amount.
Make sure you’ve specified the correct amount you want to trade. Different platforms have
different ways of inputting the trade amount. Some use radio buttons, others use scroll-down
menus, and others allow you to type the amount manually. When the trading is fast and furious,
make sure your selection has been properly registered on the platform. Some trading platforms
allow you to customize your default trade sizes in advance, so you’re able to simply click and
deal on the currency pair of your choice.
3. Double-check your selections.
Remember: This is your money; be certain now or be sorry later. In case you think input
errors can’t happen to you, think about the equity trader at a New York investment bank who
meant to sell 10 million shares of a stock but ended up entering 10 billion. By the time the
trade was stopped, the system had sold several hundred million shares. Ouch!
4. Click Buy or Sell.
Be sure you know which side of the price you want to deal on. If you want to buy, you’ll need
to click the higher price — the trading platform’s offer. If you want to sell, you’ll have to click
the lower price — the platform’s bid. Most platforms have labeled the sides of the prices from

the user’s perspective, so the bid side will be labeled Sell, and the offer side will be labeled
Buy.
After you’ve clicked Buy or Sell, the trading platform will confirm whether your trade went
through successfully, usually within a second or less. If your trade request went through, you’ll
receive a confirmation from the platform. Double-check your position, and make sure it’s what you
want it to be.
If the trading price changed before your request was received, you’ll receive a response indicating
“trade failed,” “rates changed,” “price not available,” or something along those lines. You then
need to repeat the steps to make another trade attempt.
Attempts to trade at the market can sometimes fail in very fast-moving markets when price are
adjusting quickly, like after a data release or break of a key technical level or price point. Part of
this stems from the latency effect of trading over the Internet, which refers to time lags between
the platform price reaching your computer and your trade request reaching the platform’s server.
If you’re continually getting failed trade responses, it may be due to the speed of your Internet
connection, which is preventing your trade requests from getting to the brokerage trading platform
in a timely way or delaying the incoming prices you’re seeing so that they’re always behind the
real market.

Whatever the outcome of your trade request, you need to be sure you’ve received a
response from the trading platform. If you have not gotten a response back after more than a
few seconds, you need to call your broker immediately and confirm the status of the trade
request. The deal may have gone through, but confirmations may be delayed due to processor
slowness. Or the trade may have never been received by the trading platform because your
computer lost its Internet connection.

Placing your orders
Orders are critical trading tools in the forex market. Think of them as trades waiting to
happen because that’s exactly what they are. If you enter an order, and subsequent price
action triggers its execution, you’re in the market. So you need to be as careful as you are
thorough, if not more so, when placing your orders in the market.

We go over the different types of orders and how they’re used in Chapter 4, and we look at
the finer points of placing orders in Chapter 13. Here are some additional important tips to
keep in mind when placing and managing your orders:

Input your orders correctly. Make sure you’ve correctly specified the currency pair,
order type, amount, and price. Most trading platforms are designed to reject an order that
is obviously wrong, such as a stop-loss order to buy at a price below the current market,
and will prompt you to correct it. But other errors, such as a wrong big figure on the order
price, can be accepted and end up being your problem. Double-check your order after it
has been accepted by the trading platform. If it’s wrong, edit it or cancel it and start again.
Note the expiration of your orders. Order expirations are typically good-’til-cancelled
(GTC), where the order remains active until you cancel it, or good until the end of the day
(EOD), which means that the order automatically expires at the end of the trading day (5
p.m. eastern time [ET]). If you had an intraday position with a stop-loss good until EOD,
and you later decide to hold the position overnight, you’d need to revise the expiration.
GTC orders will expire on some trading platforms after an extended period of time, such
as 90 days, so be clear on your broker’s policy.
Cancel unwanted orders. Some trading platforms allow orders to be associated with a
position, meaning that the order will remain valid as long as the position is open. Such
position orders will also usually adjust the order amount if you increase or reduce the
associated position. Other orders are independent of positions, so even if you close out
your position, the independent orders will remain active. Make sure you understand the
difference between the two types, and remember to cancel any independent orders if you
close the position they were based on, such as take profits, stop losses, or OCO.

Chapter 15

Managing the Trade
In This Chapter
Staying on top of prices and news
Listening to what other markets are saying
Updating the trade plan over time
Protecting profits and extending gains
So you’ve pulled the trigger and opened up the position, and now you’re in the market. Time to sit
back and let the market do its thing, right? Not so fast, amigo. The forex market isn’t a roulette
wheel where you place your bets, watch the wheel spin, and simply take the results. It’s a
dynamic, fluid environment where new information and price developments create new
opportunities and alter previous expectations. Actively managing a trade when you’re in it is just
as important as the decision-making that went into establishing the position in the first place.
I hope you’ll take to heart my recommendations about always trading with a plan — identifying in
advance where to enter and where to exit every trade, on both a stop-loss and take-profit basis. (I
go into more detail about developing trading plans in Chapters 10, 12, and 13.) Bottom line: You
improve your overall chances of trading success (and minimize the risks involved) by thoroughly
planning each trade before getting caught up in the emotions and noise of the market.
Depending on the style of trading you’re pursuing (short-term versus medium- to long-term) and
overall market conditions (range-bound versus trending), you’ll have either more or less to do
when managing an open position. If you’re following a medium- to longer-term strategy, with
generally wider stop-loss and take-profit parameters, you may prefer to go with the “set it and
forget it” trade plan you’ve developed. But a lot can happen between the time you open a trade and
prices hitting one of your order levels, so staying on top of the market is still a good idea, even for
longer-term trades.
Shorter-term trading styles looking to capture intraday and even smaller price movements will
necessarily have more frequent adjustments to overall trade strategies. I say necessarily because
short-term price movements can be extremely rapid as well as short lived. If your trade strategy is
designed to capture only smaller price shifts, say, on the order of 30 to 50 pips, you’ll need to be
more proactive in guarding against short-term reversals of 15 to 25 pips, which constitute nearly
half of your expected upside.
On top of that, short-term price movements are the market noise that makes up larger price
movements. There will be a lot more 30- to 50-point moves than 100- to 200-pip moves. If you’re

going after the more frequent fluctuations, you’ll have to be more nimble when it comes to
adjusting to incoming news and price developments.

Monitoring the Market while Your Trade Is
Active
No matter which trading style you follow, it’ll pay to keep up with market news and price
developments while your trade is active. Unexpected news that impacts your position may come
into the market at any time. News is news; by definition, you couldn’t have accounted for it in your
trading plan, so fresh news may require making changes to your trading plan.

The starting point for any trading plan is determining how much you’re prepared to risk,
which is ultimately the result of the size of the position and the pip distance to the stop-loss
point. When I talk about making changes to the trading plan, I’m referring only to reducing the
overall risk of the trade, by taking profit (full or partial) or moving the stop loss in the
direction of the trade. The idea is to be fluid and dynamic in one direction only: taking profit
and reducing risk. Keep your ultimate stop-out point where you decided it should go before
you entered the trade, when your emotions weren’t in play.

Following the market with rate alerts
One way to follow the market from a distance is to set rate alerts from either your charting system
or your trading platform. A rate alert is an electronic message that alerts you when a price you’ve
specified is touched by the market in a currency pair you specify. Rate alerts are a great way to
keep tabs on the market’s progress.
Rate alerts on charting systems usually have the capability of alerting you to price developments
only while you’re logged on to your computer and the charting service. With charting systems,
you’re able to work on other tasks on your computer and keep the charting system minimized or in
the background, which means you can use these at your job. If your requested price level is hit by
the market, the chart system will typically start beeping or flashing and send a pop-up message.
Some forex brokers, including FOREX.com, can send rate alerts to clients via e-mail and SMS
(short message service) text message to devices such as a cellphone, PDA, or pager. Many
brokers are also expanding communication services to sites like Twitter and Facebook.
Still another way to keep tabs on the market while you’re on the go is through wireless trading
applications from your broker. FOREX.com offers a cellphone trading platform and iPhone and
Droid apps that allow you to get market rates, place orders, execute live trades, and view charts

and research.

When you’re deciding which charting service and forex broker to use, make sure to find out
if rate alerts and wireless access are available, what systems are required, and which
devices are served.

Rate alerts are a convenient way to follow the market remotely, but they don’t take the place
of live orders and should never be substituted for stop-loss orders. By the time you respond
to a rate alert and log on to the trading platform or call your broker’s trading desk, prices may
have moved well beyond your desired stop-out level, leaving you with a larger loss than you
anticipated. Rate alerts are a nice little extra service, but only orders represent obligations on
the part of your broker to take an action in the market for your account.

Staying alert for news and data developments
Every trade strategy needs to take into account upcoming news and data events before the
position is opened. Ideally, you should be aware of all data reports and events scheduled to
occur during the anticipated time horizon of your trade strategy. You should also have a good
understanding of what the market is expecting in terms of event outcomes and anticipate how
the market is likely to react.
For instance, if the Fed chair is scheduled to deliver remarks on the economy or the monetary
policy outlook, find out what his recent comments have been. Is he currently leaning hawkish or
dovish? If it’s an economic data release, make sure you understand what the report covers and
what it means for the market’s current expectations. At the minimum, be sure you know what the
consensus expectations are for the report and what the data series has been indicating recently.

It’s often said that the market’s reaction to news and data is more important than the news or
data itself. But you can’t properly interpret the market’s reaction if you don’t have a grasp on
what the news means in the first place. (See Chapter 7 for a detailed look at economic
reports and Chapters 5 and 6 for major fundamental drivers and how the market interprets
them.)
The other reason to stay alert for news while your trade is active is that many trade strategies are
based on fundamental data and trends. If your trade rationale is reliant on certain data or event
expectations, you need to be especially alert for upcoming reports on those themes.
Part of your calculus to go short EUR/USD, for instance, may be based on the view that Eurozone

inflation pressures are receding, suggesting lower Eurozone interest rates ahead. If the next day’s
Eurozone consumer price index (CPI) report confirms your view, the fundamental basis for
maintaining the strategy is reinforced. You may then consider whether to increase your take-profit
objective depending on the market’s reaction. By the same token, if the CPI report comes out
unexpectedly high, the fundamental basis for your trade is seriously undermined and serves as a
clue to exit the trade earlier than you originally planned. There’s no sense hanging on until the
bitter end if your trade rationale has already been knocked down. You may even consider
reversing your position in light of the new data.

Speculating based on expected event or data outcomes is perfectly okay. It becomes a
problem only if you maintain the trade even after the data/event outcome has come out against
your expectations and strategy. Always relate incoming news and data back to the original
reason for your trade, and be prepared to adapt your trade strategy accordingly.

Keeping an eye on other financial markets
Forex markets function alongside other major financial markets, such as stocks, bonds, and
commodities. Although these financial markets have seen higher long-term correlations with FX in
recent years, short-term correlations are far less reliable.
But there are still important fundamental and psychological relationships between other markets
and currencies, especially the U.S. dollar. In that sense, I look to developments in other financial
markets to see whether they confirm or contradict price moves in the dollar pairs. So even though
there may not be a statistically reliable basis on which to trade currencies based on movements in
other financial markets, you’ll be a step ahead if you keep an eye on the following other markets.

U.S. Treasury yields
U.S. government bond yields are a good indicator of the overall direction of U.S. interest rates and
expectations. I focus on the benchmark ten-year Treasury-note yield as the main interest rate to
monitor. I also keep an eye on shorter term rates, like three-month T-bills and two-year notes.
Rising yields tend to be dollar positive, and falling yields tend to be negative for the dollar. If
yields are rising, but the dollar isn’t, it suggests that other factors are at work keeping the dollar
down and that dollar bulls should be cautious. If yields are falling and the dollar is falling, too,
you’re getting confirmation from the bond market of a negative U.S. dollar environment — lower
interest rates.

Make sure you understand the reason for the bond yield’s movements, because it can
suggest different interpretations. If it’s based on interest rate expectations — due to data or
Fed comments, for instance — it’s more likely to reflect overall dollar direction. If it’s due

to market uncertainty and a flight to quality — due to European debt concerns, for example —
the impact on the U.S. dollar may be more positive. The larger the change in yields, the more
important is the message that’s coming from the bond market. Yield changes of more than 5
basis points (1/100 of a percent) should get your attention.

Gold and silver prices
Precious metals like gold and silver are typically viewed as hedges against inflation and safehaven investments in times of financial market uncertainty. In recent years, gold and silver have
seen heightened demand as alternatives to the major currencies, most especially the U.S. dollar,
but also the euro, as the European debt crisis has threatened the single currency. As such, gold and
silver prices tend to move in the opposite direction of the U.S. dollar overall (inverse
correlation), but the short-term correlations are trickier. Gold and silver are relatively illiquid
markets and mostly take their cues from the larger forex market, but the metals are no stranger to
their own market-specific gyrations, typically based on breaks of technical levels.

Look for confirmation of the U.S. dollar direction in gold and silver prices. If the dollar is
rallying and the metals are falling, for instance, it’s a good sign that the dollar’s gains are for
real. If the dollar is rallying but gold is holding steady or even rising, the dollar’s strength
looks more suspect.

Oil
Oil is similar to the precious metals and other commodities in that it has a long-term inverse
correlation to the U.S. dollar (dollar down/oil up and vice versa). But the same caveat also holds
true — shorter-term correlations are less reliable, and oil is especially vulnerable to oil specific
supply/demand shocks. I would also note an asymmetric bias to the relationship between oil and
the U.S. dollar. What that means is that oil is likely to experience greater strength on a falling
dollar than weakness on a rising dollar, if all else is equal.
I also like to look to oil price developments for what they suggest about interest rate expectations
and relative economic growth. Higher oil prices tend to increase inflation pressures, which may
lead to higher interest rates. At the same time, higher oil prices tend to reduce economic growth by
undermining personal consumption. Between the two, oil’s impact on the growth outlook is more
important due to the speed with which consumers react to changes in oil prices. Interest rate
changes take longer. The recent surge in emerging market nations’ growth has also heightened
global demand for oil, so oil increasingly functions as a barometer for overall global growth.
