
Though Jane had a much smaller accuracy rate than Joe, she had a much larger expectay per trade.
Jane could psychologically tolerate a string of losing trades because she was confident that, over
time, her strategies would produce a small number of large winners if she kept taking the trade setups
she knew had a larger-than-normal chance of breaking out into a range expansion mode.
Let's look at one more hypothetical example, but this time let's view a trader with a negative
expectancy.
Reversal-style, new trader Jim loves to string together a series of small winning trades, but because
he is accustomed to winning so frequently, he often stubbornly holds on to a position that goes against
him, which subjects him to infrequent but very large losing trades. This behavior typically results in
one larger-than-normal average losing trade in relation to his smaller, more-frequent winning trades
each month. Over the course of a month, Jim calculated his average winning trade to be $500.00 with
an enviable win rate of 85 percent. However, Jim's average losing trade was $5,000.00.
Using these figures, Jim calculated his expectancy per trade to be –$325.00 as seen below:

Jim's calculation showed that he could expect to lose $325.00 per trade. Jim was puzzled—last
month, he traded 60 times and only nine of those trades were losers. However, three of those nine

trades were big losers: $10,000.00 each! Those trades caused his average losing trade to spike to
$5,000.00. Despite winning almost nine times out of every 10 trades, Jim still lost money for the
month and if he keeps trading that way, he could lose his entire account over time! Jim is trading an
anti-edge or counter-edge strategy that, despite his win rate, bleeds his account value month by month.
Calculate your expectancy at the end of each month to make changes as needed. Specifically
examine the largest losing trade per month and ask yourself if that outcome was a result of random
probabilities in the market (perhaps an unexpected overnight gap) or the result of your emotions
degrading your edge. Perhaps you held on to a losing trade longer than anticipated or you purchased
more shares than you should have (also called doubling down). Eliminating large losing trades as
much as possible will have a very positive effect on your monthly expectancy calculations.
When discussing the larger picture of your strategy's overall edge, you must incorporate two other
factors into your calculation: transaction costs and trading frequency.

Minimizing Costs from Commissions and Slippage
Trading is not free; each time you execute a trade, you must pay your broker a commission. Also, each
time you enter and exit a trade, you will pay a hidden cost called slippage. Slippage occurs when you
wish to execute a trade at a quoted price on your screen but learn that you were filled on your trade at
a price higher or lower than where you wished. In most cases, slippage per trade will be minimal, but
there are certain factors that lead to increased slippage costs on your executions.
First, the larger the number of shares you trade, the larger your slippage will be. It is easier for a
stock to absorb a 500 share order than it is for a 5,000 share order. As your account grows, you may
not be able to avoid this situation, but larger block orders suffer more price slippage than smaller
ones. Instead of putting on a 5,000 share position all at once for a swing trade that will last at least a
week or more, try breaking down the order into ten 500 share lots executed over the course of a day
(or two days).
Second, the less liquid the stock you select, the larger your slippage will be. If you trade small
capitalization stocks with low volume per day, expect to experience more slippage than if you trade
large capitalization stocks that trade millions of shares per day. As such, you may be able to purchase
a 5,000 share order with no problem in Microsoft (MSFT) which generally trades over 50 million
shares per day. However, trying to purchase the same 5,000 share position in a less liquid stock that
trades 500,000 shares per day will almost certainly result in higher slippage.
Third, the larger the volatility is, the larger the slippage will be. If a stock is in a calm trading
range, you will be more likely to be filled with less slippage than if you try to trade a stock that is in a
volatile range expansion move. During volatile times, prices move quickly which results in higher
slippage for entry. In general, the summer months are less volatile than the winter months due to
seasonal tendencies. Stocks also undergo their own range contraction and expansion cycles as
described in Chapter 3.
Finally, if you are an intraday or swing trader executing positions during the day, the time of day
affects your expected slippage. Each day, stock prices are more active and thus volatile in the opening
session and closing session. For this reason, many swing traders avoid executing positions within the
first 15 or 30 minutes after the day's open and within 15 to 30 minutes before the day's close. Though
volume will be higher during this time, volatility will also be higher, and the closer you trade to the
open and close, the higher your slippage will be.

Steps to Minimize Slippage and Commission
To minimize slippage, traders can take the following steps:
1. Trade smaller share size if possible; break down large orders into smaller ones.
2. Trade only liquid stocks—the higher the liquidity, the lower the slippage
3. Trade during less volatile times if you can help it
4. Avoid executing swing trading positions in the first 15 minutes or last 15 minutes of the
day.
In addition to reducing slippage per transaction, you also want to reduce commissions as much as
possible. In today's world of online trading accounts with commissions under $10.00 per trade, you
should have your own online account and not trade through a full-service broker who charges high
commissions per trade. Some online brokers offer per-share pricing which may be as low as $0.01
per share, or $1.00 per 100 shares.
If you trade less than 1,000 shares at a time, this will be more advantageous to you than other online
brokers who advertise fixed prices of around $10.00 for an unlimited share size. You will save 50
percent in commissions if you consistently trade 500 shares with a fixed price of $0.01 per share
($5.00 per trade) than you will by trading 500 shares with a fixed commission of $10.00 per trade.
However, you will benefit more from the fixed $10.00-per-trade plan if you trade 5,000 shares at a
time than you would with a fixed $0.01-per-share plan, which would be $50.00 per trade in
commissions. Remember, you pay a commission both on your entry and your exit! You'll also
experience slippage on both your entry and your exit. Very small improvements in either slippage or
commission result in big changes at the end of the year, depending on how actively you trade.

Trade Frequency
That brings us to our next point regarding edge: trade frequency. The number of trades you take in a
week or month affects your edge and overall performance as a trader. Some strategies require more
active trading than others, and some traders’ personalities are geared for more active trading tactics
than others. As a discretionary trader, you are not a computer and should not trade like one. If you do
not have an edge in a trade, do not take it. You have advantages a computer does not, and that comes
from the ability to create a narrative regarding the supply/demand relationship between buyers and
sellers as well as the integration of structure, patterns, and indicators into specific high-probability,
low-risk trading setups.
If you are beginning your trading journey, you probably do not want to quit your full-time job until
you have a proven track record of success. This means that you will most likely focus on the higher
timeframes and practice swing trading strategies on highly liquid stocks or ETFs. If you focus your
analysis and trade setups on the higher timeframes of the daily and weekly charts, then you will aim
for larger price targets and hold your trades longer than an individual who uses the intraday charts to
take advantage of more frequent trading opportunities.
There are caveats to the number of positions you take. First, if you are a swing trader and put on too
many trades at once, you will spread your account too thin for each position and miss critical
information that you would see if you focused only on a handful of trades at a time. Most traders have
a limited attention span in terms of the number of open positions they can manage without sacrificing

quality. The same is true for investors building a multi-stock portfolio—keeping track of too many
stocks at once often invites trouble.
In addition, by managing a smaller number of open positions, you learn lessons for improvement on
future trades that you miss if you manage dozens of open positions at once. You should perform endof-trade analysis on each position to learn what went right, what went wrong, if you committed any
unforced errors during the position, and how you could have improved your performance so you can
continue to grow as a trader.
However, you must have a larger edge if you trade fewer positions. For example, if you swing trade
three positions per month, you will trade 24 positions in a year. If you find that your accuracy edge is
close to 55 percent and your reward-to-risk relationship is one-and-a-half to one for each trade, then
you experience a very low dual edge. It would be better to deploy that smaller edge more frequently
through day trades to make more money from the reduced edge. However, if you found that your
accuracy rate was closer to 75 percent and your reward-to-risk relationship was three to one, you
could afford the luxury of fewer trades per month and year.
Of course, if you are an intraday trader, you should be keenly aware of the vital need to reduce
slippage and commissions as much as possible. Let us assume that you trade five times per day for
250 days of the year. That results in 1,250 trades over the course of the trading year. Let us also
assume that your round-trip commission fee per trade is $20.00, and you find that you slip $5.00
round-trip per trade. 1,250 trades multiplied by $20.00 in commissions results in $25,000.00.
When we add the slippage of 1,250 trades multiplied by $5.00 per round-trip trade, we have a
hidden cost of $6,250.00. Slippage is a hidden cost because your broker will never tell you how
much you slipped in executions per trade; you might be completely unaware that your execution
tactics are bleeding edge in the form of slippage unless you look very closely and understand the
factors that contribute to increased slippage. While you do not specifically pay slippage like you pay
commissions, you need to reduce slippage per trade as much as possible. Think of slippage costs as
money you could have retained in your account if slippage was not an issue.
If you are new to trading, you probably cannot overcome the commissions it takes to trade 1,250
times per year, as the $25,000.00 commission fee represents 50 percent of a $50,000.00 account or
25 percent of a $100,000.00 account. On a $50,000 account, a trader would need to generate a 50
percent annual return to overcome commissions, not including taxes. It is more feasible to generate a
25 percent annual return on a $100,000.00 account than a 50 percent return on a $50,000.00 account.
If a trader cuts the commission cost in half by switching brokers, then the money saved in
commissions is a direct addition to the trader's account.
As a rule, newer traders execute far fewer trades than professionals and also pay higher
commissions. No matter your trading experience, you will do well to reduce both commissions and
slippage as much as possible. It will ultimately be up to you to balance your trading frequency with
the size of your edge, and reduce commissions and slippage as much as possible.

Planning Your Position Size
Traders often read about position-sizing tactics but spend little time incorporating them into their
future trades. Professional traders use rigid position-sizing models while most new or amateur traders
decide how many shares to purchase depending on less stringent factors.
Your position-sizing model does not have to be complex, but you do need to know how to

determine the number of shares you purchase or short-sell in advance of every position you take. Like
most aspects in trading, there is a distinct balancing act when determining your position size: if your
position size is consistently too small, you will not profit sufficiently from your endeavors whereas if
your size is consistently too large, you invite the risk of ruin and could lose half or your entire trading
account on a consecutive series of losing trades.
If your size is too small and you are too risk-averse in your position-sizing strategy, your winning
trades will not generate enough large profits and may not allow you to continue trading because your
profits do not cover your expenses in terms of data feed, operating expenses, software, research,
commissions, and other costs associated with operating a trading business. Keep in mind that each
trade you take will result in slippage and commissions, as well as taxes you must pay on your
profitable trades, all of which reduce your income when focusing on the big picture.
On the other hand, if you consistently use a position-sizing strategy that results in taking too much
risk for your account size, particularly for smaller accounts, then you invite the risk of ruin which
means that a series of consecutive losses, or even one major unexpected loss, can deplete your trading
account where recovery back to breakeven would either be impossible to achieve, or would take
years to accomplish.
New traders make the mathematical error of assuming if they lose 50 percent of their account, then
they can just as easily put on larger positions and eventually generate a 50 percent gain to cover the
ground they lost. Mathematically, that is not possible. A loss of 50 percent of capital actually requires
a gain of 100 percent on remaining funds to return to the capital high-water mark of the account. To
make the math simple, assume a trader begins the year with a $100,000.00 account. By mid-year, the
account decreased to $50,000.00, which is of course a 50 percent account value decline. To return the
account back to the original $50,000.00, the trader must achieve a rate of return of 100 percent on the
remaining $50,000.00 to see that account climb back to $100,000.00, where the trader began the year.
While that is not impossible, it is certainly a low probability outcome that the trader will be able to
achieve this. Had the trader not used such an aggressive position-sizing strategy in the beginning, the
account would not have decreased by 50 percent.
The position-sizing question answers the question of “how much” variable in your trading plan,
specifically how many shares do I trade, or how many contracts to purchase on my next trade.
Investors and traders will approach this question differently, as investors will diversify risk across
many positions, while traders may hold open one to five positions at a time. In addition, traders will
be more likely to take on larger position sizes, even trading on margin, due to their decreased holding
period and speculative activities than investors.

Fixed-Share Size and Fixed-Dollar Amount Strategies
In his book Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom , Dr. Van Tharp describes four distinct strategies
for how a trader can select a position size that is appropriate. This section discusses three of those
strategies.
Many new traders gravitate toward fixed-dollar or fixed-share size strategies, which are extremely
easy to calculate and require no advanced mathematics. These strategies include selecting the same
number of shares or dollar amount for each trade, relative to the size of the account. For example, a
trader might decide to purchase 100, 500, or 1,000 shares at a time for each position.

Fixed-Share Size Strategy
Assume temporarily that a particular day trader only trades one vehicle, be it a particular stock, ETF,
or futures contract. In this case, the trader can decide to adopt a fixed share size strategy, which
equalizes every tick in price. For example, for every 1,000 shares purchased, a move of 10 cents
results in a profit or loss to the account of $100.00, just as a $1.00 move in the stock results in a profit
or loss of $1,000.00. The size of the trader's account will determine how many shares can be
purchased, and whether or not the trader decides to trade on margin to meet the predetermined fixed
number of shares or contracts.
The strategy of fixed share size or contract position-sizing will result in a variable dollar amount of
shares purchased. If a trader decides to trade 1,000 shares per position, the trader would need at least
a $50,000.00 account to trade a stock worth $50.00 per share, or a $75,000.00 account to trade a
stock worth $75.00 per share. While that is more appropriate for day trading, swing traders may not
find this strategy appealing, as they will want to have more positions open at a time, and thus
purchase more positions using the limited capital in their account than a strict day trader would, who
could use the entire account on one or two trades in an aggressive position-sizing strategy.
This type of strategy is more common with futures day traders or very short-term futures swing
traders holding positions less than a week. Fixed contract traders may decide to trade one contract
per every $20,000.00 or $40,000.00 in their account, and they determine the dollar-value threshold to
allow them to purchase one contract. If their account size is $100,000.00 and they determine that they
will trade one contract per every $20,000.00 in their account, then they can purchase five contracts
per trade. A trader who decided to purchase one contract per every $50,000.00 in the account—a
conservative strategy with futures—would be able to buy two contracts per $100,000.00 in the
account.
As the account grows, the trader would thus be able to purchase more contracts per trade, and if the
account declines, the trader would reduce position size accordingly. Futures contracts are highly
leveraged vehicles, and if you use a smaller threshold such as $15,000.00 to trade one contract, that
would result in a much more aggressive position-sizing strategy than a similar trader who decides on
a more conservative strategy of trading one contract per $50,000.00 in account value (which might be
too conservative a strategy). Again, you must balance risk with reward.

Fixed-Dollar Strategy
The alternate strategy would be to allocate a fixed-dollar amount per each trade, which would result
in a variable number of shares or contracts to purchase. Assuming a trader decides to purchase no
more than $50,000.00 for each position, this would result in a share size purchase of 1,000 shares for
a $50.00 stock, 2,000 shares for a $25.00 stock, and 5,000 shares for a $5.00 stock. Fixed-dollar
strategies appeal to stock- and ETF-specific swing traders because they can equalize the dollars at
risk in a number of open positions.
Traders refer to this type of fixed dollar amount strategy as a fixed unit size strategy, because they
can visualize each trade as one unit of the account. If you put on five positions at a time, each position
is equally divided from the amount in the trading account, regardless of the number of shares or
contracts you purchase. It can be easier to track positions, particularly as a swing trader, because you
can instantly know which positions are profitable, which are currently losing, and which are nearing
the stop-loss threshold for a trade exit.

For example, if you trade in $50,000.00 fixed dollar account positions for each trade and determine
that you will sell any individual position that declines 10 percent against your entry, you will thus exit
trades that show a loss greater than $5,000.00. If you determine that you will sell all swing trades that
exceed a 5 percent position loss, then you would sell positions that show a $2,500.00 loss. You may
also use a total account equity stop-loss for each position, which might be a 2 percent risk rule. For
example, in an account that is $100,000.00 and you have two open positions at $50,000.00 each, you
would stop out of a trade that declines more than 2 percent of your account value, or $2,000.00.

Percent Risked or R-Value Strategy
As your account grows over time, or if you begin with a large account, you will be able to employ
more sophisticated position-sizing strategies. Some traders bypass fixed share size or fixed dollar
amount (unit) strategies to adopt the popular Percent Risked models, which focus on the risk of each
individual trade as the determining question to answer how many shares to purchase for the next
trade. Because this strategy results in variable outcomes for each trade, it requires more math but
often results in favorable outcomes and better performance over time when compared to the simpler
fixed-dollar or fixed-share size strategies.
The Percent Risk strategy begins with asking how far away your stop-loss price is from your entry
to determine how many shares or contracts to purchase. In this way, your position size is controlled
by a factor of the quantified risk, in terms of distance from entry to stop-loss price, of your potential
trade opportunity. For example, if you have an account size of $100,000.00 and determine that you
will not risk more than 2 percent of your account on any one position, then you can afford to risk
$2,000.00 on the next trade. Let us also assume that you wish to purchase a stock that trades at $30.00
per share and that you determine that there is chart support above $25.00 per share to play for an
upper price target to $40.00 per share, so you wish to place your stop at $25.00, which is $5.00 away
from your entry. Notice how you placed your stop according to the chart here. Now, we need to know
how many shares it would take for that $5.00 stop-loss move to result in an account value loss of
$2,000.00, which is your 2 percent rule. Dividing $2,000.00 by $5.00 per share results in 400 shares,
thus, you will be able to purchase 400 shares of the stock because a $5.00 move against your position
of 400 shares down to your stop-loss price will result in a $2,000.00 account-value loss, which is
your predetermined threshold.
But wait, we're not finished yet. You then need to assess how this will affect your account. If you
purchase 400 shares of a $30.00 stock, the total dollar value will be $12,000.00, or 12 percent of
your entire account value. You will need to determine how much of your account capital, in terms of a
percentage, to allocate to each position. If you choose to limit no position to larger than 33 percent of
your account (allowing you to have three open positions at a time), then you would certainly be able
to take this particular trade, which would use 12 percent of your total account value.
Let's see what the position size would be on the same position, but with a smaller stop-loss. Let us
assume the same $100,000.00 account size and 2 percent threshold rule for an acceptable loss. This
time, you determine that you wish to locate your stop at $27.50 per share instead of your original
stop-loss price at $25.00 per share. Thus, your stop-loss stock risk is $2.50. How many shares can
you purchase?
First, ask how many shares would it take at $2.50 per share to achieve a $2,000.00 account loss.
Divide $2,000.00 by $2.50 to learn that you can purchase 800 shares this time. Now, let's see if the
