
0.7
0.6
Sharpe
Ratio

r"---".

0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2

-

0.1

-

o

F=?l
Futures

Stocks

FIGURE 7.15 Risk-adjusted returns to trend-following futures versus stocks.

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

385

percent. Again, we see evidence of systematic price movements that can
be explained as a risk premium, in this case a liquidity premium, which
can be exploited with TA.
In the context of efficient equity and futures markets, signals given by
TA methods can be viewed as identifying opportunities to fill a market
need. In effect, they are want ads, "risk adopter for hire by hedgers," or
"desperately seeking liquidity provider-will pay." TA traders profiting
from these signals are not getting a free lunch. They are simply reading
the market's Help Wanted advertisements.

(;ON(;LUSION
In this chapter, I have made a case for the existence of nonrandom price

movements in financial markets. Without them, there can be no justification for technical analysis. With them, TA has an opportunity to capture
some portion of that nonrandom behavior. Ultimately, it is up to each
method of TA to prove that it can.

Case Study:
Signal Rules
for the
S&P 500 Index

Case Study
of Rule Data
Mining for
the S&P 500

his chapter describes a case study in rule data mining, the results
of which are reported in Chapter 9. The study evaluates the statistical significance of 6,402 individual TA rules back tested on the
S&P 500 Index over the period from November 1, 1980 through July 1,
2005.

T

01\11\ MINING BIAS AND RULE EVALUATION
The primary purpose of the case study is to illustrate the application of
statistical methods that take into account the effects of data-mining bias.
To recap, data mining is a process in which the profitability of many rules
is compared so that one or more superior rules can be selected. As
pointed out in Chapter 6, this selection process causes an upward bias in
the performance of the selected rule(s). In other words, the observed performance of the best rule(s) in the back test overstates its (their) expected performance in the future. This bias complicates the evaluation of
statistical significance and may lead a data miner to select a rule with no
predictive power (i.e., its past performance was pure luck). This is the
fool's gold of the objective technician.
This problem can be minimized by using specialized statisticalinference tests. The case study illustrates the application of two such
methods: an enhanced version of White's reality check and Masters's MonteCarlo permutation method. Both take advantage of a recent improvement, l
389

390

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

which reduces the probability that a good rule will be overlooked (Type II
error). That is to say, the improvement increases the power of the tests.
A secondary purpose of the case study was the possible discovery of
one or more rules that generate statistically significant profits. However,
when the case study's rules were proposed, it was unknown if any would
be found to be statistically significant.

AVOIDANCE OF DATA SNOOPING BIAS
In addition to data mining bias, rule studies can also suffer from an even
more serious problem, the data-snooping bias. Data snooping refers to
using the results of prior rule studies reported by other researchers. Because these studies typically do not disclose the amount of data mining
that led to the discovery of whatever it was that was discovered, there is
no way to take its effects into account and hence no way to properly evaluate the statistical significance of the results. As pointed out in Chapter 6,
depending on which method is being used-White's Reality Check or the
Monte Carlo permutation method-information about each rule tested
must be available to construct the appropriate sampling distribution.
For example, suppose the case study in this book had included a rule
developed by Dr. Martin Zweig known as the double 9:1 upside/downside
volume rule. This rule signals long positions when the daily ratio of upside
to downside volume on the NYSE exceeds a threshold value of 9 on two
instances within a three-month time window. Note, this rule has three free
parameters: the threshold value on the ratio (9), the number of instances
on which the ratio exceeds the threshold (2), and the maximum time separation between the threshold violations (3 months). According to tests of
this rule conducted by students in my technical analysis class, the signal
does have predictive power over the following 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. In
other words, the rule is statistically significant, but only under the assumption that Zweig did not engage in data mining to discover the parameter values he recommends: 9, 2, and 3. Zweig has not reported if he
tested other versions of the rule using different parameter combinations
or, if he did, how many combinations were tried to find the specific set
that defines his rule. If Zweig's rule were to be included in the case study
and it was selected as the best rule, it would be impossible to take into account the true amount of data mining that led to its discovery.
In an effort to avoid data-snooping bias, the case study did not explicitly include any rules discussed by other researchers. Even though it is
possible, perhaps even likely, that some of the study's rules were similar
to those tested in prior rule studies, these sin1ilarities were by accident,

Case Study of Rule Data Mining foy the S&P 500

391

not by design. This precaution mitigated the data-snooping bias but could
not eliminate it entirely because, in proposing the 6,402 rules tested, I
could not help but be affected by rule studies I have previously read.

ANALYZED Df\'fA SERIES
Although all rules were tested for their profitability on the S&P 500 Index,
the vast majority of rules utilized data series other than the S&P 500 to
generate buy-and-sell signals. These other data series included: other market indices (e.g., transportation stocks), market breadth (e.g., upside and
downside volume), indicators that combine price and volume (e.g., onbalance volume), prices of debt instruments (e.g., BAA bonds), and interestrate spreads (duration spread between lO-year treasury notes and 90-day
treasury bills). This approach is in the spirit ofintermarket analysis as discussed by Murphy.2 All series and rules are detailed below.

TECIINICAL ANALYSIS THEMES
The 6,402 rules tested were derived from three broad themes of TA: (1)
trends, (2) extremes and transitions, and (3) divergences. Trend rules generate long and short market positions based on the current trend of the
data series analyzed by the rule. Extreme and transition rules generate
long and short positions when the analyzed series reaches an extreme
high or low value or as it makes a transition between extreme values. Divergence rules generate signals when the S&P 500 Index trends in one direction while a companion data series trends in the other. The specific
data transformations and signal logic for each rule are described later in
this chapter.
The rules employ several common analysis methods including moving
averages, channel breakouts, and stochastics, which I refer to as channel
normalization.

PERFORMANCE S1l\TISTlC: AVERAGE RETURN
The performance statistic used to evaluate each rule was its average return over the period (1980 to 2005) when back tested on detrended S&P
500 data. As pointed out in Chapter 1, detrending involves subtracting the
S&P 500's average daily price change over the back-test period from each

392

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

day's actual price change. This results in a new data series for which the
average daily change is equal to zero.
AB discussed in Chapter 1, detrending eliminates any benefit or detriment that would accrue to a rule's performance as a result of either a long
or short position bias. A binary rule can be position biased if one of its
conditions (long or short) is restrictive relative to the other condition
(long or short). For example, if the long-position condition is more difficult to satisfy than the short-position condition, the rule will have a shortposition bias and tend to spend a majority of its time in short positions. If
such a rule were to be applied to market data with a positive trend (average daily price change> 0), its average return would be penalized. This reduction in the rule's performance would have nothing to do with its
predictive power and thus cloud its evaluation.

NO COMPLEX RULES WERE EVALUATED
To keep the scope of the case study manageable, it was restricted to tests
of individual rules. Complex rules, which are derived by combining two or
more individual rules with mathematical and/or logical operators, were
not considered. The combining method can be as simple an unweighted
average or as complex as an arbitrarily nonlinear function derived with
sophisticated data-modeling software.
Limiting the case study to individual rules was detrimental for two
reasons. First, few practitioners rely on a single rule to make decisions.
Second, complex rules exploit informational synergies between individual
rules. It is not surprising, therefore, that complex rules have demonstrated
higher levels of performance. At least one study3 has shown that complex
rules can produce good performance, even when the simple rules combined to form the complex rule are individually unprofitable. Combining
rules intuitively is extremely difficult, but there are now effective automated methods4 for synthesizing complex rules.

THE CASE STUDY DEFINED IN S'mTISTICAL TERMS
The following section defines the case study in terms of the key elements
of a statistical study: the population at issue, the parameter of interest,
sample data used, the statistic of interest, the null and alternative hypotheses considered, and the designated significance level.

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

393

The Population
The population at issue is the set of daily returns that would be earned by
a rule if its signals were to be applied to the S&P 500 over all possible realizations of the immediate practical future. 5 This is an abstract population, in the sense that its observations have not yet occurred and it is
infinite in size.
Population Parameter
The population parameter is the rule's expected average annualized return
in the immediate practical future.
The Sample
The sample consists of the daily returns earned by a rule applied to detrended S&P 500 Index prices over the back-test period from November 1,
1980 until July 1, 2005.

Sample Statistic (Test Statistic)
The sample statistic is the average annualized return earned by a rule
when applied to the detrended S&P 500 price data from November 1, 1980
until July 1, 2005.

The

ull Hypothesis (80 )

The null hypothesis states that all 6,402 rules tested are without predictive
power. This implies that any observed profits in a back test were due to
chance (sampling variability).
In reality, there are two version of the null hypothesis in the case
study. This stems from the fact that two different methods were used to
assess statistical significance: White's reality check and Masters's Monte
Carlo permutation method. Although both methods assert that all rules
considered were devoid of predictive power, they implement this assumption differently. The null hypothesis tested by White's reality check is that
all rules tested have expected returns equal to zero (or less). The null
tested by Masters's Monte Carlo permutation is that all rules generated
their long and short positions in a random fashion. In other words, long
and short were randomly permuted with the market's one-day-forward
price change.

394

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P SOO INDEX

The Alternative Hypothesis
This study's alternative hypothesis asserts that a rule's back-tested profitability stems from genuine predictive power. Again, the two methods
assert this in slightly different ways. In the case of White's reality check,
the alternative hypothesis says that there is at least one rule within the
tested universe that has an expected return greater than zero. It should
be noted that White's reality check does not assert that the rule with the
highest observed performance is necessarily that best rule (i.e., the rule
with the highest expected return). However, under fairly reasonable
conditions, they are one and the same. 6 The alternative hypothesis declared by Masters's method is that a rule's back-tested profitability is the
result of an informative pairing of its long and short positions with the
market's one-day-forward price change. In other words, the rule has predictive power.

The Statistical Significance Level
A 5 percent level of significance was chosen as a threshold for rejection of
the null hypothesis. This means there was a 0.05 probability of rejecting
the Ho hypothesis when the Ho was, in fact, true.

Practical Significance
The practical significance of a result is different from its statistical significance. The latter is the probability that a rule that has no predictive power
(i.e., Ho is true) would earn a return as high as or higher than the return
produced by the rule in a back test by luck. In contrast, practical significance relates to the economic value of the observed rule return. When
sample sizes are large, as they are in the case study (i.e., over 6,000 days),
the Ho can be rejected even if a rule's return is positive by a very minor
amount. In other words, a rule can be statistically significant even though
its practical value is negligible. Practical significance depends upon a
trader's objectives. One trader may be satisfied with a rule for which expected return is 5 percent whereas another may reject any rule for which
expected return is less than 20 percent.

RULES: TRANSFORMI G DATA SERIES
INTO MARKET POSITIONS
A rule is an inputJoutput process. That is to say, it transforms input(s),
consisting of one or more time series, into an output, a new time series

395

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

consisting of +1's and -1's that indicate long and short positions in the
market being traded (i.e., S&P 500). This transformation is defined by the
one or more mathematical, 7 10gical, 8 or time series9 operators that are applied to the input time series. In other words, a rule is defined by a set of
operations. See Figure 8.l.
Some rules utilize inputs that are raw time series. That is to say, the
one or more time series used as inputs to the rule are not transformed in
any way prior to the rule's position logic being applied, for example the
S&P 500 closing price. This is illustrated in Figure 8.2.
Other rules utilize input series that have been derived from one or
more raw market series by applying various transformations to the market data. These preprocessed inputs are referred to as constructed data
series or indicators. An example of an indicator is the negative volume
index. It is derived from transformations of two raw data series; S&P 500
closing price and total NYSE daily volume. This is illustrated in Figure
8.3. The transformations used in the creation of the negative volume index and other indicators used in the case study are described in the following section.

INPUT

OUTPUT

Market
Time
Series

Time Series

of
Market Position

~
Time

~
•
•
•

Time

Rule
Mathematical,
Logical,
&
Time-Series
Operators

Etc.

FIGURE 8.1

TA rule transforms input into output.

+1

.- -

,,
,

-

-

1

'
'
'

Time

-1

396

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P SOO INDEX

Input

Output

I~. =>i_Ru'e_l~

+1

1- -

,

,,,

-

-

I

'

''

-1

Raw

S&P 500
Series

FIGURE 8.2 Raw market time series as rule input.

TimeRaw
Series
S&P 500

~

~

TimeRaw
Series
NYSEP Volume

Negative Volume Index
Formula

Indicator
(Negative Volume Index)

Rule

V

Rule Output

+1

-1

FtPf--::-----::,

::
---.

'

::
--'

FIGURE 8.3 Transformed market time series as rule input.

TIME-SERIES OPERATORS
This section describes the time-series operators used in the case study to
transform raw data series into indicators. Time-series operators are mathematical functions that transform a time series into a new time series. The
case study utilized several corrunon time-series operators: channel breakout, moving average, and channel normalization. The channel breakout operator is used to identify trends in a time series for rules that are based on

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

397

trends. The moving-average operator, which can also identify trends, is used
in the case study for smoothing. The channel-normalization operator, or
stochastics, is used to eliminate the trend of a time series (Le., detrending).
Channel Breakout Operator (CBO)

"The purpose of all trend identification methods is to see past the underlying noise in a time series, those erratic moves that seem to be meaningless, and find the current direction of the series."IO One such method is the
n-period channel-breakout operator. II Here, n refers to the number of
time periods (days, weeks, and such) into the past that are examined to
define the upper and lower channel boundaries that enclose the time series. The lower boundary is defined by the minimum value of the time series over the past n-periods, not including the current period. The upper
boundary is defined by the time series' maximum value over the past
n-periods, not including the current period. Despite its extreme simplicity,
the channel-breakout operator has proven to be as effective as more complex trend-following methods. 12
As conventionally interpreted, the channel breakout operator signals
long positions if the analyzed series exceeds its maximum value established over the past n-periods. Conversely, short positions are signaled
when the time series falls below its n-period minimum. This is illustrated
in Figure 8.4. In practice, the channel is redrawn as each new data point

Time
Series

Time

:: t---. n.·..·..nnnn.n:······· ~~~~~;
I~IGURE 8.4

Channel-breakout operator.

:.............. •

398

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P SOD INDEX

becomes available, but in Figure 8.4 only several channels are shown to illustrate its function. Although the channel has a constant look-back span
with respect to the time axis, its vertical width with respect to the axis
that represents the value of the time series adjusts dynamically to the
range of the series over the past n-periods. This feature may explain the
effectiveness of the method. This is to say, the channel breakout's dynamic range may reduce the likelihood of false signals caused by an increase in the series' volatility rather than an actual change in its trend.
The n-period breakout operator has a single free parameter, its lookback span, the number of time periods into the past used to establish the
channel's boundaries. In general, the larger the look-back span, the wider
the channel, and hence, the less sensitive the indicator. Thus, larger values
of n are used to identify larger trends. The case study tested 11 different
look-back spans for which lengths were separated by a factor of approximately 1.5. The specific spans used were: 3, 5, 8, 12, 18, 27, 41, 61, 91, 137,
and 205 days.
Moving-Average Operator (MA)

The moving average is one of the most widely used times-series operators
in TA. It clarifies trends by filtering out high frequency (short-period) fluctuations while passing through low frequency (long-period) components.
Thus, the moving-average operator is said to function as a low-pass filter.
This is illustrated in Figure 8.5, where the moving average has been centered 13 (lagged by 0.5 x period -1). Note that the output of the movingaverage operator is essentially the trend of the original time series with
the high frequency oscillations about the trend removed.
The smoothing effect is accomplished by averaging the values of the
time series within a moving data window called the look-back span. This
eliminates or reduces the magnitude of fluctuations with durations that are
equal to or less than the duration of the look-back span. Thus, a 10-day movOutput:
Time Series

Input:
Time Series

Input

_"

Series

..: \ " "

MovingAverage
Operator

\
,'\

"

','

Time
FIGURE 8.5

Moving-average operator: low-pass filter.

, !"\'~:
I

I

,
"
.'
:

':

"

II

",

I

"

MA

'I

Time

Case Study of Rule Data Mining for the S&P 500

399

ing average will reduce the amplitude of fluctuations for which peak-to-peak
or trough-to-trough duration is less than 10 days, and it will completely eliminate a fluctuation with a duration that is exactly equal to 10 days.
The benefit of smoothing comes at a cost-lag. In other words, fluctuations in the raw price that manifest in the smoothed version experience
some delay. Thus, a trough in the raw price does not produce a trough in
the moving average until some later date. The amount of lag depends
upon the length of the look-back span. A longer look-back span produces
more smoothing while producing more lag.
The lag induced by a simple moving average, which gives equal
weight to all elements in the window, is equal to one-half of the look-back
span minus one. Thus, the output of an 11-day simple moving average has
a lag of (11 - 1)/2 or 5 days. This means that trend reversals in the input
time series, which are of sufficient duration to manifest in the moving average, will not show up until 5 days later.
There are many types of moving averages, from the simple moving average that gives equal weight to each element in the data window, to sophisticated smoothing methods that use complex data-weighting
functions. The benefit conferred by a complex weighting is improved filter
perfornlance-Iess lag for a given degree of smoothing. The field of digital
signal processing is concerned with, among other things, the design of
weighting functions that maximize filter performance. Digital filters that
are relevant to TA are discussed in two books by Ehlers. 14
The calculation for a simple moving average is given by the following
formula. 15

Moving Average Operator

MAt=

Pt + Pt-l + Pt-2 ... + Pt-n+ 1

n
n

L

Pt-i+l

i=l

n
Where:
Pt = Price at time t
MAt = Moving average at time t
n = Number of days used to compute moving average

400

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX
