
STOCHASTICS
Stochastics, a range-based oscillator, is also considered a momentum oscillator. George C. Lane is credited with creating the formula. I had the

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

95

privilege of working for George back in 1980. His indicator is a popular
technical tool used to help determine whether a market is overbought,
meaning that prices have advanced too far too soon and are due for a
downside correction, or oversold, meaning that prices have declined too far
too soon and are due for an upside correction. Stochastics is based on a
mathematical formula that is used to compare the settlement price of a
specific time period to the price range of a specific number of past periods.
The method works based on the premise that in a bull, or up-trending,
market, prices will tend to make higher highs and that the settlement price,
or close, will usually tend to be in the upper end of that time period’s trading range, or at least closer to the high. When the momentum starts to fade,
the settlement prices will start to push away from the upper boundaries of
the range; and the stochastics indicator will show that the bullish momentum is starting to change. The exact opposite is true for bearish, or downtrending, markets.
There are two lines that are referred to as %K and %D. These are plotted on a horizontal axis for a given time period, and the vertical axis is plotted on a scale from 0 percent to 100 percent. As you will see from the
formula, %K will be the faster of the two lines and will change direction because the %D line is a moving average of %K. The unique feature of the stochastics reading is the moving average crossover feature.
Stochastics is a range-based oscillator with readings between 0 percent and 100 percent. The main guidelines reflect the thought that readings
over 80 percent indicate that a market condition is overbought and ripe for
a downside correction and that readings under 20 percent signal the market
is oversold and ripe for a bounce. While that certainly is the case, generally
speaking, I look for more clues within the indicator to trigger a trade signal.
The formula to calculate the first component for fast stochastics using
a 14-period look back setting for %K is:
%K = c – Ln/Hn – Ln * 100
where c = closing price of current period
Ln = lowest low during n period of time
Hn = highest high during n period of time
n = number of periods
The second calculation is the %D (3-period). It is the moving average
of %K.
%D = 100(Hn/Ln)
where HN = the n period sum of (c – Ln)

96

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

RULES TO TRADE BY
When using stochastics as a confirming tool, I see the indicator corroborate
the timing of a market turn associated with a higher closing high, especially when it is in proximity of a targeted support level based off a pivot
point level. These rules will help to make better trading triggers for buy and
sell signals.
• When the readings are above 80 percent and %K crosses below the %D
line and both lines close back down below the 80 percent line, then a
“hook” sell signal is generated.
• When the readings are below 20, percent, once %K crosses above %D,
and once both lines close back up above the 20 percent level, then a
“hook” buy signal is generated.
The market in Figure 3.1 is a 15-minute candle chart on the Chicago
Board of Trade (CBOT) mini-Dow contract. The buy signal or trigger is generated once %K and %D both cross over and back above the 20 percent line.
It also confirms the first time after the downtrend that the market makes a

FIGURE 3.1
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

97

higher closing high. We have not yet discussed candle patterns; but for
those already familiar with that charting method, you will notice that it is a
higher close above the doji high. The trigger to go long is on the close or the
next open, once the market makes a higher closing high, which in Figure 3.1
would be at 10810.
When the market trades near the daily projected resistance, as determined by using pivot point analysis, once prices start to make lower closing lows, which is a clue that helps us identify that the uptrend has
concluded. That is what generates a sell signal at 10838. That would be a
profitable scalp of 28 points at $5 per point, which is $140 on a day trading
margin of $500, which is what most futures brokerage firms charge.

STOCHASTICS CONFIRMS THE TURN
Now looking at the sell signal, we would have an opportunity to go short at
10838 as the market pivots and turns, as I say, off the resistance level as the
stochastics confirms with a %K and %D hook sell signal once both lines
cross and close below the 80 percent line. Follow the flow of the market
after that point: lower highs, lower lows, and, more important, lower closing lows all the way down to a low of 10739. That is a 99-point decline or
$495 per contract—almost a 100 percent return on your day trading margin.
As the market declines, we see the stochastics crossing above and back
below its respective values; but never does it cross back and close above
the 20 percent line. I am asked at what level do you take profits. I will go
over specific target exit levels later; but for right now, the most simplistic
answer is at the last trading price near 10758. The reason is that this would
have been a day trade; and as you can see from the bottom of the chart, the
day is running short on time. Profit objectives can be based not only on
price targets but also on time limits.
Figure 3.2 shows a pattern similar to that in Figure 3.1: a higher close
above a doji high. Candle chart aficionados may see a variation of a morning doji star pattern. I keep it very simple; I call it an HCD pattern, which
stands for a high close doji. This pattern has specific rules on entry and
exits and will be disclosed in just a bit. For now, please focus your attention
on the fast stochastics, as %K and %D both confirm the trigger to go long
once both lines cross and close above the 20 percent line. That trigger corresponds on the close of the candle, which was 10756. As the market moves
higher, follow the flow again as the momentum builds. The stochastics does
not generate a sell signal, as the high was made at 10805. We see a
crossover of %K and %D above the 80 percent line, but the stochastics does
not close back under that line.
The 20 percent and 80 percent levels in relationship with the %K and

98

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 3.2
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

%D values will help confirm your entries and exits in the markets, especially when you follow the trend or market flow as shown by the candle
charts. There is a reason why I have focused on the high close doji signal,
as we shall soon discover from a back-test study on percentile perspective.
But once again, this chapter is to help you better understand the confirming power that stochastics offers.
Markets need volatility in order to move, and we need markets to move
in order to trade. We also need to base our trading plans on reliable signals.
Not all times do the setups that trigger an entry work as perfectly as in
these examples, which is why I have other confirming signals to corroborate timing a trade signal. I also like to see if the methodology works in a diverse group, or noncorrelated markets. Testing for robustness, or how well
a system or signal responds in different markets, helps validate the reliability of that signal. The chart in Figure 3.3 is a spot forex euro currency
that demonstrates the same setup and trigger that would enter a long position with %K and %D crossing over above the 20 percent line with a con-

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

99

FIGURE 3.3
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

firming higher closing high candle pattern. The sell signal also works well
as confirmed when %K and %D both cross over and close back below the 80
percent line.

TIPS AND TRICKS TO HELP
There are other tips and tricks associated when using stochastics. There
are fast stochastics and slow stochastics. The difference is in how the parameters are set to measure the change in price. This is referred to as a
gauge in sensitivity. A higher rate of sensitivity will require the number of
periods in the calculation to be decreased. This is what “fast” stochastics
does. It enables one to generate a faster and a higher frequency of trading
signals in a short time period. The previous two examples used the default
fast stochastics settings, which help you discover the cycles of tops and
bottoms faster than the slow stochastics setting will.

100

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Stochastics Patterns
One other method in which to use the stochastics indicator is trading off a
pattern called bullish convergence. It is used in identifying market bottoms—where the market price itself makes a lower low from a previous
low, but the underlying stochastics pattern makes a higher low. This indicates that the low is a “false bottom” and can resort to a turnaround for a
price reversal. Figure 3.4 shows how prices make a secondary low significantly lower from a primary low, which is posted by a low in the stochastics indicator.
The reverse of this signal is a trading pattern called bearish divergence.
It is used in identifying market tops—where the market price itself makes
a higher high from a previous high, but the underlying stochastic pattern
makes a lower high. This indicates that the second high is a “weak” high
and can resort to a turnaround for a lower price reversal. Figure 3.5 shows

FIGURE 3.4
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

101

FIGURE 3.5
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

how the market makes a secondary high, but the corresponding high in the
stochastics is at a lower level than the price charts’ primary high point.
This stochastic pattern can alert you to a false breakout. Notice the low
close doji (LCD) off the secondary peak; and then as %K and %D both cross
over and close back beneath the 80 percent line, a sell trigger is generated.
That signal warns of an impending, prolonged downtrend of substantial
proportion. Therefore, it is important to monitor for divergence patterns.

Rules to Trade By
The bearish divergence pattern signals that there is an impending price reversal ready to occur in a market. As I mentioned previously, you can anticipate and get ready to place an order to act on the signal; but you should
not act until the confirmation of a lower closing low triggers the entry,
which would be to act on the close or the next open. Here are four rules to
guide you to trading a stochastics divergence pattern:

102

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

1. The first peak in prices should correspond with a peak in the %K and

%D reading above the 80 percent level.
2. The second peak must correspond to a significant higher secondary

price high point.
3. If the secondary stochastics peak is less than or under the 80 percent
level, this signals a stronger sell signal.
4. Prices should make a lower closing lower to confirm a trigger to enter
a short position. Enter on the close of the first lower closing low or the
next open. The protective stop should initially be placed above the high
of the secondary high.
Figure 3.6 demonstrates a bearish divergence setup with the rules described. This is a 15-minute candle chart on the CBOT mini-Dow. The secondary high is established at 10940. Both %K and %D make a primary high
above the 80 percent line, and the secondary high in price corresponds with
%K and %D below the 80 percent level. Once the long dark candle closes
below the prior low (in fact, it closes below five prior candles lows), a sell
signal is triggered. The initial entry is made on that time period close or on

FIGURE 3.6
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

103

the next open, which in this case is 10897. The stop is placed at 10945,
above the high of the secondary peak high. As you can see, the market continues to decline into the close down to 10836, for a 61-point gain had you
exited on the close. That equates to a gain of $305 on a day trade margin of
$500 per contract. Notice that as the market declines, the stochastics indicator remains below the 20 percent line as the %K and %D cross multiple
times but never back above the 20 percent level to trigger a buy signal until
after the electronic day session close, which is 4 P.M. (CT).

MACD
In simplest terms, moving average convergence/divergence is an indicator
that shows when a short-term moving average crosses over a longer-term
moving average. Gerald Appel developed this indicator as we know it
today, and he developed it for the purpose of stock trading. It is now widely
used for short-term trading signals in stocks, futures, and forex markets, as
well as for swing and position traders. It is composed of using three exponential moving averages. The initial inputs for the calculations were a 9-period, a 12-period, and a 26-period. The concept behind this indicator is to
calculate a value, which is the difference between the two exponential moving averages, which then compares that to the 9-period exponential moving
average. What we get is a moving average crossover feature and a zero-line
oscillator, and that helps us to identify overbought and oversold market
conditions.
I might add that because traders are now more computer savvy than
ever before and because many charting software packages such as
RealTick allow traders to change or optimize the settings or parameters, it
is easy to change, or “tweak,” the variables in Appel’s original calculations.
Traders can increase the time periods in the moving average calculations to
generate fewer trade signals and can shorten the time periods to generate
more trade signals. Just as is the case for most indicators, the higher the
time periods used, the less sensitive the indicator will be to changes in
price movements. MACD signals react quickly to changes in the market—
that is why a lot of analysts, including myself, use it. It helps clear the picture when moving average crossovers occur. It measures the relative
strength between where current prices are as compared to past time frames
from a short-term perspective to a longer-term perspective.
The MACD indicator is constructed with two lines: One is the 9-period
exponential average (slow line), and the other is the difference between the
12- and 26-period exponential moving averages (fast line). In general, when
the fast line crosses above the slow line, a buy signal is generated; the opposite is true for sell signals.

104

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

The MACD also has a zero baseline component, called the histogram,
that is created by subtracting the slower signal line from the MACD line. If
the MACD line is above the zero line, prices are usually trending higher. The
opposite is true if the MACD is declining below the zero line. The MACD is
a lagging indicator; that is, it is based off moving averages. We want to look
for the zero-line crossovers to identify market changes and to help confirm
trade entries or trigger action to exit a position. As you can see in the emini–Standard & Poor’s (S&P) chart in Figure 3.7, the MACD readings cross
back above the zero line, indicating a confirmed shift in momentum. That
zero-line cross helped filter out the bottoming process. A long position
would have been initiated at the close of the candle or at the next time period’s open at 1267.25, which resulted in an immediate price gain, carrying
prices up over 1270.
Clues that identify shifts in momentum as the market moves from one
extreme to another or from overbought to oversold to trigger a trading opportunity can be identified with the aid of MACD readings in both the moving average and the histogram component. While profits are higher when

FIGURE 3.7
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

105

buying the absolute bottom, that is a haphazard guessing game to play.
Trading based on a set of rules and using a confirming indicator to identify
a change in price direction and then following that price movement are the
keys to making money in the markets. Figure 3.8 shows an e-mini–S&P example; the intraday trend is established to be higher by 10 A.M., as the symmetry of higher highs and higher lows exists. The MACD confirms an HCD
trigger as the histogram bar crosses above the zero line, initiating a long at
1234.75. Notice that the histogram bars continue to expand higher, confirming that the bullish momentum is accelerating. Identifying a zero-line
cross is a powerful tool in confirming entries, and watching the progression
of the histogram bars may help you maintain a winning position.
It is not in every single instance that we see the MACD signals work exactly the same as Figure 3.9 demonstrates. The histogram was not under
the zero line; therefore, a zero-line cross did not trigger. However, observing that the histogram bars move higher as prices start to advance would
certainly help confirm the strength of the uptrend.

FIGURE 3.8
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

106

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 3.9
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

RELY ON THE PATTERNS
Another method useful with the MACD indicator, and one that is more reliable for determining a trend reversal, is to identify the pattern called bullish convergence. This is where the market price itself makes a lower low
from a previous low, but the underlying MACD pattern makes a higher low,
as shown in Figure 3.10. This indicates that the second low is a weak, or
“false,” bottom and can resort in a turnaround for a sharp price reversal.
This is similar to stochastics; however, since it is developed from moving
averages, the timing of the shorter-term versus the longer-term moving averages can delay such a signal. There is a high probability that MACD and
stochastics work more so than other indicators with this pattern.
As you can see in Figure 3.10, which is a five-minute chart on Intel, the
market made a lower low in the next trading session where the MACD histogram makes a higher low. Notice the HCD signal. Then as the price starts
to appreciate, the MACD histogram triggers or confirms a long position
with a zero-line crossover, and the progressively higher histogram bars con-

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

107

FIGURE 3.10
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

firm the positive momentum right into the close of the day. The MACD is a
very useful tool as a confirming indicator once you have entered in a position, especially by following the histogram readings.
The MACD has the same principles as far as a sell signal with what is
known as bearish divergence. This is where the market price itself makes a
higher high from a previous high, but the underlying MACD crossover lines
make a lower high. This indicates that the second high is a “weak” high and
can resort to a turnaround for a lower price reversal. In Figure 3.11, a daily
chart in the FX spot euro currency, the MACD histogram helps identify
both bearish and bullish divergence patterns.
One other useful method in using MACD is to follow as stated the direction of the histogram bars to help confirm a turn or a change in trend.
Figure 3.12 shows the price advance in the e-mini–S&P as the market closes
in on a pivot point resistance level, and the market moves from a bullish
condition as prices move higher or in an overbought state and the histogram readings start to expand over 300. As the market price conditions
change, as the close is below the open, and as the market makes the first
lower closing low, especially near the pivot resistance line, the histogram

FIGURE 3.11
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 3.12
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

108

How to Read Oscillators to Spot Overbought or Oversold Conditions

109

bars start rolling down or making lower highs as well. In a weak or downtrending market, the bars should also be making lower highs; and in this
case, they are confirming a sell signal from the change in market condition
as well as the moving average crossover as prices trade under the moving
average lines. This last example is what we will be going over in later chapters as we combine pivot point analysis with candle patterns.

SUMMARY
In conclusion, all oscillators, indicators, and most moving average studies
will give confirmation when a market shifts direction; and knowing these
signals will help you identify a trading opportunity. They also will help give
you a clue when a market is in an extreme price condition, described as
being overbought and oversold. Therefore, as a trader, you need something
that gives you a better idea of entering a trade. The next few chapters will
reveal ways by which you will learn how to identify shifts in momentum before looking at an indicator as confirmation. Impossible, you say? Well,
there are certain patterns such as the high close doji, the jackhammer candle pattern, a low close doji, or the shooting star formation that, when up
against a projected pivot support or resistance line, will alert you to a trade
entry faster than using these traditional indicators. When I introduce you to
the concept of using a pivot point moving average component as was used
in Figure 3.12, then you will see how it is possible.

CHAPTER 4

Momentum
Changes
How to Spot Divergence
or Convergence

he battle to identify when a trend ends or when a trend will start is
one of the key elements on which traders make their bread and
butter. When a market reaches an unsustainable price extreme either
up or down, we want to be able to be prewarned so we can set up our trading account with the right contract sizes and preset the buy or sell order
and then wait for the trigger to act. We have the traditional indicators that
we went over in Chapter 3 with stochastics and MACD (moving average
convergence/divergence), but there is one more measure of data we have
that stock traders and longer-term futures traders have been using for over
a hundred years. That one bit of data is called volume. The one disadvantage that foreign exchange (forex) traders have is that there is no way to
measure volume data unless you “borrow” it from the futures markets, as I
shared in Chapter 1.
