
Custodial accounts are designed to help you save for the needs
of a minor child. The savings may be general in nature or geared
toward a specific objective such as education. Once again, the laws
and restrictions vary between countries and individual brokers.
Much like retirement accounts, custodial accounts provide certain
tax advantages and may or may not restrict the types of investments
available to you. Custodial accounts often have a lower initial deposit
although that usually is attended by limits on annual contributions.
Ownership Considerations

Ownership of an account is divided into three primary categories:
individual, joint, or corporate. An individually owned account is held
by one person who makes the trading and investing decisions. The
individual owner is the only one authorized to withdraw funds or
make changes to the account. A retirement account is a typical
example of an account that would be owned by one person. It is

c14.indd 279

11/2/07 1:43:29 PM

280

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

possible for an individual owner to designate another individual as
an authorized trader but that would not affect the actual ownership
of the account.
Jointly owned accounts are typical of brokerage and savings
accounts. Often, married partners will open joint accounts that allow
both partners to individually access account records, make trading
and investing decisions, and withdraw funds. Jointly owned accounts
also provide for the efficient transfer of ownership and authority to
the surviving partner on the death of one owner.
Corporate accounts may be held by any for-profit or nonprofit
organization. These account types are typically held by trading clubs,
where the club members pool their funds for trading. Buy and sell
decisions are made according to club procedure and the trades are
executed within the corporate account. It is common practice to designate certain corporate officers or representatives as having trading
and fund withdrawal authority. You can only imagine what the result
would be if a trading club allowed all members to access the available
funds at any time without accountability. Once the members realized
the access they had to free funds, they’d be grabbing at the money
like drunken sailors on shore leave.

2. Advice and Support
One question that you need to answer in the process of selecting a
broker is, “How much help will I need along the way?” Some traders
and investors wish to be left completely alone and use their broker as
an execution venue only. They don’t want advice or any solicitations.
There are no-frill, low-cost firms that cater to these individuals. Most
traders and investors desire and need some level of assistance and
there are brokers who fit in at every level.
The dot-com era saying about bricks and clicks is one consideration in selecting your broker. Does your broker have a retail location
where you can walk in and actually speak face to face with your representative? Brokers don’t have the numbers of retail locations as banks,
and that’s why there are still many people who open their trading and
investment accounts with a local bank. Some large online brokers
have retail offices in major cities. Other online brokers have elected
to not open any retail locations and provide all support through
call centers. Almost all brokers, with or without retail locations, give
you access to representatives by phone. Many also have a premium

c14.indd 280

11/2/07 1:43:29 PM

Going to the Dance

281

support group for clients who are active traders or who maintain a
large account balance.
For a long time, online brokers would provide transaction-based
services only. You could trade, transfer funds, print records, and perform other tasks but they wouldn’t offer any guidance on planning
or strategies. On the other side of the coin, full-service advisers were
especially reluctant to let you make any trades on your own. The
investor was left in an either-or situation. Today, many online brokers have varying levels of advice and support. At one end of the
spectrum is on-demand assistance for the self-directed trader who
only needs some occasional help. Next along the line is the validator, who makes her own decisions but she wants a sanity check from
a professional. At the far end of the spectrum is the delegator, who
wants someone else to make the buy and sell decisions based on an
agreed-upon overall strategy. Many of the full-service, fee-based advisers prefer that the client not trade within the managed account. For
that reason, more traders who have professionally managed investment accounts are now opting to open a separate trading account
with an online broker.
One key area of support that is often overlooked is technical and
trade support. This is particularly crucial as you begin to trade more
actively. There are few things more annoying, or more costly, than
trading in a fast market and having your trading software freeze or
not receiving a trade confirmation quickly enough to let you know
where you stand in the position. In times like these, you need to
be able to pick up the phone and reach a support representative
quickly. If your broker can’t deliver timely information backed up by
a responsive call team, then it’s time for you to find another broker.

3. Trading and Investing Products
The basics of the trading and investing products may be found at
just about every brokerage firm. Let’s start with the basics and then
talk about some others.
Most of us think about stocks when we talk trading. Trading
stocks is the bread and butter of most retail traders. However, there
are other aspects of stock trading besides just pressing the buy and
sell button. You should consider whether your broker provides an
institutional desk for large lot orders. These representatives will take
a large lot order and work it into the market to minimize the impact

c14.indd 281

11/2/07 1:43:30 PM

282

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

of your order on the stock price. Also, if you trade penny stocks, or
the pink sheets, consider whether your broker will allow you to trade
these online. The term pink sheet comes from the fact that the prices
of these cheap stocks were originally printed on pink paper.
Mutual funds are familiar to most investors today and there are
literally thousands to choose from. More firms are now offering a wide
selection of no-load, no-transaction-fee mutual funds. You need to
look carefully at the loads and expenses associated with mutual funds
and ensure that you’re not overpaying for underperformance. Index
funds are a great way to track the markets with very low fund expenses.
Because many mutual funds include a short-term redemption fee,
they are considered investment products rather than trading products.
Funds are priced once a day at the net asset value (NAV). Your broker
should be able to provide you with the NAV and complete fund information for all of the funds they offer. In this category, we also include
exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Since ETFs trade the same as stocks,
they are available to trade through almost all brokers. However, not all
brokers provide you with ETF-specific research tools.
Options are one of the fastest growing segments of the markets
today. As a trader, you should be on the lookout for a broker that lets
you research and trade options. Unless you are in the most advanced
segment of traders, the basic option information will be adequate for
your trading. This includes the full option chain with Greeks (how
an option price changes) and the ability to place simple and complex
option orders. Some of the advanced specialized options brokers
offer much more complex trading systems geared exclusively toward
the advanced trader. For those who trade at the advanced level, this
could be useful. For the majority of the traders who do not, this could
lead to analysis paralysis.
Bonds and cash products are important investments that provide stability and growth in your account without the same type and
level of risks that come with equity investments. We never recommend trading with your entire portfolio and, therefore, you need
other investments to balance your trading activity. A good broker
will let you search for bonds, certificates of deposit (CDs), or other
high-yield cash securities. Some of these will require that you hold
the investment until maturity in order to avoid an early withdrawal
penalty.
Looking at some of the more advanced products, you can consider trading futures. Many futures brokers will let you trade futures

c14.indd 282

11/2/07 1:43:30 PM

Going to the Dance

283

on multiple exchanges for products such as commodities, currencies,
interest rates, metals, market indexes, and energy. Often, a futures
account will have a higher minimum initial deposit than a standard
brokerage account because of the leverage associated with futures
trading. Other products that are available in various locations are
contracts for difference (CFDs), spread betting, and forex. You need
to be careful to understand the increased risks that may come with
the advanced derivative products and choose a broker who will provide support as you may need it.

4. Costs and Fees
Everyone looks at commissions so we’ll start with this one, even
though commissions have dropped to the point that they’re almost
a nonissue. It wasn’t all that long ago that a 1,000 share purchase
of a blue-chip stock could set your account back hundreds of dollars
from the trade commission. Today, most brokers are hard-pressed to
justify a commission above $20 for a stock trade and many are less
than $10. Option trades are priced at a base commission plus a percontract fee. If you trade actively, you should look for a broker who
will further discount your commission based on your trading activity.
Some brokers also offer a bundle of free trades when you open a
new account or deposit additional funds. Any time you bring a value
to your broker, you should consider how they might be able to offer
you a value in return.
Another fee that is not quite as visible as the commission is the
margin interest rate that you pay on margin balances. This is nothing more than the cost of borrowing money from your broker. However, in the same way that you may shop around for the best home
mortgage, you should also shop for the best margin rate if you tend
to trade with margin. These rates are often pegged to the prevailing
interest rate, but just as with commissions, margin rates are often
discounted for active traders or high-balance accounts. On the flip
side of the margin fee is the yield that is paid on cash balances. You
should pay close attention to this because a low yield may act as a surrogate fee if you maintain cash in your account. The return you get
on your money is a function of costs and earnings. Low earnings can
have just as bad an effect on your account as high costs.
Account fees can quickly add up if you don’t pay attention to
them. Ask your broker about the charges they impose for certain

c14.indd 283

11/2/07 1:43:30 PM

284

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

account types, minimum balances or high transaction activity. You
should look for a broker who will consider all of your accounts as
a household and not assess fees to each account separately. It’s terribly frustrating to have a trading account where you may be trading
50 times a month and paying $10 trade commissions, only to have
a separate account where you’re paying $20 trade commissions
because you don’t trade often enough.
You need to consider how various transaction fees are charged
to your account and find a broker who can help you minimize these
costs. It is becoming more common for brokers to reimburse you
for ATM fees when you withdraw funds from your account, even if
the ATM machine is not on your home network. Other transaction
fees to consider are wiring, checking, option exercise and assignment, stop payment, mail and processing, records and statements,
and verification of deposit. As you can see, the menu of fees can be
quite extensive, and you need to determine which ones may affect
you and which broker keeps these costs down.

5. Software
Software for trading and investing is becoming more important as the
flow of information has shifted from the realm of the professionals
toward the average retail trader like you and me. Market software
generally falls into two categories: web-based software and standalone packaged software.
Web-based software is built into the broker’s web site and is accessible from any web connection. As a rule, web-based software tends
to be simpler than the stand-alone packages since it is used by the
majority of traders and investors, particularly those with less experience. There are a few features that you should look for in the webbased software offered by your broker.
First of all, every web application should have some level of charting. This is a must. If your broker doesn’t offer basic stock charts,
move on. The charting package is all the better if you can add trend
lines, moving averages and volume, at the least. It is also nice if you
can add some level of customization to the chart such as varying time
views and different charting styles. Most web software applications
include real-time quotes, as delayed quotes are available to the general public on almost all financial sites. Along with the quotes, you

c14.indd 284

11/2/07 1:43:30 PM

Going to the Dance

285

should be able to access various stock statistics such as daily range,
volume, current bid/ask and 52-week high. You should also have full
access to your account information including balances, transaction
history and positions with gain/loss reports.
Web software usually lags stand-alone software from an active
trading standpoint. However, for the investor, web software is usually the better choice. Web applications are usually more complete
for products such as bonds and mutual funds, for both research
and trading. Furthermore, because many of the transaction functions such as banking and bill paying are done through the web, it
is easier to integrate all of the account activity through a web-based
platform.
Standalone software applications usually come in the form of a
Java application or proprietary code that resides on your local computer. These packages are specifically designed to address the needs
of the active trader and include more advanced analysis and execution functions than the web applications. There are myriad features
within the stand-alone applications, but we’ll review some of the
more common features to aid you in your decision here.
• Charts. A solid charting capability is a must-have for any standalone application. The bare minimum features that we would
consider for the more advanced software is the three major
chart styles (line, bar, candlestick), trend lines, moving averages, volume, scalability, and color/font customization. The
latter feature is important because (1) a chart that is easy on
your eyes will allow you to read it better, and (2) this feature is
so easy to code there’s no reason for a broker not to have it.
• Screening tools. There are many types of screening tools from
preset screens to programmable screens. We prefer to have
the flexibility to create our own screens based on criteria that
we select. However, any trading platform should include top
gainers, top losers, top volume and a high/low list. Remember
that selecting a stock is one of the key parts of managing risk,
so if you can’t screen for your stock, you’re starting with an
unnecessary level of risk.
• Option data. Some people might disagree with us on this point,
but we think that you should have access to basic option chain
data even if you’re not trading the option. As option trading

c14.indd 285

11/2/07 1:43:31 PM

286

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

continues its explosive growth, you’ll find that option expiration day, open interest, and other option-specific terms become
more important to every trader. Of course, if you are trading
options, the full call/put chain, Greeks, volume, and open
interest are the least you should expect from your broker.
• Stock data. Once the exclusive domain of the professional day
trader, the Level 2 screen is now an expected part of the stock
data on advanced platforms. This gives you visibility into the
price levels other than the high bid and low offer. You also
get to see how the stock has traded for the day as well as the
current trading ticker. Most of these platforms include direct
access, which lets you route your order to any market participant. Even with direct access, we find that the intelligent order
routing systems employed by the major brokers are sufficient
for most orders.
• Watch lists. The Market Guys actually consider this to be a minimum requirement for advanced trading platforms because it
supports the stock screening function. Many times, we’ll find a
stock that is setting up very nicely for a trade but it’s not quite
at the entry point yet. The best course of action is to place it
on a watch list and review it each day until the entry point is
reached or it fails to complete the setup, in which case we’ll
remove it from the watch list.
• Real-time account and order status. What can we say here except
that you can’t manage your trades if you don’t know where
you stand? You should have instant access to your account
equity, buying power, and open positions. Each open position should have real-time profit and loss updates. Perhaps
the most important is the order status, letting you know if an
order is open, filled, or partially filled. Sometimes the markets
move rapidly and you need to take action. It’s at these critical
times that you need your software to work for you rather than
against you.
You may certainly have more features that you consider critical
to your trading. That’s fine. Our goal in this list is to help you think
about the features that we use and that you may want to also consider. Depending on what you trade, your experience level and your
time horizon for trading, there are many other tools and features
that you’ll want to review on a case-by-case basis.

c14.indd 286

11/2/07 1:43:31 PM

Going to the Dance

287

6. Order Types
Traders today need the ability to execute trades according to their
strategy and market conditions. Your broker should give you the
ability to place the following trades as conditions warrant.
Market

The market order is an order that goes to the market and tells everyone that you want to trade and are not concerned primarily with
price. A market buy order will usually fill on the offer or ask price
while a market sell will usually fill on the bid price. The market order
guarantees execution but not price. A limitation of the market
order is that it will only execute while the market is open. Low liquidity and large spreads would make the market order dangerous to
use during the pre- and post-market trading hours.
Limit

The limit order is used when you want to specify a maximum buying
price or a minimum selling price for your order. A limit buy order is
always placed below the current trading price while a limit sell order
is always placed above the current trading price. While the market
order guarantees execution but not price, the limit order guarantees
price but not execution. If you place a limit buy order below the
market and the stock never falls to your limit price, your order will
remain open and unfilled. Limit orders may be placed at any time
and may be filled while the market is closed since any fill that meets
your limit price is a valid trade.
Stop

The stop order is a little tricky for new traders to understand sometimes but it is really a simple order. The buy stop order is used to buy
a stock when the price rises; therefore, the buy stop order is always
placed above the current market price. The sell stop order is used to
sell a stock when it falls; therefore, the sell stop order is always placed
below the current market price. Notice how the limit sell and the
buy stop are both above the current trading price while the limit buy
and the sell stop are both below the current trading price.
Let’s use one example to illustrate the stop order. If you own
a stock and you want to sell it if it starts to fall, you would protect

c14.indd 287

11/2/07 1:43:31 PM

288

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

your open position with a sell stop. The sell stop will just sit in your
account only until the stock drops to the stop price that you specify.
When the stock hits your stop price, the sell stop order automatically
turns into a market sell order and your position would be closed at
the current market price.
It is possible to combine a stop order with a limit order to create a
stop limit order. The stop limit order requires that you specify both
a stop price as well as a limit price. Let’s see how this would work
for protecting a stock that you own. Let’s say you own a stock that is
trading at $50. You decide that you want to sell it if it drops to $47;
however, you really don’t want to sell it for less than $45. In this case,
you would place a sell stop limit order with a stop at $47 and a limit
at $45. If the stock drops to $47, the sell stop limit order would automatically convert to a limit sell. Here’s the problem, though. If the
stock is falling rapidly, it is possible that the stock price could drop
below your limit price before your order is filled. In that case, you
would own a falling stock without any protection. For that reason,
if you’re using a stop order to protect an open position, we always
recommend that you use a stop rather than a stop limit.
Trailing Stop

This one is a handy twist to the standard stop order. The biggest
limitation to the stop order is that it will protect the stock you own
from falling, but it doesn’t help you protect your profits. The trailing stop accomplishes both. The trailing stop is a stop order that
will continually adjust the stop price in the direction of profits. In
other words, if you own a stock and it starts to rise, the trailing stop
will rise along with the stock price, thereby increasing the level at
which the stop order will execute. The stop order, therefore, trails
behind the trading price and will follow it until the stock starts to
retreat, at which point the stop order will sell your stock and lock in
the majority of the profit.
This is another one that is best understood with real numbers. Suppose you buy a stock for $50 and you want to limit your loss to $2 per
share. At the same time, you want to lock in your profits as the stock
rises. You could place a $2 trailing stop, which would set the initial
stop price at $48. Now assume that the stock price moves from $50 to
$54. The stop price would automatically increase to $52 ($54 ⫺ $2).
Next the stock price increases to a maximum of $57.33. The stop
