
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

244

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

playing for is the slight statistical edge that may come from the rule set, and some of
these conditions have fairly limited influence with respect to both time (i.e., they are
good for only a few bars) and price (small price movements). A trader working with a
system like this, or with a discretionary approach that is similar, will find that adding to
existing trades is usually a mistake because the statistical edge identified by the condition
is usually strongest right at the entry point. Once again, note that this is not the same
thing as an entry that requires scaling in to reach full size as the market moves against
the entry price.
Add Back Only After Partial Exits As another example, consider a trader who
gets into a trade, takes half of it off at a 1X profit (where X is the initial dollar amount
risked on the trade) and then finds the trade back at the entry price. This trader can add
the half she already exited back to the trade; a stop-out at the initial stop point will now
be only a half-sized loss because of the offsetting win on half the initial position. A trader
establishing a position in an accumulation area could go through a process of selling part
of her exposure at the top of the range and bidding to buy it back at the bottom, perhaps
several times before the eventual breakout of the range. In effect, this trader is building
up a profit cushion as the market oscillates in the range before the breakout. If she has
misread the market, or if the trade doesn’t work for any reason, her ultimate loss will be
cushioned or even eliminated by the profits made in the range. There is always a tradeoff, and in this specific scenario, if the market does eventually break out of the top of
the range, the trader will have on less than full size because she was selling some of the
position at the top of the range. This trader will be penalized on the clean, easy trade that
breaks immediately out of the top of the range with no oscillations, but these trades are
the exception rather than the rule.
Another case to consider is where a trader gets lucky and catches a well-trending
market that extends for many trend legs after the entry. Though this is not common, there
are opportunities to reap truly outsized profits from extended trends with the proper
plan, so it is worth spending some time thinking about how to build positions in these
trends while also managing the downside. One very good plan is to enter a full position
and take partial profits at the appropriate targets. (For simplicity’s sake, assume half
the position is exited at a profit target.) Then, when another setup in the direction of the
trend emerges, this entry is also taken on full size, so now the trader is holding a net position equal to 1.5 times the initial trading size. At the appropriate target for that trade (the
second entry), half of that trade is exited, leaving a full-sized position, essentially for free,
with locked-in profits. This can be repeated, trading the same size and gradually accumulating a larger, more or less risk-free position as the trend expands. Avoid the temptation
to increase size on later entries—growing profits can lead to overconfidence, which is
especially dangerous near the end of trends, where volatility can dramatically expand.
Add Without Taking Partial Exits The classic pyramiding plans fall under this
category; accumulated profits from one tier are used to fund the next tier. Reverse

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

Trade Management

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

245

pyramid plans, for instance starting with one unit, next buying two, then four, eight,
16, and so on, are used in a lot of marketing literature for trading methods and systems;
if you want to turn $2,000 into $2,000,000 in one, glorious trade, this is pretty much the
only way to do it. It is possible to find historical examples of trends and show that, if
you had pyramided aggressively and perfectly, you could have eventually ended up essentially cornering the market in some commodity or owning most of the float in a stock,
even starting with a very small initial investment.
By this point in this book, we probably do not need to point out the other side, which
is that your probability of success is vanishingly small. The problem with reverse pyramid
plans is that the position is top-heavy and becomes increasingly so as more contracts are
added. When you start with one unit and end up adding 20 at higher prices, it takes
only a very small dip in the market to completely wipe out all accumulated profits since
the average price on the position is so high. As you also know, extended trends tend to
become more volatile, so reverse pyramid plans usually end up blowing out accounts or,
in the case of leveraged accounts, even going significantly negative.
In the exceedingly unlikely chance that you do get lucky with a reverse pyramid plan,
there is something else to consider—you would be totally unprepared for and unable to
deal with the psychological pressures of trading the size dictated by the pyramid. Imagine
you are a one-unit trader with a $20,000 trading account, and you’re comfortable risking
maybe $500 per trade. If you happen to catch a good trade and pyramid up to 50 units,
your average daily swings could be hundreds of thousands of dollars. How likely are you
to make good decisions under that kind of pressure? These reverse pyramid strategies
have payoff structures very close to a lottery ticket, which is probably the right way to
think of them—just imagine you are buying a lottery ticket equal to your full account
value. They are not acceptable, professional trading plans.
Pyramiding should not be dismissed out of hand, however; there is another way.
Proper pyramids, those that have the largest size at the beginning of the campaign, can
be valuable in some situations. In a proper pyramid, the trader adds successively smaller
units as the trend progresses. (For instance, you might start with 20 units, and add 16,
and next add 12.) A pyramid built this way keeps its average price closer to the base,
closer to the first units; it is not top-heavy so traders can weather volatility near the end
of the trend better. There are many successful trend followers who use some variation
of this plan, but it can cause some problems in conjunction with certain entry techniques
and other trade management plans. In the worst case, it basically adds another random
element to the risk and trade sizing equation. These additions almost always result in
a more volatile bottom line, so make sure that the additional upside compensates on a
risk-adjusted basis.
If you do decide to pyramid, size up, or aggressively add to trades when you know
you are right, make sure you are actually adding value to your overall P&L. These are
important questions that should be considered. You have to ask whether it makes sense
to add to trades in the first place. Many traders do not consider this question in building their trading plan, but make a hasty decision the first time they are faced with an

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

246

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

extended and very profitable trade. Without a good plan, that decision is likely to completely destroy the profit in that particular trade, and perhaps to even do more damage to
the trading account. If you do decide that adding makes sense, then you need to consider
exactly how to do it. There are few absolutes in trading, but it is very difficult to imagine a reverse pyramid plan that actually makes sense. With that possibility off the table,
there are several other variations of adding size to trades that can be explored. From a
practical trade management standpoint, the last thing to consider is whether the additions will be considered completely new trades so that each individual trade preserves
its own entry and management rules, or you choose to think of them as one combined
position with an average price equal to the cost basis of the group. The answers to these
questions will depend on your trading style and your chosen approach to the markets.

Time Stops
Few technical traders get into a position with the plan of the market simply staying at
their entry price. (The obvious exception would be option spreads or other derivatives
that are short volatility.) The choice to actually enter a trade is usually made because we
believe that an imbalance exists in the market and that this imbalance should cause a
price movement within a short time period. If this movement does not happen quickly,
it often suggests that much of the edge has gone out of the trade, and we are basically
flipping a coin. This is why time stops can make sense. There are many variations of
these rules, but they basically say that if a trade does not hit some kind of predetermined
profit limit within a certain time, the trade will be exited after that time window expires.
Time stops will also cut out some winning trades. This is unavoidable, but, even with
the loss of some winners, the end result could still be a net gain to the bottom line. In
addition, many traders find that their best trades work right away; this is a reflection
of certain setups in certain markets and may not generalize to all situations. For these
traders, even if a trade does end up being profitable after an extended flat period at the
beginning, the resulting trade is often less energetic and less profitable than the ones that
worked immediately, so a time stop will still make sense.
There are several choices for how to actually execute time stops. The obvious choice
is to simply exit at the market once the time window expires. Another choice that is not
often considered is to tighten the stop very close to current market prices, moving it
closer as time goes on in a similar fashion to the movement of the Parabolic SAR’s stop
levels. This greatly reduces the open risk in the trade, though it does leave the position
vulnerable to a large loss if an unexpected event causes an overnight gap. Furthermore,
after reducing the risk, this technique leaves the possibility of gains intact if the market
does move in the intended direction. This is probably not a technique for the newer trader
who has not learned to deal fully with the emotions of trading and who would probably
be better off with a simpler rule set. For the more advanced trader, this technique can
offer a very attractive compromise between limiting risk in flat trades and still preserving
the opportunity to profit from trades that take a while to develop. This is one of the most
underutilized techniques available to the self-directed discretionary trader.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

Trade Management

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

247

Tightening Stops
At first glance, it would seem that tightening stops is a simple and effective way to reduce
risk in existing trades. However, the risk/reward/probability matrix always applies in all
situations and to every action the trader makes. Inevitably, tightening stops reduces the
probability of the trade working out, as a tighter stop is always more likely to be hit than
a wider stop. Make sure that you are moving stops in response to developing market
structure and to the shifting probabilities of the scenario, rather than in response to your
own emotions or desires to avoid losses.
There is a trade-off between staying in a trade for the bigger move, which requires
looser stops, and being unwilling to give back much profit with tighter stops. Traders
using very loose stops (far from current market prices) have a much higher probability
of staying in the trade and not getting shaken out by noise, but they must also be willing
to give back large percentages of open profits. We often say “weak-hand longs” or “weak
shorts” in a pejorative sense, but there are times when a smart trader will actively choose
to be the weak hand. There are times when we want to be taken out of a trade by a
very small adverse move, for instance when taking profits in an overextended trend or a
parabolic blow-off.
Trade Reaches a Risk Multiple Target For many technical traders, once the
trade has made a significant move into the profit zone, it rarely makes sense to take a
full-sized loss on the trade. Traders can use their initial risk level as a reference point,
projected at an equivalent distance on the other side of the entry, to define a significant
move for the trade. For instance, assume you enter a long position in a $50.00 market with
a $2.50 stop at $47.50. When the market reaches $52.50, it may make sense to tighten the
stop to just under your entry point or even higher. If the initial stop was set correctly
for the volatility level of the market, once the trade moves an equivalent distance in the
other direction, the trade is working. At that point, the pattern is playing out as expected,
and a failure from that level usually suggests a larger-scale failure—there is no need to
take a full-sized loss on a trade in this situation.
Another scenario applies to traders who take profits at specific multiples of that
initial risk (e.g., taking profits at 2X). Once this profit target is hit, it usually makes sense
to tighten the stop on the remainder of the trade to the entry price, essentially working
a breakeven stop on the rest of the trade. The same logic applies here: the trade worked
in that it was able to reach the first profit target, so it makes sense to eliminate the open
risk on the trade. Move the stop to a point where a stop-out will, at worst, result in a
breakeven trade, as the loss on the open portion will be offset by the already lockedin gains on the closed portion. Be clear: this solution may not be the right fit for every
trading style, but short-term swing traders will find that a plan like this will significantly
reduce the volatility of their returns.
Sharp Momentum Develops Sometimes a trend will accelerate into a parabolic run
with very sharp momentum. This is a somewhat rare but glorious outcome, and one that

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

248

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

FIGURE 8.5 A Stop Under the Previous Day’s Low Is Appropriate in a Parabolic, Runaway Trend

often justifies working very tight stops. Figure 8.5 shows a daily chart of Silver futures,
which, after an already extended uptrend, broke into a parabolic expansion. A trader
holding a long position in a runaway trend like this could have worked a stop each day
below the previous day’s lows. In this example, assume that the trade was entered somewhere around A on the chart; if you were working a stop under the previous day’s low, it
would not have been hit until the point marked C, the day after the extreme high of the
run-up. This is a very aggressive stop technique that crosses the line into a profit-taking
exit. Basically you are asking for the market to take you out of the position with a slight
downtick so you can book the profit, but you are also leaving yourself open to continued
upside in the unlikely event the market extends further. You want your stop to be hit in
this case. Parabolic trends are a special example because they often carry very high risk
of sharp reversals from climax points. Traders who are fortunate enough to be holding
heavy exposure into such a move can become emotional and excited as they extrapolate
the move into infinity, and this time of extreme emotion often results in very poor decisions. Use tight stops on at least part of the position to remove the emotional component
from the decision process in parabolic trends.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Trade Management

249

The parabolic trend is an unusual and dramatic example, but even normal trends
can often justify fairly tight stops, depending on the trader’s plan and personality. Swing
traders, who are clearly playing for only one swing with minimal giveback, will work
much tighter stops than traders who plan to hold for the longer trend, if it should develop. Price action in trends is more directional and more predictable than price action
in ranges, so we can get away with stops much closer to the market if the goal is to
protect open profits. For example, in an uptrend, a tight stop could be trailed under the
highest pivot low of the trend. Slightly wider stops could go under the second-highest
pivot low, probably working both of these stops on a close-only basis to avoid the possibility of selling into a fake dropout. It is also worth considering that if you are stopped
out by an intraday move that reverses on close, it may make sense to reenter the position
with a stop under the new extreme.
It Is Difficult to Tighten Stops Against a Range If it is easy to work tight stops
in trends, it is much more difficult to work tight stops in consolidation areas. These areas
tend to be much more random, and one of the dominant features of these structures is
that they have large spikes outside the range. Volume and liquidity tend to be lower in
these areas, reflecting the generally reduced trading interest, so medium-sized orders
can have a very large impact on prices. Be aware that tightening stops on a trade in
consolidation is usually effectively a time stop and a conscious decision to work toward
being taken out of the trade. This is often justified, but if it is not what you are trying
to accomplish, it may make sense to leave stops close to the initial risk point while the
market is ranging. Once momentum and a new trend develop in the trade’s favor, the
stop can be significantly tightened in the new trending environment.

Widening Stops
The rules for this technique can be simplified to one word: don’t. Most traders will be
better off if they have a simple rule that says they will never move a stop in the direction of risk. In other words, never move a stop down in a long position or higher in a
short position. For new trades, the reason is obvious: A trade is initiated against a fixed
stop, and position size is calculated based on a loss at that level. If the stop is moved to
allow for additional risk, then a larger than expected loss could result. Why even make
rules for position sizing, initial risk, and initial stop placement if you do not intend to
follow them?
I actually have a trading rule that says a stop can never be moved in the direction
of risk, but there are two precisely defined exceptions to that rule. In both cases, the
common factor is that the stop must remain inside the initial 1× risk parameter; this
is a hard limit established at the time of trade entry that can never be violated. The
exceptions are:

r When the decision to tighten the stop was clearly an error. In these cases I will move
the stop back out, but not further than the day on which the error was made.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

250

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

r When emerging market structure suggests the need for a slightly wider stop. Be careful because it is easy to justify moving the stop further and further away from the
market as the market edges toward the stop. In my opinion, newer traders should
never do this, because they do not have the experience to separate their emotional
reactions from legitimate market feel.
There is actually a third, very rare case that justifies a larger stop. Imagine that you
are scaling into a trade in a large move, and something happens that suggests the volatility may be even higher than expected. For instance, perhaps you are buying into a decline
and then some news hits the market that causes ranges to expand. In this case, assuming
you have on part of the intended position size, it may make sense to not complete your
buying program, but to move the stop further away from the market. The total risk on
the trade is equal to or less than the original intended risk, but the position size will be
much smaller against a further stop. This is not actually an increase of risk in any way,
as the total bottom line for the trade will be the risk that was initially allocated.

Managing Gaps Beyond Stops
Though many markets are moving toward round-the-clock trading, there are still cases
where a market will gap open beyond a stop level. For instance, overnight news could
cause a stock to open much lower, gapping under a stop on a long position. In a more
dramatic example, a natural catastrophe could trigger a large shift in markets, causing
many positions to gap beyond stop levels. In these cases, the initial losses on the open
may be many times the intended risk on the trade. No doubt this event is a disaster, but
the damage can get much worse. It is important to have a good plan that accounts for
these possibilities, so that you are not put in the position of having to make emotional
decisions on the fly.
There are two important factors to consider here. Understand your chosen markets’
tendencies around the open. For instance, most gaps in equities are reversed; if a stock
opens down, there is a good tendency for it to trade up into the gap. Second, consider
the markets’ tendencies in trading off the open print. The high or low of the day tends
to be set in early trading. So, if you are holding a long position that gaps down and immediately starts trading up, it may make sense to set a new stop under the day’s low to
give the market a chance at recovery. However, if the market opens down and immediately presses lower, or breaks lower out of an opening range, there is a good chance
that it could trend down all day. Long positions should be dumped immediately in the
second scenario.
If you trade long enough, these gaps through stops will happen, and they will result in
some stunning losses. Fortunately, you will be on the right side of some of these surprise
events as well, but it is important to realize that your ability to make good decisions
may be compromised in the face of very large, volatile market movement. In these cases,
your best hope is to have a plan that already considered the possibilities and to follow
that plan with perfect discipline.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Trade Management

Printer: Hamilton Printing

251
