
decrease demand for the yen, and finally cause the yen to depreciate across the board.
A currency substitution theorist would agree with this scenario and look to take
advantage of this by shorting the yen or, if long the yen, by promptly getting out of
the position. By taking this action, our yen trader is helping to drive the market
precisely in that direction thus making the monetary model theory a fait accompli.
The step-by-step process is illustrated in Figure 3.8.

Figure 3.8 Currency Substitution Model.
A. Japan announces now stock and bond buyback plan. Economists are now
predicting Japan's money supply will dramatically increase.
B. Economists are also predicting a rise in inflation with the introduction of this
now policy. Speculators expert a change in the exchange rate as a result.
C. Economists expect interest rates to rise also as inflation takes hold in the
economy. Speculators start shorting the yen in anticipation of a change in the
exchange rate.
D. Demand for the yen plummets as money flows easily through the Japanese
economy and speculators dump yen in the markets.
E. The exchange rate for Japanese yen changes dramatically as the yen falls in
value to foreign currencies, especially those that are easily substituted by investors
(read: liquid yen crosses).
Limitations of Currency Substitution Model Among the major, actively
traded currencies this model has not yet shown itself to be a convincing, single
determinant for exchange rate movements. While this theory can be used with more
confidence in underdeveloped countries where hot money rushes in and out of
emerging markets with enormous effect, there are still too many variables not
accounted for by the currency substitution model. For example, using the earlier yen
illustration, even though Japan may try to spark inflation with its securities buyback
plan, it still has an enormous current account surplus that will continually prop up the
yen. Also, Japan has numerous political land mines it must avoid in its own
neighborhood, and should Japan make it clear it is trying to devalue its currency there
will be enormous repercussions. These are just two of many factors the substitution
model does not take into consideration. However, this model (like numerous other
currency models) should be considered part of an overall balanced FX forecasting
diet.

45

What Moves the Currency Market
in the Short Term?
For any type of trader, fundamental or technical, the importance of economic
data cannot be underestimated. Having worked in the FX markets for many years, I
have learned that even though there are many traders who claim to be pure
technicians and do not factor fundamentals into their trailing strategies, these same
traders have also frequently stayed out of the markets ahead of key economic
releases. In fact, many system traders turn their systems off ahead of big releases
such as the U.S. nonfarm payrolls reports. On the other side of the spectrum, there
are also technicians who do factor fundamentals into their trading strategies and wait
only for key economic releases to put on breakout trades. As a result, it is important
for any type of active market trader to know what the most important economic
releases are for the U.S. dollar. Since 90 percent of all currency trades are against the
U.S. dollar, the currency movements are naturally most sensitive to U.S. economic
releases.
TABLE. 4.1 Range of EUR/USD Following Economic Releases for 2004
First 20 Minutes
Average
Total Daily Range Average
Range (Pips)
Range (Pips)
Nonfarm Payrolls
FOMC Decisions
Trade Balance
Inflation (CPI)
Retail Sales
GDP
Current Account
Durable Goods
TIC Data

124
74
64
44
43
43
43
39
33

Nonfarm Payrolls
FOMC Decisions
TIC Data
Trade Balance
Current Account
Durable Goods
Retail Sales
Inflation (CPI)
GDP

193
140
132
129
127
126
125
123
no

Based on a study that I conducted, the most significant movements in the dollar
(against the euro) on the back of an economic release in 2004 occurred in the first 20
minutes of trading following the release. As shown in Table 4.1, the nonfarm payrolls
report is hands down the most important piece of U.S. data. Throughout 2004 on
average, the EUR/USD would move 124 pips (points in FX) in the first 20 minutes
following the release. Excluding any release that came in within 10 percent of
estimates, the average move was 133 pips. On a daily basis, the EUR/USD moved an
average of 193 and 208 pips excluding nearly in-line levels. On average, the
EUR/USD moved 111 pips throughout the course of the trading day. On the other
side of the spectrum is the gross domestic product (GDP) report, which results in an
average move of only 43 pips in the first 20 minutes and 110 pips on a daily basis.
The GDP ranking on the 20-minute table is higher than on the daily table because
prices do retrace throughout the course of the day. The biggest 20-minute mover for
the dollar may not be the most significant market mover for the entire trading.
According to our own analysis of 20- minute and daily ranges, we have created the
following rankings for economic data.
46

Top Market-Moving Indicators for Dollar as of 2004:
First 20 Minutes
1. Unemployment (nonfarm payrolls).
2. Interest rates (Federal Open Market Committee rate decisions).
3. Trade balance.
4. Inflation (consumer price index).
5. Retail sales.
6. Gross domestic product,
7. Current account.
8. Durable goods.
9. Foreign purchases of U.S. Treasuries (TIC data).
Daily
1. Unemployment (nonfarm payrolls).
2. Interest rates (FOMC rate derisions).
3. Foreign purchases of U.S. Treasuries (TIC data).
4. Trade balance.
5. Current account,
6. Durable goods.
7. Retail sales,
8. Inflation (consumer price index).
9. Gross domestic product.
You can compare the breakdowns of the average pip ranges for the EUR/USD
that are shown in Table 4.1 with the average daily range for the EUR/USD in 2004,
which was approximately 110 pips.

RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF DATA CHANGES OVER
TIME
With a dynamic market, one caveat Is that the significance of economic data
releases does change with time. According to a paper titled “Macroeconomic
Implications of the Beliefs and Behaviors of Foreign Exchange Traders” written by
Cheung and Chinn of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) in 1992,
the trade balance was the number one market-moving U.S. economic release on a 20minute basis, while non-farm payrolls (and unemployment data) was the third. In
1999, unemployment took the top place while the trade balance fell to the fourth. As
indicated in the earlier table for 2004 (Table 4.1), the trade balance and inflation
reports switched places with the trade balance being the third most market-moving
indicator in 2004 instead of inflation, which took the ranking in 1997, while the
significance of labor market data held steady. Intuitively, this makes sense since the
market shifts its attention to different economic sectors and data based on the.
conditions of the domestic economy — for example, trade balances may be more
important when a country is running unsustainable deficits, whereas an economy that
has difficulty creating jobs will see unemployment data as more important.

47

FX Dealer Kinking of Importance of Economic Data:
Changes over time
As of 1997
As of 1992
1. Unemployment
1. Trade balance
2. Interest rates
2. Interest rates
3. Inflation
3. Unemployment
4. Trade balance
4. Inflation
5. GDP
5. GDP
Rankings are based on reaction one minute after data is released.

GROSS DOMESTIC PRODICT — NO LONGR A BIG DEAI,
Contrary to popular belief, the GDP report has also become one of the lesser
important: economic indicators on the U.S. calendar and has led to one of the
smallest relative movements in the EUR/USD. One possible explanation is that GDP
reports are less frequently released than other data used in the study (quarterly versus
monthly), but in general the GDP data is more prone to ambiguity and
misinterpretation. For example, surging GDP brought about by rising exports will be
positive for the home currency; however, if GDP growth is a result of inventory
buildup, the effect on the currency may actually be negative. Also, a large number of
the components that comprise the GDP report are known in advance of the release.

HOW CAN YOU USE THIS TO YOUR BENEFIT?
For breakout traders, the knowledge of which data has the potential of leading to
the largest average range can be useful in determining how to weight positions
accordingly. For example, in Figure 4.1, which shows the daily EUR/USD chart,
there is a triangle forming as prices consolidate significantly. A breakout trader
would probably overweight positions ahead of the August 6, 2004, nonfarm payrolls
release on the eve prior in the anticipation of a large breakout move following this
release. In contrast, the third bar of the consolidation was the day of the GDP release.
As you can see, the range, was still comparatively tight, and given the knowledge
that the average instantaneous 20-minute move off of the GDP release is only a third
of the nonfarm payrolls move, the same breakout players hoping for a large move off
of that economic release should probably put on only 50 percent of the same position
that they would have put on for a no alarm payrolls-based breakout. The same
guidelines apply for range traders or system traders. Nonfarm payrolls day would be
a perfect day to stand on the sidelines and wait for prices to settle, whereas GDP day
still provides an opportunity for solid range or systems-based trading.
Overall knowing what economic indicator moves the market the most is very
important for all traders. Knowing the 20-minute versus daily range is also very
important because the exchange rate adjustment to economic news appears to be very
swill. Any reaction beyond a 15-to-30-minute window after the data is released may
be the result of investor overreaction or trading related to customer flow rather than
news alone. The GDP is a perfect example—the 20-minute reaction ranking is higher
than the daily ranking. It is also critical to stay abreast of which data the market
deems important at any point in time because the market's focus changes from period
48

to period; once-relevant data may end up having less of an effect on currency values
later on, and vice versa.

Figure 4.1 EUR/USD Daily Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
Resource
"Macroeconomic implications of the Beliefs and Behavior of Foreign Exchange
Traders," www.georgetown.edu/faculty/evansml/New%20Micro/chinn.pdf.

A DEEP LOOK INTO THE FX MARKET
The next three chapters cover some of the unique studies that I have done on the
FX market that provide some telling details for both the novice and the advanced
trader. Thee topics are:
• What are the best times to trade for individual currency pairs?
• What are the most market-moving economic data?
• What are currency correlations and how do traders use them?

49

What Are The Best Times to
Trade for Individual
Currency Pairs?
The foreign exchange market operates 24 hours a day and as a result it is
impossible for a trader to track every single market movement and make an
immediate response at all limes. Timing is everything in currency trading. In order to
devise an effective and time-efficient investment strategy, it is important to note the
amount of market activity around the clock in order to maximize the number of
trading opportunities during a trader's own market hours. Besides liquidity, a
currency pair's trading range is also heavily dependent, on geographical location and
macroeconomic factors. Knowing what time of day a currency pair has the widest or
narrowest trading range will undoubtedly help traders improve their investment
utility due to better capital allocation. This chapter outlines the typical trading
activity of major currency pairs in different time zones to see when they are the most
volatile. Table 5.1 tabulates the average pip range for the different currency pairs
during various lime frames between 2002 and 2004.
ASIAN SESSION (TOKYO): 7 p.m. – 4 a.m. EST
FX trading in Asia is conducted in major regional financial hubs; during the
Asian trading session, Tokyo takes the largest market share, followed by Hong Kong
and Singapore. Despite the flagging influence of the Japanese central bank on the FX
market, Tokyo remains one of the most important dealing centers in Asia. It is the
first major Asian market to open, and many large participants often use the trade
momentum there as the benchmark to gauge market, dynamics as well as to devise
their trading strategies. Trading in Tokyo can be thin from time to time; but large investment banks and hedge funds are known to try to use the Asian session to run
important stop and option barrier levels. Figure 5.1 provides a ranking of the
different currency pairs and their ranges during the Asian trading session.
For the more risk-tolerant traders, USD/JPY, GBP/CHF, and GBP/JPY are good
picks because their broad ranges provide short-term traders with lucrative profit
potentials, averaging 90 pips. Foreign investment, banks and institutional investors,
which hold mostly dollar-dominated assets, generate a significant amount of
USD/JPY transactions when they enter the Japanese equity and bond markets. Japan's
central bank, with more than $800 billion of U.S. Treasury securities, also plays an
influential role in affecting the supply and demand of USD/JPY through its open
market operations. Last but not least, large Japanese exporters are known to use the
Tokyo trading hours to repatriate their foreign earnings heightening the fluctuation of
the currency pair. GBP/CHF and GBP/JPY remain highly volatile as central bankers
and large players start to scale themselves into positions in anticipation of the
opening of the European session.
For the more risk-averse traders, AUD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF are good
choices because they allow medium-term to long-term traders to take fundamental
factors into account when making a decision. The moderate volatility of the currency
50

pairs will help to shield traders and their investment strategies from being prone to
irregular market movements due to intraday speculative trades.
TABLE 5.1 Currency Pair Ranges
Currency
Pairs (EST)

Asian Session
7 p.m.–4 a.m.

EUR/USD
USD/JPY
GBP/USD
USD/CHF
EUR/CHF
AUD/USD
USD/CAD
NZD/USD
EUR/GBP
GBP/JPY
GBP/CHF
AUD/JPY

51
78
65
68
53
38
47
42
25
112
96
55

European
U.S. Session
Session
2 a.m. – 12 p.m. 8 a.m.–5 p.m.

87
79
112
117
53
59
94
52
40
145
150
63

78
69
94
107
40
47
64
46
34
119
129
56

U.S. & Europe Europe
&
Overlap
Asia Overlap
8 a.m. – 12 a.m. 2 a.m.–4 a.m.

65
58
78
68
40
59
74
38
27
99
105
47

32
29
43
43
24
20
28
20
16
60
62
26

Figure 5.1 Asian Session Volatility
U.S. SESSION (NEW YORK): 8 a.m. – 5 p.m. EST
New York is the second largest FX market place, encompassing 19 percent of
total FX market volume turnover according to the 2004 Triennial Central Bank
Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in April 2004
published by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). It is also the financial
center that guards the back door of the world's FX market as trading activity usually
winds down to a minimum from its afternoon session until the opening of the Tokyo
market the next day. The majority of the transactions during the U.S. session are
51

executed between 8 a.m. and noon, a period with high liquidity because European
traders are still in the market.
For the more risk-tolerant traders, GBP/USD, USD/CHF, GBP/JPY, and
GBP/CHF are good choices for day traders since the daily ranges average about 120
pips. (See Figure 5.2.) Trading activities in these currency pairs are particularly
active because these transactions directly involve the U.S. dollar. When the U.S.
equity and bond markets are open during the U.S. session, foreign investor have to
convert their domestic currency, such as the Japanese yen, the euro, and the Swiss
franc, into dollar-dominated assets in order to carry out their transactions. With the
market overlap, GBP/JPY and GBP/CHF have the widest daily ranges.

Figure 5.2 U.S. Session Volatility
Most currencies in the FX market are quoted with the U.S. dollar as the base and
primarily traded against it before translating into other currencies. In the GBP/JPY
case, for a British pound to be converted into Japanese yen, it has to be traded against
the dollar first, then into yen. Therefore, a GBP/JPY trade involves two different
currency transactions, GBP/USD and USD/JPY, and its volatility is ultimately determined by the correlations of the two derived currency pairs. Since GBP/USD and
USD/JPY have negative correlations, which means their direction of movements are
opposite to each other, the volatility of GBP/JPY is thus amplified. USD/CHF
movement can also be explained similarly but has a greater intensity. Trading
currency pairs with high volatility can be very lucrative, but it is also important to
bear in mind that the risk involved is very high as well. Traders should continuously
revise their strategies in response to market conditions because abrupt movements in
exchange rates can easily stop out their trading orders or nullify their long-term
strategies.
For the more risk-averse traders, USD/JPY, EUR/USD, and USD/CAD appear
to be good choices since these pairs offer traders a decent amount of trading range to
gamer handsome profits with a smaller amount of risk. Their highly liquid nature
52

allows an investor to secure profits or cut losses promptly and efficiently. The modest
volatility of these pairs also provides a favorable environment for traders who want
to pursue long-term strategies.
EUROPEAN SESSION (LONDON): 2 a.m. – 12 p.m. EST
London is the largest and most important dealing center in the world, with a
market share at more than 30 percent according to the BIS survey. Most of the
dealing desks of large banks are located in London; the majority of major FX
transactions are completed during London hours due to the market's high liquidity
and efficiency. The vast number of market participants and their high transaction
value make London the most volatile FX market of all. As shown in Figure 5.3, half
of the 12 major pairs surpass the 80 pips line, the benchmark that we used to identify
volatile pairs with GBP/JPY and GBP/CHF reaching as high as 140 and 146 pips
respectively.

Figure 5.3 European Session Volatility
GBP/JPY and GBP/CHF are apt for the risk lovers. These two pairs have an
average daily range of more than 140 pips and can be used to generate a huge amount
of profits in a short period of time. Such high volatility for the two pairs reflects the
peak of daily trade activity as large participants are about to complete their cycle of
currency conversion around the world. London hours are directly connected to both
the U.S. and the Asian sessions: as soon as large banks and institutional investors are
finished repositioning their portfolios, they will need to start converting the European
assets into dollar-denominated ones again in anticipation of the opening of the U.S.
market. The combination of the two reconversions by the big players is the major
reason for the extremely high volatility in the pairs.
53

For the more risk-tolerant traders, there are plenty of pairs to choose from.
EUR/USD, USD/CAD, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF, with an average range of 100
pips, are ideal picks as their high volatilities offer an abundance, of opportunity to
enter the market. As mentioned earlier, trade between the European currencies and
the dollars picks up again because the large participants have to reshuffle their
portfolios for the opening of the U.S. session.
For the more risk-averse participants, the NZD/USD, AUD/USD, EUR/CHF and
AUD/JPY, with an average of about 50 pips, are good choices as these pairs provide
trader with high interest incomes in additional to potential trade profits. These pairs
allow investors to determine their direction of movements based on fundamental
economic factors and be less prone to losses due to intraday speculative trades.
U.S. - EUROPEAN OVERLAP: 8 a.m. – 12 p.m. EST
The FX markets lend to be most active when the hours of the world's two largest
trading centers overlap. (See Figure 5.4.) The range of trading between 8 a.m. and
noon EST constitutes on average 70 percent of the total average range of trading for
all of the currency pairs during the European trading hours and 80 percent of the total
average range of trading for all of the currency pairs during U.S. trading hours. Just
these percentages alone tell day traders that if they are really looking for volatile
price action and wide ranges and cannot sit at the screen all day, the time to trade is
the U.S. and European overlap.

Figure 5.4 U.S.-European Overlap
EUROPEAN - ASIAN OVERLAP: 2 a.m. – 4 a.m. EST
The trade intensity in the European-Asian overlap is far lower than in any other
session because of the slow trading during the Asian morning. (See Figure 5.5) Of
course, the time period surveyed is relatively smaller as well. With trading extremely
thin during these hours, risk-tolerant and risk-loving traders can take a two-hour nap
or spend the time positioning themselves for a breakout move at the European or U.S.
open.
54

Figure 5.5 European – Asian Overlap

55

What Are Currency
Correlations and
How Do Traders
Use Them?
When trading in the FX market, one of the most important facts to remember in
creating a strategy is that no currency pair is isolated. In many cases, foreign
economic conditions, interest rates, and price changes affect much more than just a
single pairing. Everything is interrelated in the forex market to some extent, and
knowing the direction and how strong this relationship is can be used to your
advantage; it has the potential to be a great trading tool. The bottom line is that unless
you only want to trade one pair at a time, it can be very profitable to take into
account how pairs move relative to one another. To do this, we can use correlation
analysis. Correlations are calculations based on pricing data, and these numbers can
help gauge the relationships that exist between different currency pairs. The
information that the numbers give us can be a good aid for any trader who wants to
diversify his or her portfolio, double up on positions without investing in the same
currency pair, or just get an idea of how much risk their trades are opening them up
to. If used correctly, this method has the potential to maximize gains, gauge exposure, and help prevent counterproductive trading.
POSITIVE/NEGATIVE CORRELATIONS: WHAT THEY MEANS AND
HOW TO USE THEM
