
MACD-Histogram
MACD stands for Moving Average Convergence-Divergence. This indicator
was developed by Gerald Appel, who combined three moving averages
into two MACD lines. We can enhance MACD by plotting it as a histogram,
reflecting the distance between those lines. It helps identify trends and rate
the power of bulls and bears. It is one of the best tools in technical analysis for catching reversals.
Before we use any indicator, we must understand how it is constructed
and what it measures. As noted before, each price represents a momentary consensus of value of market participants. A moving average shows
us the average consensus of value during a selected period of time. A fast
moving average reflects the average consensus during a short period of
time, and a slow moving average during a longer period of time. MACDHistogram measures changes in consensus by tracking the spread between
fast and slow moving averages.
Appel used three exponential moving averages to create MACD:
1. Calculate a 12-day EMA of closing prices.
2. Calculate a 26-day EMA of closing prices.
3. Subtract the 26-day EMA from the 12-day EMA—this is the fast or
MACD line.
4. Calculate a 9-day EMA of the fast line—this is the slow or signal line.
The values of 12, 26, and 9 have become standard numbers, used as defaults in most software packages. My testing shows that changing these
values has little impact on MACD signals, unless you go way out on a limb
and seriously distort their relationships by more than doubling one but not
the others. If you track several markets and do not have the time to customize your indicators, you can accept the default values of MACD. If you
follow only a few markets, it makes sense to experiment with higher and
lower MACD values to find those that more closely track turning points in
your stocks or futures. If your software doesn’t include MACD, you may
use two EMAs (for example, 12-day and 26-day) in lieu of the fast and
slow MACD lines. Then apply the MACD-Histogram formula, on the next
page, to the spread between those two averages.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

sell
buy

103

sell
buy

sell
buy

buy

Figure 5.8 MACD Lines
Entry and exit signals are rarely symmetrical. The indicator that gives you
good entry signals is usually not the best indicator for exits; some other tool
will do a better job. MACD lines give entry signals when the fast line crosses
the slow line. If the fast line crosses above, it gives a signal to go long. When
it crosses below, it gives a signal to sell short. Waiting for a crossover in the
opposite direction to close out a position is not a good idea because by that
time a lion’s share of profits will have evaporated.
Can you find a trading system in this chart? MACD lines tell you to enter
at the crossover, but how will you decide when to exit? What tools can you
use to find out when a market surge is starting to fade and hop off with profit?
At the right edge of the chart MACD lines are in a buy mode, with a fast
line above the slow and both rising. Prices are hovering above the EMA—an
overvalued level. Buying at the right edge would mean taking a “greater fool
theory” trade. Placing a buy order in the vicinity of the rising EMA would
allow us to buy value.

The fast line of MACD reflects a short-term consensus of value, while the
slow signal line reflects a longer-term consensus. When the fast line rises
above the slow line, it shows that market participants are becoming more
bullish. When bulls are becoming stronger, it is a good time to get long.
When the fast line of MACD falls below the slow line, it shows that market
participants are becoming bearish. When bears become stronger, it is a good

104

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

time to get short. MACD lines follow trends, and their crossovers mark trend
reversals. Like all trend-following indicators, they work best when markets
are moving but lead to whipsaws during choppy periods. We can make
MACD more useful by converting it into MACD-Histogram.
MACD-Histogram = Fast MACD line − Slow signal line
MACD-Histogram measures the spread between short-term and longterm moving averages and plots it as a histogram. It reflects the difference
between short-term and long-term consensus of value. Some software
packages include MACD lines but not MACD-Histogram. In that case, run
MACD lines, return to the menu and run an indicator called spread (or
similar), which should measure the spread between the two lines and plot
it as a histogram.
When you look at MACD lines, their spread may appear tiny, but MACDHistogram rescales it to fit the screen. The slope of MACD-Histogram shows
whether bulls or bears are growing stronger. That slope is defined by the

B

A

C

Figure 5.9 MACD-Histogram
A very powerful signal of MACD-Histogram, which occurs only once or
twice per year on a daily chart, is a divergence between the indicator peaks
or bottoms and price extremes. In area A the Euro grinds down to a low of

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

105

relationship between the two latest bars. When the bars of MACD-Histogram
rise (like the pattern of letters g-G), they show that the crowd is becoming
bullish—it is a good time to be long. When the slope of MACD-Histogram
declines (like in letters Q-q), it shows that the crowd is becoming bearish—
it is a good time to be short.
Markets run on a two-party system—the bulls and the bears. When
MACD-Histogram rises, it shows that bulls are becoming stronger, and when
it declines, it shows that bears are becoming stronger. MACD-Histogram
helps you bet on the winning party and sell short the opposition.
The Strongest Signal MACD-Histogram gives two types of signals. One
is ordinary, and we see it at every bar—it is the slope of MACDHistogram. An uptick of MACD-Histogram shows that bulls are stronger
than they were at the previous bar, and a downtick shows that bears are
gaining. Those upticks and downticks provide minor buy and sell signals,
but we shouldn’t read too much into them. Markets do not move in

84 cents and MACD-Histogram confirms that low by tracing its own bottom,
A. Prices rally into area B, and a strong rally of MACD-Histogram confirms
its strength. It rises to a new multi-month high, showing that bulls are becoming stronger below the surface of the bear market. Prices trace a double top
in area B. The second top of MACD-Histogram in that area is a little lower
than the first, warning of the imminent resumption of the downtrend. So far,
the indicator and prices are in gear, but from this point they diverge.
In area C prices crash to a new bear market low, while MACD-Histogram
stops just below its centerline, creating a more shallow bottom than during its
previous decline. When it ticks up from that low, it completes the bullish divergence and shows that bears have run out of steam and bulls are taking over.
When two or three diverse technical tools flash the same message, they
confirm one another. Notice that prices have traced a false downside breakout in area C. That breakout has cleaned out stops placed by bulls and sucked
in the most rabid bears who shorted. Premature bulls have been shaken out,
late bears have been trapped, and the upside reversal is complete. Those
trapped bears will have to cover shorts when they can no longer stand the
pain, adding fuel to the rally.
At the right edge of the chart prices are shooting higher from a bullish
divergence. This powerful pattern usually propels prices for weeks if not
months.

106

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

straight lines, and it’s normal for MACD-Histogram to keep ticking up
and down.
The other signal occurs rarely, only a couple of times per year on the
daily charts of most markets, but it’s worth waiting for because it is the
strongest signal in technical analysis. That signal is a divergence between
the peaks and bottoms of price and MACD-Histogram. A divergence occurs
when the trend of price highs and lows goes one way and the trend of tops
and bottoms in MACD-Histogram goes the opposite way. Those patterns take
several weeks or even more than a month to develop on the daily charts.
A bullish divergence occurs when prices trace a bottom, rally, and then
sink to a new low. At the same time MACD-Histogram traces a different
pattern. When it rallies from its first bottom, that rally lifts it above the
zero line, “breaking the back of the bear.” When prices sink to a new low,
MACD-Histogram declines to a more shallow bottom. At that point,
prices are lower, but the bottom of MACD-Histogram is higher, showing
that bears are weaker and the downtrend is ready for a reversal. MACDHistogram gives a buy signal when it ticks up from its second bottom.
Occasionally, the second bottom is followed by a third. This is why
traders must use stops and proper money management. There are no certainties in the markets, only probabilities. Even a reliable pattern such as
a divergence of MACD-Histogram fails occasionally, which is why we must
exit if prices fall below their second bottom. We must preserve our trading capital and reenter when MACD-Histogram ticks up from its third bottom, as long as it is higher than the first.
A bearish divergence occurs when prices rise to a new high, decline,
and then rise to a higher peak. MACD-Histogram gives the first sign of
trouble when it breaks below its zero line during the decline from its first
peak. When prices reach a higher high, MACD-Histogram rises to a much
lower high. It shows that bulls are weaker, and prices are rising simply out
of inertia and are ready to reverse.
The Hound of the Baskervilles MACD-Histogram offers traders what
x-rays offer doctors, showing the strength or weakness of the bone below
the surface of the skin. Bulls or bears may appear powerful when prices
reach a new extreme, but a divergence of MACD-Histogram shows that the
dominant party is becoming weak and prices are ready to reverse.
Go long when MACD-Histogram traces a bullish divergence, that is,
when prices fall to a new low while the indicator ticks up from a more shallow low. Get long after MACD-Histogram ticks up from its second bottom.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

107

A bottom that is more shallow than the preceding one shows that bears
have grown weaker, and the uptick tells us that bulls are taking over. Place
a protective stop below the latest bottom. Rallies from bullish divergences
tend to be very powerful, but you must always use protection in case a
signal does not work out.
An aggressive trader can make that stop “stop-and reverse,” meaning
that if stopped out of a long position, he will reverse and go short. When
a super-strong signal doesn’t pan out, it shows that something is fundamentally changing below the surface of the market. If you buy on the
strongest signal in technical analysis and then your stop gets hit, it means
that bears are especially strong, making it worthwhile to sell short.
Reversing positions from long to short is usually not the best idea, but the
failure of a divergence of MACD-Histogram is an exception.
I call this a Hound of the Baskervilles signal, after a story by Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle. Sherlock Holmes was called to investigate a murder on a
country estate. His clue came from the fact that the family dog did not bark
while the crime was being committed. That indicated the dog knew the
criminal, and the murder was an inside job. Sherlock Holmes received
his signal not from the action but from the lack of expected action. When
a divergence of MACD-Histogram fails to produce a reversal, it gives a
Hound of the Baskervilles signal.
Go short when the MACD-Histogram traces a bearish divergence, that is,
when prices rise to a new high but the indicator ticks down from a lower
peak. When the crowd gets on its hind legs and roars, it is tempting to
throw caution to the wind, close our eyes, and buy. When the crowd becomes manic, it is hard to remain cool, but an intelligent trader looks for
MACD-Histogram divergences. If prices rally, decline, and then rally to a
higher level, but MACD-Histogram rallies, falls below its zero line, breaking the back of the bull, and rallies again, but to a lower level, it creates
a bearish divergence. It shows that bulls have grown weaker, the stock is
rising out of inertia, and as soon as that inertia runs out, the stock is likely
to collapse.
MACD-Histogram flashes a signal to go short when it ticks down from
its second peak. Once short, place a stop above the latest rally peak.
Placing stops when shorting near the tops is notoriously difficult because
of high volatility. Trading smaller positions allows you to place wider stops.
Divergences between MACD-Histogram and prices on the daily charts
are almost always worth trading. Divergences on the weekly charts usually mark transitions between bull and bear markets.

108

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

A

C
D
B

E

Figure 5.10 The Hound of the Baskervilles Signal
Heating oil, along with the rest of the oil complex, ran up to an historic high
in November 2000. Then the demand shrunk, new supplies entered the market, bullish mania was broken, and oil began to slide. In December, it fell to
85 cents (point A), with MACD-Histogram tracing a new massive low, which

When MACD-Histogram reaches a new multi-month peak, it indicates
that bulls are extremely strong, and the corresponding price peak is likely
to be retested or exceeded. When MACD-Histogram falls to a new multimonth low, it shows that bears are extremely strong, and the corresponding
price low is likely to be retested or exceeded.
When MACD-Histogram rises to a new record peak, it shows a terrific
splash of bullish enthusiasm. Even if bulls pause to catch their breath, the
upside inertia is so strong that the rally is likely to resume after a pause.
When MACD-Histogram drops to a new low, it shows that bears are extremely strong. Even if bulls manage to stage a rally, the sheer downside
inertia is likely to drive the market to retest or exceed its low.
MACD-Histogram works like headlights on a car—it lights up a stretch
of the road ahead. It doesn’t show you the entire way home, but lets you
see far enough so that driving at a normal speed you can prepare for the
twists and turns ahead.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

109

indicated that bears were extremely strong. There was a brief reflex rally to
the EMA, while the indicator turned positive (breaking the back of the bear)
and then declined to a more shallow low (point B). At that time prices traced
out a kangaroo tail, reaching down to 75 cents, and turned up. That bullish
divergence, combined with a tail, gave a buy signal. Remember, no matter
how strong the signal, a serious trader needs to use stops.
Heating oil resumed its decline and gave a Hound of the Baskervilles
sell signal when prices violated their bottom B in area C. It paid to switch
to the short side then because heating oil eventually slid below 68. A violation of a bullish divergence of MACD-Histogram is a prime example of
the Hound of the Baskervilles signal. The underlying fundamentals must be
extremely strong to violate a divergence, and one is well advised to trade
in the direction of the break after the stop is hit.
If you have the discipline to use stops and reverse after a divergence is violated, you are not going to be afraid the next time you see a divergence. After
seeing a new bullish divergence D-E you’ll put on a trade again, using the
same principles and rules.
At the right edge of the chart a minor bullish divergence is taking shape.
Prices have briefly violated their March-April lows and rallied, completing a
false downside breakout and giving a bullish signal. The EMA has stopped
declining and gone flat. From here, heating oil should be traded from the
long side, with a stop below the recent low.

Force Index
Force Index is an oscillator developed by this author and first described
in Trading for a Living. The decision to reveal Force Index was one of the
hardest in writing that book. I felt reluctant to disclose my private weapon
but remembered how resentful I used to feel while reading books by
authors who wrote, in so many words, “Now, of course, you wouldn’t
expect me to tell you everything,” I decided I would write either everything or nothing, and describe Force Index.
The disclosure did me no harm. Force Index continues to work for me
as well as it did before. Very few software companies have included it in
their systems, and its behavior on my charts hasn’t changed. This reminds
me of a good friend with whom I served on a ship. He was the biggest
smuggler I ever met, but he never hid anything far away. Sometimes he’d
put the contraband right on his desk, under the noses of customs officers.
Leaving a secret in the open can be the best way of hiding it.

110

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Force Index helps identify turning points in any market by tying together
three essential pieces of information—the direction of price movement, its
extent, and volume. Price represents the consensus of value among market
participants. Volume reflects their level of commitment, financial as well as
emotional. Price reflects what people think, and volume what they feel.
Force Index links mass opinion with mass emotion by asking three questions: Is the price going up or down? How big is the change? How much
volume did it take to move the price?
It is very useful to measure the force of a move because strong moves
are more likely to continue than weak ones. Divergences between peaks
and bottoms of prices and Force Index help nail important turning points.
Spikes of Force Index identify zones of mass hysteria, where trends
become exhausted. Here is the Force Index formula:
Force Index = (Close today − Close yesterday) • Volumetoday
If the market closes higher today than yesterday, Force Index is positive,
and if it closes lower, Force Index is negative. The greater the spread
between today’s and yesterday’s closes, the greater the force. The higher
the volume, the more forceful the move.
Force Index is greater when the market moves far on high volume and
lesser when the market moves a short distance on thin volume. When the
market closes unchanged, Force Index equals zero.
Smooth Is Better We can plot Force Index as a histogram, with positive
readings above the zero line and negative readings below. The raw Force
Index looks very jagged, up one day, down the next. It works better if we
smooth it with an exponential moving average and plot it as a line.
If we smooth Force Index with a long-term EMA of 13 days or longer, it
will measure long-term shifts in the balance of power between bulls and
bears. To help pinpoint entries and exits, we should smooth Force Index
with a very short moving average, such as a two-day EMA.
When the trend of our stock or future is up and the two-day EMA of
Force Index declines below zero, it gives a buy signal. When the trend is
down and the two-day EMA of Force Index rallies above zero, it gives a
sell signal.
The key to using a short-term Force Index is to combine it with a trendfollowing indicator. For example, when the 22-day EMA of price is up and
the two-day EMA of Force Index becomes negative, it reveals a short-term
splash of bearishness within an uptrend, a buying opportunity. Once long,

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

111

S
B

S

Tail

H

D
A

C

Figure 5.11 Force Index—Two-Day EMA
Spikes of a short-term, two-bar Force Index mark areas where trends exhaust
themselves. The downward spike in area A showed that the move from 56 to
43 was at its end. Curiously enough, it was immediately followed by an
upward spike in area B. This pattern of two adjacent spikes, pointing in
opposite directions, shows a great deal of confusion in the markets and is
usually followed by a period of flat prices. GE remained flat for almost two
months following those two opposing spikes.
Technical patterns confirm one another when they give similar messages. The downward spike in area C showed that the downtrend was
becoming exhausted. That bullish signal was followed by a bullish divergence between prices and Force Index, which traced a series of higher bottoms while prices tried to grind lower. For fans of classical charting, there
was a “reverse head-and-shoulders” pattern. Finally, there was a kangaroo
tail at the very low. It looks as if GE keeps ringing a bell and telling us that
the decline is over, it is ready to go up! In area D, half-way through the rise
from 37 to 53, Force Index starts tracing a bearish divergence, warning
that bulls are losing power. When the EMA follows this up by turning
down in May, the bullish game is over. It is the last good chance to take
profits and position short.
At the right edge of the chart the EMA is down and prices have just fallen
to a new low, but Force Index is starting to trace a bullish divergence. It tells
you to tighten stops on short positions.

112

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

you have several exit strategies. If you’re very short-term oriented, sell the
day after Force Index turns positive, but if your time horizon is wider, hold
until prices hit their channel line or the EMA turns flat.
When the 22-day EMA of prices is down, and the two-day EMA of Force
Index rallies above zero, it reveals a short-term splash of bullishness within
a downtrend, a shorting opportunity. If you’re very short-term oriented,
grab a quick profit and cover the day after Force Index turns negative. If
your time horizon is wider, use the lower channel wall for the profit target.
When the two-day EMA of Force Index spikes up or down, exceeding its
normal peaks or lows by several times, it identifies an exhaustion move—
a signal to take profits on existing positions.
When the trend is up and the two-day EMA of Force Index traces a
sharp upward spike, eight or more times above its normal height for the
past two months, it marks a buying panic. The bulls are afraid of missing
the train and bears feel trapped and cover shorts at any cost. Such spikes
tend to occur during end-stages of bull moves. They tell you it is a good
time to take profits on long positions. Prices often rally to retest the spike
day’s high. By then the spirit is gone from the rally and other indicators
start developing bearish divergences, warning of a trend reversal.
When the two-day EMA of Force Index traces a sharp downward spike
during a downtrend, four or more times deeper than normal for the past
two months, it marks an hysterical stage of the downmove. It identifies a
selling panic among the bulls, who are dumping their holdings at any
price to get out. Such spikes tend to occur at the end-stages of bear moves.
They tell you that it’s a good time to take profits on short positions. Prices
sometimes retest the spike day’s low, but by then most indicators are
developing bullish divergences and an upside reversal is coming.
Spikes are somewhat similar to the kangaroo tails we discussed earlier
(see “The Reality of the Chart” on page 73). The difference between them
is that tails are purely price-based, while Force Index reflects volume as
well as prices. Tails and spikes identify panics among the weakest players.
Once they get flushed out, the trend is ready to reverse.
A Reversal Is Coming Trend reversals do not have to come as a surprise;
divergences between Force Index and price usually precede them. If the
market is trying to rally, but the peaks in Force Index are becoming lower,
it is a sign of weakness among the bulls. If a stock or a future is trying to
decline, but the bottoms in Force Index are becoming more shallow, it is
a sign of weakness among the bears.
