
But Susie was already passing beyond his reach; she was now in other hands. And the force of her
withdrawal from his world to the next was tearing him apart.

62
Claim Checks
Omaha and New York City • 2004–2008

The first aftershocks of Susie’s death occurred at the reading of her will, even though most of its provisions
were not unexpected. She left nearly all of her Berkshire stock, worth almost $3 billion, to the newly
renamed Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, now headed by her daughter. Another six hundred shares,
worth $50 million at the time, went to each of her children’s foundations.
She had been generous to people she cared about, although her husband’s influence doubtless dampened her
generosity. Her children each received $10 million. A long list of other people, headed by Kathleen Cole and
her husband, received smaller amounts. She had amended her will in the year before her death through a
codicil executed by a new lawyer; the codicil gave John McCabe $8 million. It also left $1 million to Ron
Parks, the friend who had spent so many years as the de facto chief financial officer of “STB Enterprises.”1
The secret codicil shocked nearly everyone. Susie had never reconciled the divisions within her world and in
the end chose to leave them unexplained. The life she lived for others was her legacy; her inner truth would
remain forever unspoken. Thus it would be left to others to form their own interpretations.
Warren had long loved his wife as an ideal. She had been the “grounding person who was his connection to
the outside world” as well as the “glue that held the family together.”2 After her death, he was never able to
look at Susie’s photograph without crying. But he did not lapse into a years-long depression, or commit
suicide, as Susie had suggested he might. Instead he mourned. For about two months, he seemed deeply
depressed. And then, as most people do, he gradually returned to living his life. The bathtub memory went to
work and his love for Susie overcame the rest.
“That was the most important relationship he had personally,” says Howie. “No question about it. And he
depended on it heavily. But my dad is a survivor. Anybody who thought he was going to fall apart because
my mom died, I think didn’t know him. Because he is not going to fall apart over anything. He’s got his own
toughness, even though people may not see him that way. He didn’t get to where he is because he’s some
kind of wimp.”3
That toughness helped him not just to survive but to adapt and even to grow. When the dreamlike assumption
that “Susie will take care of everything” popped like a soap bubble, Warren began to show a newfound
realism. As each month passed, he began to deal more acceptingly with endings and mortality and to connect
with his children in a new way. As his sister Bertie would say, Susie seemed to have willed him some of her
strength, a little of her emotional fluency, and a lot of her generosity. Warren seemed to be acquiring
unexpected dimensions to his inner life. He reclaimed some of the responsibility for the emotional territory
that he had always left to his wife. He became more aware of his children’s feelings, of what they were doing
and of what mattered to them.
Susie Jr. quickly stepped into the leadership role that her mother had played, especially when it came to
philanthropy, a job for which she had been preparing much of her life. She began to hire and to enlarge the
foundation’s offices to plan for the much larger sums of money it would now be giving away. Running two
foundations seemed to her a wonderful opportunity, not a burden.

Peter was taking Spirit—The Seventh Fire to the National Mall in Washington as part of the celebration for
the grand opening of the National Museum of the American Indian. One day he called his father to say, Dad,
we’re setting up the tent! Afterward he realized that, in the past, he would have called his mother, who would
have told his father. It felt good to have a direct connection.4 Warren gathered a group of friends and flew to
Washington to attend the cocktail party and opening night. By the time Spirit opened, Peter had released or
contributed to thirteen albums and soundtracks. But with the show, Warren felt a different connection with
his son—not just because of Peter’s success, but through the effort they were making to be part of each
other’s lives.
When Spirit arrived in Philadelphia, it got the kind of recognition that Buffett understood: It was compared
to “a Native American version of Philip Glass’s dance performance/opera 1,000 Airplanes on the Roof” with
“guitar rolls that would put U2’s The Edge to shame.”5 Its costly production, however, meant that even with
high ticket prices, Spirit was losing money as a touring show. Peter put it on hiatus and while working on a
new CD, Gold Star, the first in which he would perform as a singer, began to consider what to do about
Spirit’s longer-term future.
Howie had published On the Edge and Tapestry of Life, books of his photographs, and had given exhibitions
and lectures on his photography and work in the Third World. His foundation office still looked like a teenage
boy’s bedroom, with toy jeeps and backhoes and equipment reminiscent of his old teenage CB radio. But his
business experience had ripened; he now served on the board of Lindsay Manufacturing and ConAgra and
had faced the task of firing two CEOs. Savvy about money, he had kept his CCE stock and had invested in
Berkshire Hathaway stock. This latter gesture bonded him to his father as nothing else could. Warren
observed how much his son had settled down and matured in the past ten years. Howie, a “marshmallow”
emotionally who had always been so close to his mother and had yearned for a warm connection to his father
all his life, now saw an opportunity to have a different sort of relationship with him. He and Devon bought a
house in Omaha so they could be nearby.
The events following Susie’s death affected Astrid deeply. She had lost someone she considered a dear
friend, then found out that Susie’s life had run on parallel tracks—one of which had always been invisible to
her. Years of staying behind the scenes out of deference to Susie and to a marriage that, however
unconventional, had been held up to all as some kind of ideal suddenly was revealed as based on a falsehood.
She knew Susie’s mesmerizing power over Warren and had seen Warren’s bathtub memory at work many
times, but she was furious that Warren had allowed this to happen and felt betrayed and used. Belatedly, he
recognized how high a price Astrid had paid for the arrangement he and Susie had worked out, the realities of
which they had both avoided facing all these years. He took the blame and went to work setting things right.
Gradually, as he passed through the stages of mourning, he brought Astrid more and more into his public life.
In December, Warren sent all of his grandchildren large checks as a Christmas gift. He had always paid for
their college tuition, but he had never before given them money without any strings attached. He wrote each
of them a letter offering advice on how to spend it. Do a little something fun, he said, and also pay down your
mortgage. But I won’t judge you if you blow it. You’ll get another check next year.6
Buffett made two exceptions to the checks. He did not include Nicole and Erica Buffett, Peter’s adopted
daughters. Big Susie had loved Erica and Nicole. They had shown up at her funeral dressed in long flowing
outfits and wailed like a pair of brunette banshees. Susie had left each of her “adored grandchildren,”
including Nicole and Erica, $100,000 “as a hug” in her will. But ten days after Susie’s funeral, Warren had
told Peter, “By the way, I don’t consider the girls my grandchildren. I don’t want them to expect anything
from me in my will.” Peter found this inexplicable. “Are you sure you want to do this?” he asked. His father
was undeterred. That Susie had given the girls money and specified that they had the same status as her other
grandchildren in her will seemed to have roused Warren’s feelings of possessiveness about money. Peter let it
go, however. He figured that if his father cut the girls out of his will, they would never find out the reason.
And indeed, when Christmas came and they did not receive checks, they never found out.7
Warren spent New Year’s with Astrid at the home of Sharon Osberg and her husband, David Smith, in

California’s Marin County. He, Osberg, Gates, and the rest held one of their bridge orgies while Astrid
shopped at Trader Joe’s. At the beginning of November, Buffett had overcome some earlier reservations that
Gates’s powerful personality might dominate the Berkshire board, and had invited him to join it. Sharon and
Bill had been talking for some time about the challenges that the Buffett Foundation faced. To give away
several billion dollars a year after Warren was gone, it would have to change dramatically. No foundation in
history had ever succeeded in such a transformation, because no foundation had ever tried. With one
exception—the Gates Foundation—no other philanthropic organization had ever worked with such large
sums.
Warren had also been thinking about the problem. In the fall, he had videotaped a question-and-answer
session with his foundation trustees, making sure they understood his wishes and that these were
memorialized. Like Walter Annenberg, he wanted to reduce the chance of being double-crossed after he was
dead. After all, Boys Town had eventually double-crossed Father Flanagan. If even Father Flanagan wasn’t
sacred, then how to handicap the odds on Warren Buffett?
Early in 2005, Osberg “trumped up some pretense” and made a trip to Omaha to speak to Buffett. Given his
admiration for Gates, she said, shouldn’t he consider leaving his money to the Gates Foundation after he
died? Though Buffett reacted noncommittally,8 he had in fact been considering leaving at least some of the
money to the Gateses since well before Susie died.
Charlie Munger had already been encouraging the idea. “It wouldn’t surprise me if they had Gates running it
eventually,” he said shortly after Susie died. “It wouldn’t surprise me at all. Warren doesn’t like conventional
pomposity. Gates is unconventional in the way he thinks, and he’s fifty instead of seventy-four.”9
For a long time Buffett had felt that society was best served if he carried on compounding the money, rather
than giving it away, so that there would be more to give away. But delaying the gift until his death also
amounted to the White Queen’s “jam tomorrow”—a postponement in his struggle with endings, with loss,
with death, with letting go. Over the years he had gradually evolved from a boy who stole his sister’s bicycle
and got other people to buy his barbells, from a father who said no to every request for money from his
children, to a man who gave them a million dollars every five years on their birthday, a man who bought a
pink heart-shaped diamond ring for his daughter. But he still had some issues with money, which, for
example, seemed to have been triggered by Susie’s will. Nonetheless, in a profound shift, he was working his
way through the problem of whether to serve some of tomorrow’s jam today.
That did not mean, however, that the encroachments of time would become easier for him. A year after Susie
died, Buffett found himself shocked once again by the impending arrival of another birthday. Could he
actually be three-quarters of a century old? He spoke of it with disbelief. Then he seized on examples of
health and vitality lasting well into old age: his mother, who had lived to ninety-two; his aunt Katie, who had
lived to age ninety-seven; Walter Schloss, who was still playing tennis at almost ninety. And of course, there
was his icon, Rose Blumkin.
His seventy-fifth birthday party took place at Sharon and David’s, with Astrid, Bill Gates, and his sister
Bertie in attendance. His birthday cake was a white-chocolate replica of a $100 bill. On Saturday morning,
Smith had arranged for Buffett to take on Ariel Hsing, a nine-year-old Chinese-American Ping-Pong
champion. With the video camera rolling, the little girl crushed him. After a fierce bridge tournament the
following morning, an artist whom Osberg and Smith had hired came over to amuse Buffett and Gates by
trying to teach them the art of landscape painting. Buffett gamely swiped away with a brush at acrylics, but
painting, unlike Ping-Pong, was not rhythmic and repetitious, and the results were hilarious. He produced a
canvas adorned with trees that resembled brown lollipops. Meanwhile, the previous day’s Ping-Pong game
was fermenting an idea. Why not add the video of him getting trounced by Ariel Hsing to the ever-expanding
movie at the shareholders’ meeting?
Before 2003, Buffett’s need for attention had been satisfied by a few interviews a year and the shareholder
meeting. He had always been careful and strategic in his cooperation with the media (if not always
forthcoming about just how cooperative he had been). But starting around the time of Susie’s illness, for
whatever reason, he had begun to need the mirror of media attention, television cameras especially, almost

like a drug. The intervals he could tolerate without publicity were growing shorter. He cooperated with
documentaries, spent hours talking to Charlie Rose, and became such a regular on CNBC that it started to
prompt puzzled queries from his friends.
The Buffett who so craved attention contrasted markedly with the Buffett who focused with unaltered
intensity on Berkshire Hathaway. To see him flip from one mode into the other in half a second was
head-spinning. In addition to adding Bill Gates to the board, he now set up a “whistleblower line” so that
employees could report wrongdoing. And—in a major step toward the day when Berkshire’s board would
have to make decisions without him—he initiated separate meetings of the board without his presence. Yet
he remained as focused on investing as he had been as a younger man.
Since the Federal Reserve’s dramatic interest rate cuts in the wake of 9/11, the market had steadily recouped
its losses until it was nearing bubble-era levels. Buffett wrote in his 2004 letters to shareholders: “My hope
was to make several multibillion dollar acquisitions that would add new and significant streams of earnings
to the many we already have. But I struck out. Additionally, I found very few attractive securities to buy.
Berkshire therefore ended the year with $43 billion of cash equivalents, not a happy position.” The
following year, Berkshire used part of this money to make four small acquisitions—Medical Protective
Company and Applied Underwriters, two insurance businesses; Forest River, a recreational-vehicle
manufacturer; and Business Wire, which distributed public-relations material for corporations—and one
larger acquisition, PacifiCorp, a major electric utility, for MidAmerican Energy. While MidAmerican had not
yet spawned a series of huge acquisitions as Buffett had hoped, the wisdom of buying it had grown clearer.
Oil prices had continued to rise. MidAmerican had a significant toehold in alternative energy. Its relationships
with consumers and regulators were excellent. Its CEO, David Sokol, was often mentioned as a potential
successor to Buffett, although Buffett himself was keeping his cards very close to the vest.
Buffett also used this report to reiterate that he was still down on the dollar, and thought it would decline.
The dollar had strengthened since his first article, and now his view was being widely criticized in the
financial press. He had reduced his currency bets in favor of buying foreign stocks, but nothing changed his
view. And once again, he decried excessive executive compensation. On derivatives, a topic he now covered
every year, Buffett wrote:
“Long ago Mark Twain said: ‘A man who tries to carry a cat home by its tail will learn a lesson that can be
learned in no other way.’…I dwell on our experiences in derivatives each year for two reasons. One is
personal and unpleasant. Both Charlie and I knew at the time of the Gen Re purchase that it was a problem
and told its management that we wanted to exit the business. It was my responsibility to make sure that
happened. Rather than address the situation head-on, however, I wasted several years while we attempted
to sell the operation. That was a doomed endeavor, because no realistic solution could have extracted us
from the maze of liabilities that was going to exist for decades. Our obligations were particularly
worrisome because their potential to explode could not be measured. Moreover, if severe trouble occurred,
we knew it was likely to correlate with problems elsewhere in financial markets.
“So I failed in my attempt to exit painlessly, and in the meantime more trades were put on the books.”
Buffett was referring to a period during which he had hired a new manager, and briefly allowed him to
expand the business. Some of these trades later proved costly to unwind. “Fault me for dithering. (Charlie
calls it thumb-sucking.) When a problem exists, whether in personnel or in business operations, the time to
act is now.
“The second reason I regularly describe our problems in this area lies in the hope that our experiences
may prove instructive for managers, auditors, and regulators. In a sense, we are a canary in this business
coal mine and should sing a song of warning as we expire…General Re was a relatively minor operator in
the derivatives field. It has had the good sense to unwind its supposedly liquid positions in a benign market,
all the while free of financial or other pressures that might have forced it to conduct the liquidation in a
less than efficient manner. Our accounting in the past was conventional and thought to be conservative.
Additionally, we know of no bad behavior by anyone involved.
“It could be a different story for others in the future. Imagine, if you will, one or more firms (troubles often

spread) with positions that are many multiples of ours attempting to liquidate in chaotic markets and under
extreme, and well-publicized pressures. The time to have considered—and improved—the reliability of New
Orleans’s levees was before [Hurricane] Katrina.”10
The general belief, however, continued to be that derivatives spread and reduced risk. In a market shoved
upward by cheap debt and derivatives nearly day by day, low interest rates and the “securitization” of
mortgages into derivatives were pumping a housing boom that would peak in 2006. By one estimate, total
global leverage (debt) had quadrupled in less than a decade.11 Buffett fretted occasionally that he might
never again see the kind of home-run climate for investing that had blessed him in the 1970s. But he never
stopped searching, he never stopped delving for ideas.
***
One day in 2004 he obtained from his broker a thick book, the size of several telephone directories stapled
together. Its pages contained listings of Korean stocks. He had been scouring the global economy, looking for
a country, a market, that was overlooked and undervalued. He had found it in Korea. Night after night, he
leafed through the tome, studying column after column of numbers, page by page by page. But the numbers
and their nomenclature puzzled him. He realized that he needed to learn a whole new language of business
that described a different culture of commerce. So he got another book and figured out everything important
there was to know about Korean accounting. That would reduce the odds of getting hornswoggled by the
numbers.
Once he’d mastered the listings, he began sifting and sorting. It felt something like the old days back at
Graham-Newman, when he sat next to the ticker machine clad in his cherished gray cotton jacket. Staring at
hundreds of pages of numbers, he could pick out which were important and how they fell into a coherent
pattern. Working from a list of several thousand Korean stocks, he quickly pared it down to a workable
number; after making some notes on a yellow legal pad he kept going, just as he had when he’d paged
through the Moody’s Manual, looking for the gems amid the dreck—until finally he arrived at a much shorter
list.
This winnowed-down list was so short that it could be contained on a single piece of legal-size paper. Sitting
down with a visitor, he held out the list, which consisted of at most a couple of dozen companies. A few were
large—among the largest in the world—but most were very small.
“Lookit,” he said, “this is how I do it. They are quoted in won. If you go to the Internet and look them up on
the Korean stock exchange, they have numbers instead of ticker symbols, and they all end in zero unless it’s
a preferred stock, in which case you click in five. If they have a second class of preferred, you don’t click
in six, you click in seven. Every night you can go on the Internet at a certain time and look up some issues
and it’ll show you the five brokerage firms that would have been the largest buyers and the five that would
have been the largest sellers that day. You have to set up a special account with a bank in Korea. That’s not
easy to do. I’m learning it as I go along.
“It’s like finding a new girl to me.
“These are good companies, and yet they’re cheap. The stocks have gotten cheaper than five years ago, and
yet the businesses are more valuable. Half of the companies have names that sound like a porno movie.
They make basic products, like steel and cement and flour and electricity, which people will still be buying
in ten years. They have a big market share in Korea, which isn’t going to change, and some of these
companies are exporting to China and Japan too. Yet for some reason, they haven’t been noticed. Look, this
flour company has more than its market value in cash, and it sells at three times earnings. I couldn’t buy
very much, but I got a few shares. Here’s another one, a dairy. I could end up with nothing but a bunch of
Korean securities in my personal portfolio.
“Now, I’m no expert on foreign currencies. But I’m comfortable owning these securities denominated in the

won right now.
“The main risk, and part of why the stocks are cheap, is North Korea. And North Korea is a real threat. If
North Korea invaded South Korea, the whole world could go to hell. China, Japan, all of Asia would be
drawn into a war. The consequences are almost unimaginable. North Korea is very close to having nuclear
weapons. I regard it as one of the world’s most dangerous countries. But I would make the bet that the rest
of the world, including China and Japan, are simply not going to let the situation get to the point that North
Korea makes a nuclear attack on South Korea anytime soon.
“When you invest, you have to take some risk. The future is always uncertain. I think a group of these
stocks will do very well for several years. Some of them may not do well, but as a group, they should do
very well. I could end up owning them for several years.”
He had found a new game, a new puzzle to figure out. He wanted more of them and kept looking for
opportunities with the same eagerness he’d once shown stooping for winning tickets at the racetrack.
***
In December 2005, in a talk at the Harvard Business School, he was asked about his hopes for the Buffett
Foundation’s impact on society, since it would someday become the best-funded philanthropy in the world.
Buffett responded that his guess was that he was not doing society as great a favor by compounding any
more. So he was thinking more these days about giving the money away.
Nobody said anything. Nobody seemed to realize that Buffett had just signaled a total shift in direction.
Later, in the same speech, he talked about the Gates Foundation. He admired Bill and Melinda Gates more
than any other philanthropists, he said. Theirs was the most rational and best executed of any foundation
policy he had ever seen. And he liked that they didn’t want publicity for their philanthropy, did not want their
name on any buildings.
By early 2006, his thoughts had begun to crystallize. While he was pleased with the job his kids were doing
with their own foundations, the sense of safety and security that Big Susie had given him was not duplicable.
This emotional force operated beyond a conscious level. His decision to leave her in charge of the money had
never been based on a rational or calculated assessment of her qualifications as a philanthropist. With the
accretion of a decades-long relationship, he had simply built up layers of personal trust and comfort in his
wife’s judgment and wisdom. Now that she was gone, everything was different. He mentioned his change of
heart to Tom Murphy at Murphy’s daughter’s wedding. Out of the blue, he told Sharon Osberg. He was going
to give the money away early. But he had only an idea, not a plan.
The plan, which was complicated, took months to work out in detail. The following spring, he started telling
the people who were directly affected. “Brace yourself,” he said when he sat down with Carol Loomis, one
of the Buffett Foundation trustees. “The news was indeed stunning,” she wrote.12
“I got lots of questions,” he said about the conversations in which he made this startling announcement, “and
some people had qualms about the plan initially because it was such an abrupt change from what they had
been anticipating.”13 His sisters, on the other hand, were instantly enthusiastic when they found out. “This is
the best idea you’ve had,” wrote Bertie afterward, “since you pretended to have asthma to get sent home
from Fredericksburg.”14 Doris—who knew from her Sunshine Lady Foundation how much work it was to
give away even a few million dollars intelligently—thought it was a brilliant decision.15
On June 26, 2006, Buffett announced that he would give away eighty-five percent of his Berkshire Hathaway
stock—worth $37 billion at the time—to a group of foundations over a number of years. No gift of this size
had ever been made in the history of philanthropy. Five out of every six shares would go to the Bill and
