
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

294

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

assume that the probability of success is at least 60 percent. Because of that, they
should not take any profits until the trade has gone at least two points. The mathematics of trading are discussed in the second book. A trader should exit a trade only
when the chance of success (here, 60 percent or higher) times the potential reward
is significantly greater than the chance of failure (here, 40 percent or less) times
the risk. Since the protective stop is two points below the entry price, the risk is
two points. This means that the trader’s equation begins to become favorable only
when the reward is two points or more. Therefore, if traders take a smaller profit,
they will lose money over time, unless they believe that their probability of success
is about 80 percent, which is rarely the case. When it is, an experienced trader can
scalp part out at a one-point profit and still make money while using a two-point
stop. Most traders should never risk more than their reward.
So, how should traders swing their trades in that bull trend? This is addressed
more in the second book. Swing trading is much more difficult than it appears when
a trader looks at a chart at the end of the day. Swing setups tend to be either unclear
or clear but scary. After a trader sees a reasonable setup, he has to take the trade.
These setups almost always appear less certain than scalp setups, and the lower
probability tends to make traders wait. A trend begins with a breakout either from
a trading range or after a reversal of the current trend. When there is a potential
reversal and it has a strong signal bar, it usually comes when the old trend is moving
fast in a strong, final, climactic spike. Beginning traders invariably believe that the
old trend is still in effect, and they probably lost on several earlier countertrend
trades today and don’t want to lose any more money. Their denial causes them to
miss the early entry on the trend reversal. Entering as the breakout bar is forming,
or after it closes, is difficult to do because the breakout spike is often large, and
traders have to quickly decide to risk much more than they usually do. As a result,
they often end up choosing to wait for a pullback. Even if they reduce their position
size so that the dollar risk is the same as with any other trade, the thought of risking
two or three times as many ticks frightens them. Entering on a pullback is difficult
because every pullback begins with a minor reversal, and they are concerned that
the pullback might be the start of a deep correction, their stop will be hit, and they
will lose money. They end up waiting until the day is almost over. When they finally
decide that the trend is clear, there is no longer any time left to place a trade. Trends
do everything that they can to keep traders out, which is the only way they can keep
traders chasing the market all day. When a setup is easy and clear, meaning it has
a high probability of success, the move is usually a small, fast scalp. If the move is
going to go a long way, it has to be unclear and difficult to take, to keep traders on
the sidelines and force them to chase the trend.
Since a bull trend has trending highs and lows, then every time the market
reaches a new high, traders should raise their protective stop to one tick below
the most recent low. This is called trailing their stop. Also, if their profit is large

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

295

enough, they should consider taking partial profits as the market goes above the
most recent high. Lots of traders do this and that is why trends often pull back
after reaching a new high. The pullback very often goes below the original entry price, and inexperienced swing traders will have tightened their stops to the
breakeven price and will get stopped out of a great trend trade. Once the market
tests the original entry price and then goes to a new high, most traders would then
raise their stops to at least their entry price because they would not want the market to come back to test it a second time after reaching a new high following the
first test. Others would put it below the low of the pullback that just tested their
original entry.
Some traders will allow pullbacks below the signal bar as long as they believe
that their premise of a bull trend is still valid. For example, assume that the average range in the Emini has been about 10 to 15 points lately, and they bought
a high 2 pullback in a bull trend on the 5 minute chart. If the signal bar was two
points tall, they might be willing to hold on to their position even if the market
falls below the low of the signal bar, thinking that the pullback might evolve into
a high 3, which is a wedge bull flag buy setup. Other traders would exit if the
market falls below the signal bar and then buy again if a strong high 3 buy signal sets up. Some might even buy a position that is twice as large as their first,
because they see the strong second signal as more reliable. Many of these traders
would have bought just a half-size position on the high 2 buy signal if they thought
that the signal did not look quite right. They were allowing for the possibility of
the high 2 failing and then evolving into a wedge bull flag, which might even look
stronger. If it turned out to be, they would then feel comfortable trading their usual
full size.
Other traders trade half size when they see questionable signals, exit if their
protective stop is hit, and then take the second signal with a full size if the signal
is strong. Traders who scale in as a trade goes against them obviously do not use
the signal bar extreme for their initial protective stop, and many look to scale in
exactly where other traders are taking losses on their protective stops. Some simply use a wide stop. For example, when the average daily range in the Emini is less
than about 15 points, a pullback in a trend is rarely more than seven points. Some
traders will consider that the trend is still in effect unless the market falls more
than between 50 to 75 percent of the average daily range. As long as a pullback is
within their tolerance, they will hold their position and assume that their premise
is correct. If they bought a pullback in a bull trend and their entry was three points
below the high of the day, then they might risk five points. Since they believe that
the trend is still in effect, they believe that they have a 60 percent or better chance
of an equidistant move. This means that they are at least 60 percent certain that
the market will go up at least five points before falling five points to their protective stop, which creates a profitable trader’s equation. If their initial buy signal in

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

296

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

the bull pullback came at five points below the high, then they might risk just three
points, and they would look to exit their long on a test of the high. Since the pullback was relatively large, the trend might be a little weak, and this might make them
take profits below the trend high. They would try to get at least as much as they had
to risk, but they might be willing to get out just below the old high if they were concerned that the market might be transitioning into a trading range, or possibly even
reversing into a bear trend.
At some point, selling pressure will be strong enough to convert the trend into
a trading range, which means that a pullback might fall below the most recent low.
Experienced traders have a good sense of when the market is transitioning from a
trend into a trading range, and many will exit the remainder of their positions when
they believe that it is about to happen. They might then trade the trading range
using a trading range approach, which means looking for smaller profits. This is
discussed in the second book. They might instead hold on to part of their long
positions until either the close or when the market flips into always-in short. If it
does, they would then either exit their longs or reverse to short. Very few traders
can reverse consistently, and most prefer to exit their longs and then reassess the
market, and maybe take a break before looking to go short.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Figure 18.1

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

297

FIGURE 18.1 Strong Trend Day in GS

There are countless ways to trade any day, but when there is a trend like the bull
trend in GS shown in Figure 18.1, traders should try to swing at least part of their
trade. I had extensive discussions years back with a trader who excelled on days
like this. He bought early and then determined his initial risk (how far his protective
stop was from his entry price). He then took half of his position off once the market
reached twice his initial risk and held the other half until there was a clear reversal.
If there never was a strong reversal, he exited in the minutes before the close. After
every new high, he tightened his stop to below the most recent higher low, since as
long as the trend kept making higher highs and lows, it was still strong. If it stopped
making higher lows, it was beginning to weaken.
There is one sure way to consistently lose money on a day like this, and all
traders know it. Successful traders avoid it, but beginners are irresistibly drawn to
it. They see the market as constantly overdone. The most recent bar is always at the
top of the computer screen and there surely can’t be enough room up there to go
higher, and there clearly is a lot of room below. Also, they know trends have pullbacks, so why not short every reversal for a scalp, and then go long on the pullback?
Even if the trade is a loser, the loss is not big. They don’t buy the pullback when it
finally comes, because the market might be reversing into a bear trend, and the buy
setup does not look strong enough. Also, since they were short and the market did
not quite reach their scalper’s profit target, they were rooting for the market to go

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

298

JWBT576-Brooks

TRENDS

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 18.1

down just a little bit more, and therefore were not expecting, and actually not wanting, the pullback to end just yet. They saw bars 7, 10, 18, 20, 21, and 24 as reversals
that were likely to fall far enough to offer at least a scalper’s profit and as potential
highs of the day. However, experienced traders know that 80 percent of reversal
attempts fail and become bull flags, and they held long, took some profits on their
earlier longs, or bought more as the pullback progressed. The beginners don’t accept this premise and they take small losses all day, and by the end of the day are
shocked that they have lost so much. They have been successful all their lives in
other careers and are very smart. They see trading gurus on television who look
more like clowns and used car salesmen than like formidable adversaries, so they
are confident that they can trade at least as well as those so-called experts. They
are right in their assessment of the abilities of those pundits, but wrong in their
assumption that those people are successful traders. They are entertainers, and the
networks hire them to create an audience that will result in advertising dollars. The
networks are companies, and like all companies, their goal is to make money, not
to help the viewer in any way. Beginners do not stop losing until they are able to
stop themselves from looking for shorts in bull trends (or bottoms in bear trends).
They can start winning only when they accept that each top is the start of a bull flag.
Some of the material that follows will be covered later in books 2 and 3, and is
included here because it is important in trend trading.
Great swings usually begin with weak setups, like the two-bar reversal that began at bar 3. Both bars were small dojis, and they followed a large two-bar reversal
top. The setup that leads to the breakout is usually weak enough to trap traders
out. Traders wait for a higher-probability setup after the breakout occurs, and miss
the initial breakout. Entering either on the low-probability setup or on the higherprobability ones after the breakout are both mathematically sound approaches.
Most traders would have decided that the always-in direction was up by either
bar 2 or bar 4. That means that they believed that the market was in a bull trend and
they therefore would look for sensible reasons to buy, and there were many. They
could have bought as bar 4 broke above bar 2, on the close of bar 4, or at one tick
above its high. They could have placed a limit order to buy at or below the low of the
next bar and the lows of the next several bars. They would have been filled below
bar 5. Some would have placed orders to buy a small pullback to the midpoint of the
prior bar, maybe 20 cents down. They also would have looked to buy a bear close
because they believed that attempts to reverse should fail. The move from bar 4 to
bar 5 was a tight channel, so an attempt to break to the downside was likely to fail.
They could have bought below bar 5, on the close of the small bear trend bar that
followed, or above it as a failed breakout below a bull micro channel. Bar 7 was
a breakout pullback short but traders expected it to just lead to a pullback. The
market broke below the bull micro channel on the move below bar 5, and the rally
to bar 7 was a breakout pullback higher high. Traders expected the reversal to fail

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 18.1

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

299

and some had limit orders maybe 50 cents down and in the area of the bar 6 low,
expecting a double bottom bull flag. Some traders had their protective stops below
bar 6 since it was a strong bull trend bar, and a strong bull trend usually would
not fall below such a bar. Therefore, buying just above its low was a low-risk, highreward trade with at least a 50 percent chance of success. They also could have
bought above the bull reversal bar that followed bar 8 since it was a double bottom
bull flag setup and a high 2 long (bar 6 was the high 1).
Bar 9 was another break below a bull micro channel, and traders expected it
to fail. Some would have had limit orders to buy at the low of the prior bar as the
micro channel was growing, and they would have been filled on bar 9. Other traders
bought above the bar 9 high as a failed breakout below the bull micro channel.
Bar 11 was another high 2 buy setup, but the market had been mostly sideways
for over 10 bars, and the bars were getting small. Although this was also a double
bottom buy signal, the tight trading range could have continued, so many traders
would have waited to see if there was a third push down and then looked to buy
above the wedge bull flag, which some traders would have seen as a triangle, since
it would have been sideways instead of down. These traders got long on bar 12 and
above bar 12. After the breakout from this bull flag, the market went sideways for
several bars and created a breakout pullback buy entry above bar 13 and again on
the bar 14 outside up strong bull trend bar. This was a high 2 entry bar since bar 13
was a high 1 entry and the pullback below the next bar was a second leg down in
this four-bar-long tight trading range.
Some traders bought as the market broke above bar 10, which they saw as a
breakout of a trading range in a bull trend. Traders also bought the close of bar 14
and above its high. The next bar had good follow-through, which was a sign of
strength, and traders therefore bought its close and above its high. There was a
two-bar pause, creating a small breakout pullback bull flag, and traders bought the
breakout above the bar after bar 15.
Bar 16 was a doji top but there was no prior bear strength and no significant
selling pressure, and the bar was small and weak compared to the bar 14 bull spike.
Traders expected the reversal attempt to fail and therefore placed limit orders to
buy at and below its low. Bar 17 was a failed top buy signal, and bar 19 was a small
second push down and therefore a high 2 buy setup. Traders bought as the market
went above its high and above the high of the bull bar that followed it, which was a
two-bar reversal buy setup.
The move up to bar 20 was another strong bull spike. Traders would have
bought at and below the low of the prior bar, on the close of the bull trend bars, and
on the close of the first bear trend bar, like the bar after bar 20. Since bar 20 was an
especially large bull trend bar in a mature trend, it was enough of a buy climax to
warrant a larger correction, one that might go sideways or down to the moving average. There was less urgency for the bulls, who were expecting a high 2 or a triangle.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

300

JWBT576-Brooks

TRENDS

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 18.1

Bar 21 was a one-bar final flag reversal attempt but the up momentum was
strong. Traders expected another bull flag and not a reversal. Some bought below
its low while others waited to see if there would be a high 2, a wedge bull flag,
or a triangle. Bar 22 was another double bottom and therefore a high 2 buy setup.
Traders placed stop orders to go long above its high and above the high of the inside
bar that followed it. Some saw bar 23 as a high 2 buy setup with the bar after bar
20 as the signal for the high 1. Others saw it as a wedge bull flag with the first push
down as the bear bar after bar 20. It was also a breakout pullback buy setup for the
breakout above the bull flag that occurred on the prior bar.
Bar 24 was a very important bar. It was the third push up and third consecutive
buy climax after the spike up from bar 14 (the top of the spike was the first push).
The channel in a spike and channel bull often ends on a third push up and is then
followed by a correction. Also, bar 24 was a particularly strong bull trend bar in a
protracted bull trend. This is just the bar that strong bulls and bears were waiting
for. Both saw it as a possible temporary end of the trend, and they expected it to
be a brief opportunity to sell before a larger pullback developed. Both expected
a correction to have at least two legs and 10 bars and to penetrate the moving
average. The bulls were selling to take profits and the bears were selling to initiate
shorts. Both sold at the close of bar 24, above its high, at the close of the next bar,
and below its low.
The bulls thought that the market might be transitioning into a trading range,
and that there was a reasonable chance that they could buy again lower. Bar 28 was
a two-legged correction to the moving average and therefore a high 2 buy setup. It
was also the first touch of the moving average all day, and therefore a 20 gap bar
buy setup, and was likely to be followed by a test of the bull high. The bears took
profits on their shorts here and the bulls bought for another leg up.
The biggest prior pullback of the day since the rally began at bar 3 was 75 cents
on the pullback to bar 8. Some traders expected the largest pullback of the day to
come after 11:00 a.m. or so and therefore had limit orders to go long at 75 cents
below the most recent swing high. They might have scaled in at 75 cents below that
and maybe risked up to a little more than twice the size of that first pullback, or
about $1.60. Throughout the day, traders would have expected pullbacks to remain
less than the first and they would have had limit orders to buy any pullback that
was about half as big, or maybe 40 to 50 cents. The pullback to bar 11 was 40 cents,
which meant that traders tried to buy a 50 cent pullback and when they did not
get filled on the second attempt on the bar before bar 12, they decided to chase
the market up and bought above the high of bar 12. Some traders saw the bars 9
and 11 double bottom and would have placed limit orders to buy just above its low,
maybe 30 cents down from the high. Traders would then have to determine where a
worst-case protective stop would be. They should pick a level where they would no
longer want to be long. An obvious location would have been below the bar 8 low,

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 18.1

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

301

since a bull trend has a series of higher highs and lows, and after each new high,
the bulls expect the next pullback to stay above the most recent higher low. Since
they were planning to get long at $161.05, 30 cents down from the high, and they
would need to risk to around $160.35 or 70 cents lower, they had to determine the
position size. If they normally risk $500 or less on a trade, they could have bought
600 shares of GS. Since they were risking 70 cents and they always should have a
reward that is at least as large as their risk, their profit target should have been at
least 70 cents above their entry. This was clearly a strong trend day at this point
and the probability of success was therefore at least 60 percent, and maybe higher.
On a strong trend day like this, it was far better to use a generous profit target.
Traders should not have tried to take any profit until the market went to at least
twice their risk, or $1.40 above their entry price. They would have placed a limit
order to sell half of their position at $162.45. After the bar 12 strong bull trend bar
broke above the triangle (some thought of it as a wedge bull flag), they could have
tightened their protective stop to just below its low at $161.05, reducing their risk
to less than 20 cents. After the bar 14 strong bull trend bar breakout, they could
have tightened their stop to just below its low, reducing their risk to a penny. Their
limit order to take profits on 300 shares would have been filled on bar 20, giving
them $420. At that point, they could have tightened their protective stop to below
the bar 19 start of that most recent bull spike. If the stop was hit, they would have
made about 80 cents on their remaining 300 shares. At this point, they would have
held their position until there was a clear reversal down or until the close. When
you have a large profit, it is usually wise to exit in the final hour or so on any setup
that could lead to a larger pullback and then maybe look to get long again once
that two-legged pullback is complete. The bear reversal bar at bar 24 was a third
push up and was followed a buy climax bar, so the market could finally have been
getting ready to pull back to the moving average. If traders exited below its low,
they would have made $2.00, or $600, on their remaining 300 shares. If they held
until the close, they would have made $375 on those shares. The market never even
clearly became always-in short.
Many traders would have bought on a limit order at one tick above the moving
average as bar 27 tested the moving average, since it was a 20 gap bar buy setup,
and held for a test of the high. Some traders would have bought on the close of
bar 27 because it was the first bear trend bar with a close below the moving average.
Although it was the second bar of a two-bar bear spike and a breakout below bar 25,
the bears needed follow-through before believing that the market had flipped to
always-in short, and instead got a bull inside bar for the next bar. This was the
bottom of a developing trading range and the test of the beginning of the channel
up from the bar 22 pullback from the four-bar bull spike up to bar 20. The bull bar
that followed bar 27 also closed above the moving average. Some bulls would have
bought on the close of that bull bar, while others would have bought at one tick
