
35/396

speculation, and even more from the 85 percent collapse in the Icelandic stock market.
The exact dollar amount of Iceland’s financial hole was essentially unknowable, as it
depended upon the value of the generally
stable Icelandic krona, which had also
crashed and was removed from the market
by the government. But it was a lot.
Iceland instantly became the only nation
on earth that Americans could point to and
say, “Well, at least we didn’t do that.” In the
end, Icelanders amassed debts amounting to
850 percent of their GDP. (The debtdrowned United States has reached just 350
percent.) As absurdly big and important as
Wall Street became in the U.S. economy, it
never grew so large that the rest of the population could not, in a pinch, bail it out. Each
one of the three Icelandic banks suffered
losses too large for the nation to bear; taken
together they were so ridiculously out of proportion that, within weeks of the collapse, a

36/396

third of the population told pollsters that
they were considering emigration.
In just three or four years an entirely new
way of economic life had been grafted onto
the side of this stable, collectivist society,
and the graft had overwhelmed the host. “It
was just a group of young kids,” said the man
from the IMF. “In this egalitarian society,
they came in, dressed in black, and started
doing business.”
FIVE HUNDRED MILES northwest of Scotland the

Icelandair flight lands and taxis to a terminal
still painted with Landsbanki logos—Landsbanki being one of Iceland’s three bankrupt
banks, along with Kaupthing and Glitnir. I
try to think up a metaphor for the world’s expanding reservoir of defunct financial corporate sponsorships—water left in the
garden hose after you’ve switched off the
pressure?—but before I can finish, the man
in the seat behind me reaches for his bag in
the overhead bin and knocks the crap out of

37/396

me. I will soon learn that Icelandic males,
like moose, rams, and other horned mammals, see these collisions as necessary in
their struggle for survival. I will also learn
that this particular Icelandic male is a senior
official at the Iceland Stock Exchange. At this
moment, however, all I know is that a
middle-aged man in an expensive suit has
gone out of his way to bash bodies without
apology or explanation. I stew on this apparently wanton act of hostility all the way to
passport control.
You can tell a lot about a country by observing how much better they treat themselves than foreigners at the point of entry.
Let it be known that Icelanders make no distinction at all. Over the control booth they’ve
hung a charming sign that reads simply, ALL
CITIZENS, and what they mean by that is not
“All Icelandic Citizens” but “All Citizens of
Anywhere.” Everyone is from somewhere,
and so we all wind up in the same line,

38/396

leading to the guy behind the glass. Before
you can say, “Land of contradictions,” he has
pretended to examine your passport and
waved you on through.
Next, through a dark landscape of snowspackled black volcanic rock that may or may
not be lunar, but that looks so much as you
would expect the moon to look that NASA
scientists used it to acclimate the astronauts
before the first moon mission. An hour later
we arrive at the 101 Hotel, owned by the wife
of one of Iceland’s most famous failed
bankers. It’s cryptically named (101 is the
city’s richest postal code) but instantly recognizable: hip Manhattan hotel. Staff dressed
in black, incomprehensible art on the walls,
unread books about fashion on unused coffee
tables—everything to heighten the social
anxiety of a rube from the sticks but the
latest edition of the New York Observer. It’s
the sort of place bankers stay because they
think it’s where the artists stay. Bear Stearns

39/396

convened a meeting of British and American
hedge fund managers here, in January 2008,
to figure out how much money there was to
be made betting on Iceland’s collapse. (A
lot.) The hotel, once jammed, is now empty,
with only six of its thirty-eight rooms occupied. The restaurant is empty, too, and so are
the small tables and little nooks that once led
the people who weren’t in them to marvel at
those who were. A bankrupt Holiday Inn is
just depressing; a bankrupt Ian Schrager
hotel is tragic.
With the financiers who once paid a lot to
stay here gone for good, I’m given a big room
on the top floor with a view of the old city for
half-price. I curl up in silky white sheets and
reach for a book about the Icelandic economy—written in 1995, before the banking
craze, when the country had little to sell to
the outside world but fresh fish—and read
this remarkable sentence: “Icelanders are
rather suspicious of the market system as a

40/396

cornerstone of economic organization, especially its distributive implications.”
That’s when the strange noises commence.
First, the banging of a bed frame against
the wall, followed by various moans and
high-pitched yells. The couple in the next
room has returned for the evening. Their
noises grow louder but what’s strange is that
no matter how loud they grow, or how clearly
I can hear them, the words that accompany
them remain totally incomprehensible. Finding it hard to concentrate on The Icelandic
Fisheries, I instead try to mimic the sounds
coming though my wall—but when I do my
tongue is doing things in my mouth that it’s
never done before. The sounds from the other side of the wall are roughly those made by
the Stoor hobbit in Lord of the Rings. Gollum . . . Gollum! . . . Mordor . . . Mordor!
Then I realize: it’s just Icelandic.
Next comes a screeching from the far side
of the room. I leave the bed to examine the

41/396

situation. It’s the heat, sounding like a teakettle left on the stove for too long, straining
to control itself. Iceland’s heat isn’t heat as
we know it, but heat drawn directly from the
earth. The default temperature of the water
is scalding. Every year workers engaged in
street repairs shut down the cold-water intake used to temper the hot water and some
poor Icelander is essentially boiled alive in
his shower. So powerful is the heat being released from the earth into my room that
some great grinding, wheezing engine must
be employed to prevent it from cooking me.
Finally, from outside, comes an explosion.
Boom!
Then another.
Boom!
AS IT IS mid-December, the sun rises, barely,

at 10:50 A.M. and sets with enthusiasm at
3:44 P.M. This is obviously better than no sun
at all, but subtly worse, as it tempts you to
believe you can simulate a normal life. And

42/396

whatever else this place is, it isn’t normal.
The point is reinforced by a twenty-six-yearold Icelander I’ll call Magnus Olafsson, who,
just a few weeks earlier, had been earning
close to a million dollars a year trading currencies for one of the banks. Tall, whiteblond, and handsome, Olafsson looks exactly
as you’d expect an Icelander to look—which
is to say that he looks not at all like most
Icelanders, who are mousy-haired and
lumpy. “My mother has enough food
hoarded to open a grocery store,” he says,
then adds that ever since the crash Reykjavík
has felt tense and uneasy.
Two months earlier, in early October, as
the market for Icelandic kronur dried up,
he’d sneaked away from his trading desk and
gone down to the teller, where he’d extracted
as much foreign cash as they’d give him and
stuffed it into a sack. “All over downtown
that day you saw people walking around with
bags,” he says. “No one ever carries bags

43/396

around downtown.” After work he’d gone
home with his sack of cash and hidden
roughly 30 grand in yen, dollars, euros, and
pounds sterling inside a board game.
Before October the big-name bankers were
heroes; now they are abroad, or lying low.
Before October Magnus thought of Iceland
as essentially free of danger; now he imagines hordes of muggers en route from foreign nations to pillage his board-game
safe—and thus refuses to allow me to use his
real name. “You’d figure New York would
hear about this and send over planeloads of
muggers,” he theorizes. “Most everyone has
their savings at home.” As he is already unsettled, I tell him about the unsettling explosions outside my hotel room. “Yes,” he says
with a smile, “there’s been a lot of Range
Rovers catching fire lately.” Then he
explains.
For the past few years, some large number
of Icelanders engaged in the same disastrous

44/396

speculation. With local interest rates at 15.5
percent and the krona rising, they decided
the smart thing to do, when they wanted to
buy something they couldn’t afford, was to
borrow not kronur but yen and Swiss francs.
They paid 3 percent interest on the yen and
in the bargain made a bundle on the currency trade, as the krona kept rising. “The
fishing guys pretty much discovered the
trade and made it huge,” says Magnus. “But
they made so much money on it that the financial stuff eventually overwhelmed the
fish.” They made so much money on it that
the trade spread from the fishing guys to
their friends.
It must have seemed like a no-brainer: buy
these ever more valuable houses and cars
with money you are, in effect, paid to borrow. But, in October, after the krona collapsed, the yen and Swiss francs they must
repay became many times more expensive.
Now many Icelanders—especially young

45/396

Icelanders—own $500,000 houses with $1.5
million mortgages, and $35,000 Range
Rovers with $100,000 in loans against them.
To the Range Rover problem there are two
immediate solutions. One is to put it on a
boat, ship it to Europe, and try to sell it for a
currency that still has value. The other is set
it on fire and collect the insurance: Boom!
The rocks beneath Reykjavík may be igneous, but the city feels sedimentary: on top
of several thick strata of architecture that
should be called Nordic Pragmatic lies a thin
layer that will almost certainly one day be
known as Asshole Capitalist. The hobbit-size
buildings that house the Icelandic government are charming and scaled to the city.
The half-built oceanfront glass towers meant
to house newly rich financiers and, in the
bargain, block everyone else’s view of the
white bluffs across the harbor are not.
THE BEST WAY to see any city is to walk it, but

everywhere I walk Icelandic men plow into

46/396

me without so much as a by-your-leave. Just
for fun I march up and down the main shopping drag, playing chicken, to see if any
Icelandic male would rather divert his stride
than bang shoulders. Nope. On party
nights—Thursday,
Friday,
and
Saturday—when half the country appears to
take it as a professional obligation to drink
themselves into oblivion and wander the
streets until what should be sunrise, the
problem is especially acute. The bars stay
open until five in the morning, and the
frantic energy with which the people hit
them seems more like work than work. Within minutes of entering a nightclub called Boston I get walloped, first by a bearded troll
who, I’m told, ran an Icelandic hedge fund.
Just as I’m recovering I get plowed over by a
drunken senior staffer at the Central Bank.
Perhaps because he is drunk, or perhaps because we had actually met a few hours earlier, he stops to tell me, “Vee try to tell them

47/396

dat our problem was not a solfency problem
but a likvitity problem, but they did not
agree,” then stumbles off. It’s exactly what
Lehman Brothers and Citigroup said: if only
you’d give us the money to tide us over, we’ll
survive this little hiccup.
A nation so tiny and homogeneous that
everyone in it knows pretty much everyone
else is so fundamentally different from what
one thinks of when one hears the word “nation” that it almost requires a new classification. Really, it’s less a nation than one big extended family. For instance, most Icelanders
are by default members of the Lutheran
Church. If they want to stop being Lutherans
they must write to the government and quit;
on the other hand, if they fill out a form, they
can start their own cult and receive a subsidy. Another example: the Reykjavík phone
book lists everyone by his first name, as
there are only about nine surnames in Iceland, and they are derived by prefixing the

48/396

father’s name to “son” or “dóttir.” It’s hard to
see how this clarifies matters, as there seem
to be only about nine first names in Iceland,
too. But if you wish to reveal how little you
know about Iceland, you need merely refer to
someone named Siggor Sigfússon as “Mr.
Sigfússon,” or Kristin Pétursdóttir as “Ms.
Pétursdóttir.” At any rate, everyone in a conversation is just meant to know whomever
you’re talking about, so you never hear anyone ask, “Which Siggor do you mean?”
Because Iceland is really just one big family, it’s simply annoying to go around asking
Icelanders if they’ve met Björk. Of course
they’ve met Björk; who hasn’t met Björk?
Who, for that matter, didn’t know Björk
when she was two? “Yes, I know Björk,” a
professor of finance at the University of Iceland says in reply to my question, in a weary
tone. “She can’t sing, and I know her mother
from childhood, and they were both crazy.
That she is so well known outside of Iceland

49/396

tells me more about the world than it does
about Björk.”
One benefit of life inside a nation masking
an extended family is that nothing needs to
be explained; everyone already knows
everything that needs to be known. I quickly
find that it is an even greater than usual
waste of time to ask directions, for instance.
Just as you are meant to know which Bjornjolfer is being spoken of at any particular
moment, you are meant to know where you
are on the map. Two grown-ups—one a
banker whose office is three blocks
away—cannot tell me where to find the
prime minister’s office. Three more grownups, all within three blocks of the National
Gallery of Iceland, have no idea where to find
the place. When I tell the sweet middle-aged
woman behind the counter at the National
Museum that no Icelander seems to know
how to find it, she says, “No one actually
knows anything about our country. Last

50/396

week we had Icelandic high school students
here and their teacher asked them to name
an Icelandic nineteenth-century painter.
None of them could. Not a single one! One
said, ‘Halldór Laxness?’!” (Laxness won the
1955 Nobel Prize in Literature, the greatest
global honor for an Icelander until the
1980s, when two Icelandic women, in rapid
succession, captured Miss World titles.)
THE WORLD IS now pocked with cities that feel

as if they are perched on top of bombs. The
bombs have yet to explode, but the fuses
have been lit, and there’s nothing anyone can
do to extinguish them. Walking around Manhattan just before the collapse of Lehman
Brothers, you saw empty stores, empty
streets, and, even when it was raining, empty
taxis; the people had fled before the bomb
exploded. Reykjavík had the same feel of incipient doom, but the fuse burned strangely.
The government mandates three months’
severance pay, and so the many laid-off

51/396

bankers were paid until early February,
when the government promptly fell. Against
a basket of foreign currencies the krona is
worth less than a third of its boom-time
value. As Iceland imports everything but
heat and fish, the price of just about
everything is, in mid-December, about to
skyrocket. A new friend who works for the
government tells me that she went into a
store to buy a lamp. The clerk told her he had
sold the last of the lamps she was after but
offered to order it for her, from Sweden—at
nearly three times the old price.
Still, a society that has been ruined
overnight doesn’t look much different from
how it did the day before, when it believed itself to be richer than ever. The Central Bank
of Iceland is a case in point. Almost certainly
Iceland will adopt the euro as its currency,
and the krona will cease to exist. Without it
there is no need for a central bank to maintain the stability of the local currency and

52/396

control interest rates. Inside the place stews
David Oddsson, the architect of Iceland’s rise
and fall. Back in the 1980s, Oddsson had
fallen under the spell of Milton Friedman,
the brilliant economist who was able to persuade even those who spent their lives working for the government that government was
a waste of life. So Oddsson went on a quest
to give Icelandic people their freedom, by
which he meant freedom from government
controls of any sort. As prime minister he
lowered taxes, privatized industry, freed up
trade, and, finally, in 2002, privatized the
banks. At length, weary of prime-ministering, he got himself appointed governor of the
Central Bank—even though he had no experience in banking and was, by training, a poet.
After the collapse, this disciple of Milton
Friedman holed up in his office inside the
bank, declining all requests for interviews.
Senior government officials tell me, seriously, that they assume he spends most of

53/396

his time writing poetry. (In February 2009
he would be asked by a new government to
leave.) On the outside, however, the Central
Bank of Iceland is still an elegant black
temple set against the snowy bluffs across
the harbor. Sober-looking men still enter and
exit. Small boys on sleds rocket down the
slope beside it, giving not a rat’s ass that they
are playing at ground zero of the global
calamity. It all looks the same as it did before
the crash, even though it couldn’t be more
different. The fuse is burning its way toward
the bomb.
When Neil Armstrong took his small step
from Apollo 11 and looked around, he probably thought, Wow, sort of like Iceland—even
though the moon was nothing like Iceland.
But then, he was a tourist, and a tourist can’t
help but have a distorted opinion of a place:
he meets unrepresentative people, has unrepresentative experiences, and runs around
imposing upon the place the fantastic mental

54/396

pictures he had in his head when he got
there. When Iceland became a tourist in
global high finance it had the same problem
as Neil Armstrong. Icelanders are among the
most inbred human beings on earth—geneticists often use them for research. They inhabited their remote island for 1,100 years
without so much as dabbling in leveraged
buyouts (LBOs), hostile takeovers, derivatives trading, or even small-scale financial
fraud. When, in 2003, they sat down at the
same table with Goldman Sachs and Morgan
Stanley, they had only the roughest idea of
what an investment banker did and how he
behaved—most of it gleaned from young
Icelanders’ experiences at various American
business schools. And so what they did with
money probably says as much about the
American soul, circa 2003, as it does about
Icelanders. They understood instantly, for
instance, that finance had less to do with
productive enterprise than trading bits of

55/396

paper among themselves. And when they
lent money they didn’t simply facilitate enterprise but bankrolled friends and family, so
that they might buy and own things, like real
investment bankers: Beverly Hills condos,
British soccer teams and department stores,
Danish airlines and media companies, Norwegian banks, Indian power plants.
That was the biggest American financial
lesson the Icelanders took to heart: the importance of buying as many assets as possible with borrowed money, as asset prices
only rose. By 2007, Icelanders owned
roughly fifty times more foreign assets than
they had in 2002. They bought private jets
and third homes, in London and Copenhagen. They paid vast sums of money for services no one in Iceland had theretofore ever
imagined wanting. “A guy had a birthday
party, and he flew in Elton John for a million
dollars to sing two songs,” the head of the
Left-Green
Movement,
Steingrimur

56/396

Sigfússon, tells me with fresh incredulity.
“And apparently not very well.” They bought
stakes in businesses they knew nothing
about and told the people running them
what to do—just like real American investment bankers! For instance, an investment
company called FL Group—a major shareholder in Glitnir bank—bought an 8.25 percent stake in American Airlines’ parent corporation. No one inside FL Group had ever
actually run an airline; no one in FL Group
even had meaningful work experience at an
airline. That didn’t stop FL Group from
telling American Airlines how to run an airline. “After taking a close look at the company over an extended period of time,” FL
Group CEO Hannes Smárason, a graduate of
MIT’s Sloan School, got himself quoted saying, in his press release, not long after he
bought his shares, “our suggestions include
monetizing assets . . . that can be used to reduce debt or return capital to shareholders.”

57/396

Nor were the Icelanders particularly
choosy about what they bought. I spoke with
a hedge fund in New York that, in late 2006,
spotted what it took to be an easy mark: a
weak Scandinavian bank getting weaker. It
established a short position, and then, out of
nowhere, came Kaupthing to take a 10 percent stake in this soon to be defunct enterprise, driving up the share price to absurd
levels. I spoke to another hedge fund in London so perplexed by the many bad LBOs
Icelandic banks were financing that it hired
private investigators to figure out what was
going on in the Icelandic financial system.
The investigators produced a chart detailing
a byzantine web of interlinked entities that
boiled down to this: a handful of guys in Iceland who had no experience in finance were
taking out tens of billions of dollars in shortterm loans from abroad. They were then relending this money to themselves and their
friends to buy assets—the banks, soccer

58/396

teams, etc. Since the entire world’s assets
were rising—thanks in part to people like
these Icelandic lunatics paying crazy prices
for them—they appeared to be making
money. Yet another hedge fund manager explained Icelandic banking to me this way:
you have a dog, and I have a cat. We agree
that each is worth a billion dollars. You sell
me the dog for a billion, and I sell you the cat
for a billion. Now we are no longer pet owners but Icelandic banks, with a billion dollars
in new assets. “They created fake capital by
trading assets amongst themselves at inflated values,” says a London hedge fund
manager. “This was how the banks and investment companies grew and grew. But they
were lightweights in the international
markets.”
ON FEBUARY 3, Tony Shearer, the former CEO

of a British merchant bank called Singer &
Friedlander, offered a glimpse of the inside
when he appeared before a House of

59/396

Commons committee to describe his bizarre
experience of being acquired by an Icelandic
bank.
Singer & Friedlander had been around
since 1907 and was famous for, among other
things, giving George Soros his start. In
November 2003, Shearer learned that
Kaupthing, of whose existence he was totally
unaware, had just taken a 9.5 percent stake
in his bank. Normally, when a bank tries to
buy another bank, it seeks to learn
something about it. Shearer offered to meet
with Kaupthing’s chairman, Sigurdur
Einarsson; Einarsson had no interest. When
Kaupthing raised its stake to 19.5 percent,
Shearer finally flew to Reykjavík to see who
on earth these Icelanders were. “They were
very different,” he told the House of Commons committee. “They ran their business in
a very strange way. Everyone there was incredibly young. They were all from the same
