is greatly overextended is intensifying this problem (which exists in any case,
but which does not need to cause him too much worry if he has planned
his program).
You can understand the paradoxical statement that percentage gains and
losses are not equal if you take the extreme case, first, of a man, who, in
every business venture he enters, risks his entire capital with the expectation
of either a 100% gain or a 100% loss. If this first venture is a loss, he loses
100%. He is finished, because he cannot gain by making 100% on nothing.
However, if the first venture is successful and he then uses his entire capital,
including the new profits, again on the same terms, and the second venture
is a failure, he will be wiped out completely. No matter how many successes
he may have, he stands to lose everything on his first failure. EN: This is, of
course, the problem of “gambler’s ruin,” which has been admirably analyzed by a
number of writers, including Niederhoffer with the most delightful illustration. See
Resources (Appendix D) for the formula and discussion.
In a lesser degree, this is the situation we are speaking of. You would
not risk all of your capital on a basis of doubling your money or losing all.
But suppose you were extended, continually, to a point where you were
taking the risk of a 40% net loss on each transaction, with the hope of a 40%
net gain. Should you start with $1000 and have a succession of 10 losses,
you would wind up with about $6. Now suppose the very next 10 transactions were all successful. You would finally come out, after 10 losses and
10 gains, each of 40%, with capital of less than $100. It would not be necessary
either that these 10 losses and 10 gains come in the order given. You might
have the 10 gains first, or three gains, four losses, seven gains, and then six
losses. The result would be the same. After 10 gains and losses, in any order,
you would have lost more than 90% of your capital.
On the other hand, if you risked your entire capital each time on
20 ventures, in 10 of which you took an 8% net gain and in 10 an 8% net
loss, your $1000 after the 10 gains and losses would be reduced only to $937.
You would still have about 94% of your original capital. Therefore, in this
case (and 8% is a fair average figure for short-term transactions resulting in
a loss, in fact, a rather liberal figure according to extensive tabulations of
actual transactions), you would have a handicap due to this paradox of only
about ⅓ of 1% on each trade.
Now it is conceivable that 10 successive trades might go wrong, though
that would be an unusual condition. There was one period of 10 months
between the actual turn of the market and the Dow Signal for a Reversal of
the Primary Trend. True, the resulting new trend, once established, ran far
and long, and would have made up all losses and produced fine profits. But
during the 10 hard months, allowing the fair average time of 30 days per
transaction, it is possible that 10 successive wrong-way trades might have
been stopped out for losses, reducing the original $1000 to $434.
The important thing here is that the next 10 successful trades would
have brought this $434 back to $937; in other words, you could have righted
the boat and sailed right on if you were working on the 8% basis, whereas

AU3772_book.fm Page 600 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

600

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

if you had been following the 40% basis we gave previously as an example,
you would have been sunk without a trace, a victim of overtrading.
Therefore, by maintaining a sane Composite Leverage Index
(EN: Portfolio Risk Exposure) and letting the law of averages work for you
and with you, you will be on solid mathematical ground. Your technical
studies will have every opportunity to make you a profit. Otherwise you
can, simply by unwise overextension of your trading, prevent even the best
technical analysis from producing a net profit.
EN: John Magee could easily be called the father of modern investment theory
but modern investment theory is so unenlightened as to technical analysis that
academics largely have not recognized his contributions — and many probably have
not read his work. If they had, he would be recognized as having identified what
theorists now call systematic risk, or what is now called the beta (Greek letter β)
with his concept of the Sensitivity Index. Similarly, his work on Composite Leverage
precedes (and may be more practical than) modern portfolio risk analysis, if cumbersome in the modern context.
In his original exposition of Composite Leverage in this chapter Magee made
use of some cumbersome manual procedures which I have relegated to Appendix A.
There is nothing invalid about them, but there might be more simple and convenient
ways for the present-day trader to assess his leverage, his risk, and profit exposure.
One of these is certainly utilizing VAR technology. But — or, and — there might
be simpler more pragmatic (and even more effective) ways of extracting this information from our trading portfolios.
Volatility, for example, tells us something about the risk of a stock. Portfolio
volatility gives us a way of measuring the riskiness of a group of stocks. In researching our systems and methods we should be able to get some handle on “drawdown,”
or the largest negative swing against our equity in an account. Simple conclusions
follow: if we are willing to accept larger risks, we pick a portfolio of volatile stocks —
a portfolio of Internet (or whatever the current frenzy is) stocks rather than a portfolio
of utility stocks.
It is indispensable to maintain a regular periodic review of portfolio statistics
to assure oneself that excessive risks are not being undertaken heedlessly. These
important numbers include:
• Original risk per trade
• Actual realized loss
• Average loss and profit per trade and their relationship (average profit
divided by average loss)
• Number of winning and losing trades and their ratio
• Time in winning and losing trades (long-time trades combined with oversize
losses is an ominous sign)
• Equity swings: average drawdown, maximum drawdown
• Costs and expenses, summation, and per trade
• Daily risk, yearly risk, and catastrophic risk, as computed by Pragmatic
Portfolio Theory (as discussed below)

AU3772_book.fm Page 601 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two:

Portfolio Risk Management

601

Risk of a Single Stock
The beginning of conventional, or academic, analysis of risk is the examination of
volatility.
The formula for calculating the volatility of a stock (or downloading it) was
discussed in Chapter 24. As a theoretical exercise, the formula and the theory make
certain assumptions which are not necessarily of interest to the pragmatic practitioner. One of the assumptions is that the holder chooses to accept the inherent
volatility of the stock at hand. But the point of technical analysis is to limit the risk
accepted while attempting to realize profit opportunities. Thus the volatility of a
stock, its risk, is 0.30 or 30%, but when we trade it, we put a stop loss on it and
only risk a move of (say arbitrarily) 5–8% against our position. (Where the 5-8%
sums to 2-3%, or x of total capital.) So our method of risk control is basically more
dynamic than the theory. Nonetheless, volatility will give us a measure of the stocks
which make interesting trading vehicles.
It is perfectly possible to take our own experience with a stock, or our system’s
experience with a stock and calculate its volatility to ourselves, using the method
described in Chapter 24. If the dispersion of its returns was greater than our appetite,
we could then eliminate it from our watch list. To my knowledge the literature does
not mention this method for customizing our analysis of risk. Use of a customizing
procedure like this would give us an idea of the reliability of our methods in a
particular case. Stocks which didn’t behave would be banished to the portfolios of
mutual fund managers.

Risk of a Portfolio
If you have sufficient experience with a portfolio, you can calculate its volatility the
same way you calculate the volatility of a stock. And the method in Chapter 24 can
be used. You may also dramatize the volatility of your portfolio by preparing a
frequency distribution. The dispersion of the returns would certainly highlight
characteristics of your trading system or style.
Academicians and investment managers use a measure called the Sharpe Ratio
to compare the performance of two systems or competing money managers. It is
discussed in Resources (Appendix D), and has severe deficiencies in analyzing
portfolio risk. I will address this question later in this chapter after looking at some
of the ways professionals treat risk.
The reader may judge for himself in the use of Composite Leverage as presented
in Appendix A by Magee, or he may consider the following brief presentation of
modern portfolio management and risk analysis. The purpose of Composite Leverage
is to measure and control risk and profit exposure in a more or less quantitative
manner. Present-day portfolio managers might use VAR technology, or do this as
follows. The Editor offers this exposition only for perspective. His own preferred
method, Pragmatic Portfolio Theory, follows thereafter.

AU3772_book.fm Page 602 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

602

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

EN9: Risk and Trend
Risk of a Portfolio and risk of a stock are affected by being the right way in
the trend. It seems intuitive and it is observable that losses (thus risk) expand
in an Enron case where the trader remains long while the stock dies. The
converse is also true. Risk is diminished to a portfolio and a stock when it
is with the trend. In a paper submitted to the Market Technicians Association
(mta.org), Dissecting Dow Theory, Bassetti and Brooker argue (with some
success in the opinion of this editor) that risk can be proved to diminish in
the Industrials when the portfolio (of Industrials) is with the trend as identified by Dow Theory. Charts 9.1 and 9.2 present other material from this
paper which is available at the Magee website, www.edwards-magee.com.

VAR Procedure
Returns of the individual securities are determined and, from these, returns of the
portfolio are calculated. This is done based upon some time period for which the
portfolio is held. Thus, from day to day the returns, or changes in value, of the
portfolio will vary — some positive and some negative. Taking a totality of returns,
an average return will be determined. A frequency distribution of returns may be
constructed. The width of this frequency distribution measures the riskiness of the
portfolio. Thus, a portfolio which has a minimum return of 1% and a maximum
return of 8% is inherently less risky (according to investment theory) than one with
returns varying from –1% to 20%. And while a frequency distribution is illustrative,
it does not give us a common measure for two different portfolios. That is done by
determining the volatility of the portfolio.
Volatility measures the deviation of returns from the mean. This is known as
the standard deviation and is indicated by the Greek letter sigma (σ). The higher
the volatility of a portfolio the greater its risk, according to the academic theory.
This would seem to be intuitive, in that a commodity portfolio might range from
–30% to 100% returns because of leverage, whereas a bond portfolio would vary
only by the market price of the bonds and would return face value at maturity. Of
course in calculating bond risks, managers ignore the deterioration of money — but
that is a little secret among us pragmatic analysts and we needn’t bother academicians and bond traders with that information, as they wouldn’t want to know it
anyway.
As pointed out above, portfolio volatility can be easily obtained if we have
sufficient experience with the portfolio. If we have to calculate the volatility, the
procedure gets quite complicated and the entire procedure for determining our VAR
requires some statistical sophistication as well as a gamut of data. We must weight
the components of our portfolio, determine their correlations, compute correlation
coefficients, and on and on. And, as Mandelbrot notes in Scientific American, at
the end of all this, we would still be wondering what to do in the Perfect Storm.
A crystal-clear procedure for computing VAR is presented in Philippe Jorion’s Value
At Risk.

AU3772_book.fm Page 603 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two:

Portfolio Risk Management

603

Pragmatic Portfolio Theory (and Practice)
Perhaps, rather than giving ourselves headaches trying to remember college statistics, we should look for something simpler and more pragmatic — something just
as serviceable for the general investor: Pragmatic Portfolio Theory. The academic
world, and the world of rarefied Wall Street, strives madly to quantify everything
in the world except the risks and liabilities that they themselves create for their
customers.
Let us seek simpler methods to quantify the risks of individual stocks and the
portfolios they reside in, knowing all the time that absolute precision is impossible.
(Viz., Professional portfolio managers’ performance in The Great Panics — 1929,
1957, 1987, 1989. Viz., Long-Term Capital Management which almost brought
down the world financial system in 1998, and Leland O’Brien Rubinstein Portfolio
Insurance which contributed mightily to the Reagan Crash in 1987.)

Pragmatic Portfolio Risk Measurement
Determining the Risk of One Stock
The theoretical risk of a stock is commonly agreed to be its volatility, which is
determined as detailed in Chapter 24. So we might say that the theoretical risk of
our stock, Microsoft, for example, equals on 100 shares, our position, at the market
price of 120 and annualized volatility of .44:
Theoretical Risk = Volatility × Position × Price
V × Po × Pr = T$Risk
.44 × 100 × 120 = $5200
where
T$Risk = Theoretical $Risk
V
= Volatility
Po
= Position (number of shares)
Pr
= Price
Theoretically speaking then, the annual risk for Microsoft should be volatility ×
Price or (in 2000) 0.44 × 120 or $52. In fact, those non-chart analysts who bought
Microsoft at 120 (there were some) and who did not have the technician’s ability to
set a stop and discipline to stick to it saw a risk of 50% from its top of 120 in
February 2000 to its (presumed) bottom of 60 in June 2000.
There is another measurement which might be more meaningful to us, Operational Risk. Operational Risk refers to the specific instance of the particular trade.
For example, we have taken an initial position in Microsoft of 100 shares. Our
analysis has identified a stop point where we put our stop, which is 5% away from
the market price. Our Operational Risk is:

AU3772_book.fm Page 604 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

604

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
Operational Risk = Market Price − Stop Price × Position

( MP − S) × Po = O$Risk
(120 − 114) × 100 = 600
where
O$Risk = Operational Risk
MP
= Market Price
Po
= Position
S
= Stop Price

Determining the Risk for a Portfolio
Computing the theoretical risk for a portfolio is quite a complex process. It
involves, in essence, finding the volatility for the portfolio as a whole, and
multiplying the portfolio market value by the portfolio volatility. This does
not sound so complex, but volatility is not determined by simply adding
together volatilities of individual securities. Rather, correlations between
instrument returns must be computed, and variance and covariance of securities must be determined as steps along the way. This by no means presumes
to be a complete description of the process, further study of which may be
guided by entries in Resources (Appendix D).
The theoretical risk for a portfolio is, for a simple case:
Volatility × Market Value
TP$Risk = MV × V
where
TP$Risk = Portfolio Theoretical Risk
MV
= Market Value
V
= Volatility
Under normal market conditions, the Operational Risk of a simple Portfolio,
PO$Risk, may be calculated by first taking the sum of the Operational Risk figures,
O$Risk, for each stock held long. Then the sum of O$Risk for short positions is
subtracted from the first figure.
PO$Risk = ( sum of O$Risk longs) − ( sum of O$Risk shorts)
In the situation of perfect negative correlation, the two factors would be
summed.

AU3772_book.fm Page 605 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two:

Portfolio Risk Management

605

Measuring Maximum Drawdown,
or Maximum Retracement
In the designing and testing of a system, or in actual trading experience, we care
little about standard deviations and cold statistics. What bothers us is the flow of
blood, that is to say, the worst run of “luck” or experience we have. What is the
greatest sustained loss we suffer before our system or trading method rights itself,
stanches the flow of blood, and begins to accumulate profits again? Constructing a
wave chart is one way to look at this experience. (A wave chart is illustrated in
Figure 2.)
Measuring from the top of the wave to the bottom gives us our maximum
drawdown, and an idea of what amount of capital we need and how much reserves
to maintain. It also gives us a vivid depiction of our results. A chart with many
tsunamis (in the wrong direction) probably means that we need to modify our
methods — unless we genuinely enjoy riding roller coasters (with the full understanding that dreadful accidents do sometimes happen on thrill rides). If constructing
a system without actual market experience, one should multiply maximum drawdown by 3 or 4 to get a reasonable amount of capital to back the system with.

Pragmatic Portfolio Analysis: Measuring the Risk
In analyzing a portfolio, we must first know what is important to measure. In order
to be able to control risk, we must be able to measure it. Theoreticians identify risk
with volatility. There are some real-life problems with this concept but we will use
it for the moment anyway. In a portfolio, we want to be able to separate our various
types and weights of risk. In terms of volatility, bonds are obviously less volatile
than stocks, and unleveraged commitments are less volatile than, say, futures.
Similarly, if the portfolio is not risk balanced, that is, if one issue represents a large
proportion of the whole, then it represents a larger portion of the risk. But, if a
portfolio consisted of only the S&P 500, that would obviously be a different case,
since a commitment like this would be by definition diversified. So we must know
what is important to measure. (Cf. Philippe Jorion’s Value At Risk. In addition
there is a piece of tutorial software called Risk Management 101, which is excellent
in presenting these concepts.)
In operational or pragmatic terms, a trader wants to know what his operational
risk is, rather than his theoretical risk. And he doesn’t consider upside equity
volatility a negative. A trader may choose to measure risk by the pragmatic method
outlined here. In doing so, he will want to know for his Portfolio Ordinary or
Normal Risk, POR, his Risk Over Time, PRT, and his Extraordinary or Catastrophic Risk, PCR.

Portfolio Ordinary, or Operational, Risk
First consider that we want to measure our risk today. Our Ordinary Risk today is
easily computed by taking the stop price from the market price on each position and

AU3772_book.fm Page 606 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

606

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

summing the differences, as above. Dividing this figure by the allocated capital (Total
Capital, TC) will give us a Portfolio Risk Factor, PRF. And that is the risk factor
the trader is willing to assume for one day.
POR = sum of Differences
PRF = PO$Risk TC

Portfolio Risk Over Time
The number can be annualized to give us a number for risk over time — or it can
be computed for a week or a month, etc. Or, this factor may be collected from
operations. It may be collected by taking each day’s Ordinary Risk, summing and
dividing for the desired time period (and plotted). It may also be computed by taking
the average return and the variances therefrom and calculating the standard deviation. This is Risk Over Time. Annualized risk, for example: DR × 365 where
DR = Daily Risk.

Portfolio Extraordinary or Catastrophic Risk
Extraordinary Risk is the risk of market collapse or panic on any given day. The
way to look at this risk is, first of all, to assume normal behavior of the markets, or
your everyday panic. In this case, if all of one’s positions cratered, one would take
his worst-case, one-day loss and be out of the market. To extend this analysis, assume
that the market makes a two, then four, then six standard deviation move. What
will be the effect on your position in this event, when stops will not be honored by
specialists and market makers and the market will be stampeding like spooked cattle
for the exits? That is, meltdown. This is Extraordinary or Catastrophic Risk.

Controlling the Risk
The most danger in these meltdown events is in the greatest leverage — so the
greatest risk is in short options — and usually short puts. You will remember my
story of my customer who lost $57MM during the Reagan Crash of 1987. He was
short puts. Some market makers have been destroyed by shorting calls, but the case
is rare and specifically results in the case of takeovers and unwise concentration of
commitments in one issue only.
The least risk lies in being hedged. To oversimplify, long the stock, long the put.
The profit of one makes up for the loss on the other. Also, if one were long some
stocks and short others, that also is a kind of hedge. Or long the Dow and short
futures on the Dow, or some of its components.
Now let us be pragmatic. If we have during the management of our portfolios
consistently measured the market with the Magee Evaluative Index and balanced
our portfolio accordingly, we will be at less risk, both from the Ordinary and the
Extraordinary viewpoint. In fact, we may profit from an event which disemploys
many professional money managers.

AU3772_book.fm Page 607 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter forty-two:

Portfolio Risk Management

607

If you have been religiously raising your stops, following the market with
progressive stops, and in fact raising them based on new highs as described in
Chapter 28 (3-days-away procedure), it is quite possible that while the market is
storming you will be sailing to Byzantium in your customer yacht.
