
Chapter 4: Char ting the Market

Having Fun with Pictures: The
Four Main Chart Types
Reading a chart isn’t difficult, but there are different ways of viewing the same
price information, be it a line chart, candlestick chart, or bar chart. Most swing
traders choose one chart type and stick to it. The most popular chart type for
swing traders is the candlestick chart, because it reveals the most information.
To get the most value out of charting for your swing trading ventures, you
first need to be able to recognize the four main types of charts in the finance
world and how each can help you — or harm you if you’re not careful.
Following are the four main chart types and a brief description of each (from
the most common and basic to the least common):
 Line chart: This chart type simply connects closes from one period to
another, and the resulting chart resembles a line. Television news programs
often show line charts because of their simplicity. However, critical data
is missing. A line chart doesn’t show you where a security opened for
the day — only where it closed. Nor does it plot the highs and lows that
occurred for each period. Line charts do, however, allow you to focus on
the most critical piece of information: the day’s closing price.
 Bar chart: You’re likely familiar with traditional bar charts, which show the
open, high, low, and close of a specific security. The bar chart addresses
many of the shortcomings found in the line chart. Often called an OHLC
bar chart (which stands for, you guessed it, open-high-low-close), this chart
can provide hourly, daily, weekly, or even monthly information. Figure 4-1
shows a representation of a standard bar. A horizontal line protruding from
the left of the bar signals the security’s opening price, and a horizontal line
protruding from the right side of the bar signals the security’s closing price.
The period’s highs and lows are the top and bottom of the bar.
 Candlestick chart: This chart type clearly depicts a security price’s open,
high, low, and close. Traditional bar charts do the same, but candlestick
charts do it more effectively. Candlestick charts are made up of two components: the range between the open and close (called the real body)
and price movement above and below the body (called shadows). If the
security closes higher than its open during that period (a bullish sign), the
body is usually white. If the security closes lower than its open during the
period (a bearish sign), the body is usually black (Note: Different charting
programs use different colors to shade in the body.) When prices open
and close at the same level, the candlestick body is reduced to a horizontal line, and the remaining parts are the upper and lower shadows. Figure
4-1 shows what typical candlesticks look like.

61

62

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Candlesticks are a great way to examine charts, and you can use these
patterns to assist you when entering and exiting securities. However, I
don’t know any swing traders who rely on candlestick patterns exclusively. So avoid putting all your eggs in the candlestick basket. Like
every technical tool, the candlestick is an imperfect instrument. Look
for candlestick patterns as confirmation of a trend or reversal, but avoid
looking to trade a security primarily because of a candlestick chart
pattern.
 Point and figure (P&F) charts: P&F charts plot security prices using a
column of Xs (to represent rising price movements) and Os (to represent falling price movements). The major advantage of P&F charts is
that they filter out noise or unimportant price movement by plotting
only new Xs and Os when the price of a security moves by a predefined
amount. One downside is that they don’t reflect the passage of time well.
Because new plots are made only when the price exceeds the predetermined threshold, a plot may not be made for days or even weeks if the
security in question doesn’t move significantly.
The three charts in Figure 4-2 contrast a line chart, bar chart, and candlestick
chart. All three charts cover price action for Google (symbol: GOOG) between
December 10, 2007 and February 6, 2008. The bottom chart demonstrates a
rising trendline, which highlights a support area that, when broken, signals
the end of the uptrend. Figure 4-3 shows the other main chart type: P&F.
This book focuses on bar charts and candlestick charts, primarily the latter.
Both chart types reveal intraday or intraweek (depending on the time period
set) strength of bulls and bears, making them favored tools of swing traders
far and wide. Support or resistance areas are also occasionally easier to see
with bar charts or candlestick charts.

High
Figure 4-1:
a) A bar
chart. b) A
candlestick
chart.

High
Close

Close
Open
a.

High
Open

Open
Low

b.

Close
Low

Low

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market
Line Chart

Bar Chart

Candlestick Chart

Figure 4-2:
Sample line
chart, bar
chart, and
candlestick
chart
featuring
shares of
Google.

63

64

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Figure 4-3:
A sample
P&F chart
featuring
shares of
Google.

Charts in Action: A Pictorial View
of the Security Cycle of Life
Securities go through a naturally occurring cycle, but not all securities follow
this cycle religiously. If you can’t characterize which stage a security is in,
you’re better off skipping it and finding one that’s following the normal cycle
of accumulation, expansion, distribution, and contraction. Understanding
this cycle is helpful, because different phases require different strategies.
Swing trading trends, for example, is best achieved during the expansion and
contraction phases. Trading ranges, on the other hand, is best achieved in
accumulation and distribution phases.

The waiting game: Accumulation
The accumulation phase is typically the longest phase a security goes through.
During this period, its price neither rises nor declines meaningfully. Instead,
its price moves sideways through time. Supply and demand are roughly in balance, and institutional managers or smart money often accumulate shares of
an undervalued security. (Smart money is typically institutional dollars that are
informed by extensive research.)
Volume is usually light, reflecting a general consensus that the security’s price
is correct. Buyers are unable to push prices higher than a ceiling (a resistance
level), whereas sellers are unable to push prices below a floor (a support level).
You can’t know in advance with any precision where these ceilings or floors

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market
will be found. You can easily identify them, however, by viewing a price chart
and looking for price levels that a security is unable to climb above or fall
below. These support and resistance areas are usually driven by fundamental
reasons. For example, Microsoft’s stock may not be able to rise above $35
per share because that movement represents a valuation of $300 billion, and
market participants may not feel the company is worth more than $300 billion. Thus, support and resistance levels vary by security and can’t be determined until you examine a price chart.
Think of an accumulation phase as a period where most market participants
agree on a security’s value. Because price isn’t moving dramatically, profiting
off of securities in the accumulation phase can be difficult. Some swing traders may buy at or near the support level and attempt to sell at the resistance
level. This approach only works, of course, when the distance between the
support and resistance level is sufficiently wide enough to make the profit
worthwhile. It also only works as long as the security continues to trade in the
range. If you swing trade trends, you want to look for securities moving out of
the accumulation phase and into the expansion phase. However, if you swing
trade ranges, you may be content to find accumulation phases and trade them
until the security ends its accumulation phase.
You can spot accumulation phases on charts of varying time periods. Although
accumulation phases are traditionally thought of as occurring over several
months, a security can technically be accumulated over a few days. The key
factor is time frame. A day trader, for example, looks at intraday charts where
each plot represents a five- or ten-minute interval. For day traders, accumulation phases may occur over a two-day period.
As a swing trader, you shouldn’t be so close to the bushes. Although you can
use intraday charts occasionally to perfect your timing of buys and sells, your
default chart period should be measured in days. In these types of charts, an
accumulation phase must last several weeks — if not months — to be considered a true accumulation phase. Otherwise, you may be dealing with some
other phase of the cycle of the security.
Figure 4-4 highlights a typical accumulation phase when shares of Apache
Corporation (symbol: APA) oscillated between two price levels — $75 and
$60 — between October 2005 and April 2006. This wide trading range allowed
swing traders to buy at support level and sell at resistance level for profits.
However, the accumulation phase wasn’t perfect. In October 2005, shares
rose above the resistance level by a hair for a few days. And then in June
2006, shares fell below the support level of $60 by a hair.

65

66

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Figure 4-4:
The accumulation
phase of
APA.

You can’t be strict on exact price levels of support and resistance and assume
a security’s price will immediately stop falling near a support level or immediately stop rising near a resistance level. For example, if a security’s support
level is $35 and its resistance level is $40, you can’t assume the security’s
price will immediately stop falling when it hits $35. It may stop falling at $35.20,
$34.90, $34.75, $35.50 — well, you get the idea. Sometimes share prices don’t
reach either extreme and make turns within the two bands. Swing traders sell
long positions or enter short positions near resistance levels.

The big bang: Expansion
The expansion phase, also known as the markup phase, follows the accumulation phase (see the preceding section) and is a period of increasing prices. If
the movement out of the accumulation phase is truly an expansion period, the
security’s price doesn’t reenter accumulation. So if you swing trade trends, this
is the phase where you want to go long — as soon as possible.
This phase marks the beginning of a change in perception among shareholders and outside investors. A stock expansion may occur as the earnings
outlook for a company improves. In the case of companies with a highly successful product (think Apple and the iPod), shares may begin to rise steadily
out of an accumulation pattern after that product’s launch.
The expansion phase is ripe with profit opportunities. Swing traders who buy
right as the expansion phase gets underway often can ride a strong trend for
several days or weeks. The beauty of buying as an expansion gets underway is
that the proverbial line in the sand is clearly marked. That is, you know rather
quickly whether you bought at the right time based on whether the security’s
price reenters the accumulation phase. If you buy late, then you risk a large

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market
loss if shares of the security rapidly fall to the breakout price level — or worse —
fall back into the previous accumulation range. Use the money management
strategies outlined in Chapter 10 if you’re in this boat.
Look for strong volume at the beginning of the expansion phase as confirmation that it’s genuine. If a security emerges from an accumulation phase on
weak volume, that may indicate a lack of conviction on the part of buyers.
Hence, the rally may be short-lived. For a refresher on the role of price and
volume, flip back to the earlier section, “Nailing Down the Concepts: The Roles
of Price and Volume in Charting.”
For a real-life example of what the expansion phase looks like, check out Figure 4-5,
which reflects the expansion of Apache Corporation (symbol: APA). Notice how
the breakout from the accumulation phase is on heavy volume, as highlighted
in the volume subgraph, and that shares returned to the resistance level established in the accumulation phase. If prices had broken below that level, that’d
indicate the expansion breakout had failed. Instead, shares returned to the
breakout level and found support. This move is seen as a low-risk entry level.
Yet not all breakouts give you such a beautiful gift. Strong breakouts often don’t
return to the accumulation phase and allow reentry.

Figure 4-5:
The
expansion
phase of
APA.

The aftermath: Distribution
All good things must come to an end, including high-flying securities. During
the distribution phase, the good news that propelled shares during the expansion phase is no longer so surprising to Wall Street. Share prices start to even
out and move sideways instead of rising or falling. Think of the distribution
phase as the end of the party. The music is bland, the food is stale, and the
conversations are getting old. That’s the distribution phase in a nutshell.

67

68

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
The folks who built up shares of a security in the accumulation phase unload
those shares during the distribution phase. Amateur investors are often
buying the security in the distribution phase, having found out about the
company or the investment from a front cover on Forbes. When everyone
knows the story, it usually means the story doesn’t have much farther to run.
The distribution phase can resemble the accumulation phase, a misinterpretation that can seriously mess with your swing trading. Confusing the two may
prove costly when you’re expecting a higher breakout rather than a lower one.
Shares move sideways during the distribution phase, seemingly indicating a
consensus on a security’s price, and volume tends to taper off. You can tell
accumulation from distribution by
 Observing that a markup phase precedes distribution, whereas a markdown phase usually precedes accumulation
 Looking at the security’s fundamentals — typically they aren’t as strong
during accumulation
Companies can sometimes give you a hint that their shares are priced too
high. If you see one offering new stock to the public via a secondary offering,
you can be sure that management thinks shares are trading at a premium to
their true value. Also, you may see a stock split during the distribution phase.
As a swing trader, identifying distribution phases is helpful for knowing when
to exit long positions (sell securities you own) and enter short positions
(short securities you anticipate declining in value). If you spot a distribution
phase, exit immediately if you own the position. You’re likely to be stopped
out by one of your sell rules during a distribution phase: a moving average
crossover or the breaking of a predefined support level, for example. You
may also exit based on the passage of time, a strategy I present in Chapter 10.
I don’t recommend shorting during a distribution phase. Because distribution
resembles accumulation, you may short a security that’s only pausing in its
ascent. So don’t short until you see a security’s price exiting the distribution
phase and entering the contraction phase (covered in the following section).
Figure 4-6 highlights shares of Sandisk (symbol: SNDK) during a distribution
period. Notice that volume tapers off as shares move sideways. This distribution phase followed an expansion phase that occurred in June and July of 2007.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market

Figure 4-6:
Shares
of SNDK
during a
distribution
phase.

The downfall: Contraction
The fourth and final stage of a security’s price cycle is the contraction, or
markdown, phase that’s best summarized as a period of lower highs and
lower lows, a time when short sellers rule. (For more on the earlier stages,
see the previous three sections.)
Contraction is a dangerous period. Security prices don’t fall in straight lines.
Instead, they fall, and then rally to attract new buyers who believe a bottom
has been hit. Those rallies fail, and the security moves to fresh, new lows.
Avoid timing a bottom in a security. Often termed bottom fishing, buying a
declining security may feel psychologically pleasing because you’re buying
something that was more expensive only a few days or weeks ago. But it’s dangerous because shares can fall off a cliff after being in a contraction phase.
Volume isn’t a helpful indicator in periods of contraction. Although heavy
volume indicates sellers’ conviction, light volume doesn’t indicate the opposite. As the old Wall Street maxim says, “A stock can fall on its own weight,
but it takes volume to rise.” Hence, a contraction period can be met with light
volume throughout.
Securities tend to fall faster than they rise. In just a few days, a security can
give up gains that it made over the last several months because greed influences price rises and fear influences price declines. Fear’s a more potent
emotion than greed. If traders fear lower prices, they sell — fast. But when
prices are rising, they’re not as committed to buying as quickly as possible.

69

70

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Rallies in a contraction phase are normal and mark entry points for short sellers.
Each rally ends at a point that’s lower than the previous one. And every decline
takes the security’s price to a new low. The prudent approach is to wait for
clear signs that the contraction phase is complete and that the security’s either
holding in an accumulation phase or entering an expansion phase. Short sellers
should short on the rallies and cover on the declines, a profitable strategy (until
it becomes so obvious that it ends). You want to have the wind at your back
when you buy a security, and buying in a contraction phase means that wind’s
going to hit you full in the face.
Figure 4-7 highlights the contraction phase in shares of Sandisk (symbol: SNDK).
This contraction followed the distribution phase highlighted in Figure 4-6. Shares
of Sandisk rallied in late October and late November as the stock broke to fresh,
new lows.

Figure 4-7:
Shares of
SNDK enter
a contraction phase.

Assessing Trading-Crowd Psychology:
Popular Patterns for All Chart Types
Highbrow academics in their ivory towers shun chart patterns because spotting a head and shoulders or cup and handle can be subjective. Just like seeing
a pattern in a cloud or the stars, chart patterns are difficult to quantify. To be
proven sound, an academic needs to establish rules on spotting these chart
patterns, but programming a computer to look for patterns is difficult. Yet
reading chart patterns is an essential ability of the successful swing trader.

Chapter 4: Char ting the Market
The solution to the quandary? Trade only patterns that are clear as day. Stick
to the tried-and-true chart patterns and you’ll avoid the pain of trying to see
patterns where none exist.
The following sections describe five major chart patterns: Darvas box, head
and shoulders, cup and handles, triangles, and gaps. Rest assured that other
chart patterns exist, but these five are, in my opinion, the most common and
the most useful. They occur regularly and reflect the psychology of the crowd:
day traders, swing traders, position traders, long-term investors, and the like.

The Darvas box: Accumulation in action
The Darvas box, a rectangle-shaped pattern, illustrates that security prices
tend to trade between two levels before breaching a level and rallying or falling. You may recognize this pattern as the accumulation phase described in
the earlier section, “The waiting game: Accumulation.”
In a nutshell, the pattern’s creator, Nicholas Darvas, looked for securities
that traded between two clear price levels: a support level and a resistance
level. The support level marked the price point at which buyers stepped in
and bought shares, preventing prices from going down. The resistance level
marked the price point at which sellers stepped in and sold shares, preventing prices from going up. Darvas didn’t waste time with securities that didn’t
fit nicely into this mold.
After identifying a security as trading between the two price levels, Darvas
waited patiently until the security broke out of the upper band on heavy
volume. Then he’d buy, placing a stop loss below the support level of the
rectangle. If the security rose and formed a new rectangle, he’d raise his stop
loss level to the area below the new support level.
The Darvas box works in reverse, too. A falling security may form Darvas
boxes on its way down, so short sellers do the opposite of buyers. That is,
they identify a security trading between two price levels and then short only
after the security breaks below the support level. They place their stop loss
level right above the old support level. If a new Darvas box forms, they move
the stop loss down to the area above the new resistance level.
Figure 4-8 depicts a typical Darvas box using shares of Philippine Long Distance
(symbol: PHI) traded between two clear price levels: $30.50 and $27.30. The
excitement came on November 2, 2005, when shares broke out convincingly
above $30.50 on heavy volume. This date signaled the beginning of an uptrend
(see the later section, “Uptrend lines: Support for the stubborn bulls,” for more
info on uptrends) and marked the first time shares had exited the Darvas box,
indicating an opportune time to buy. Subsequent Darvas boxes would offer the
trader a chance to raise the stop loss level.

71

72

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Figure 4-8:
Shares of
PHI traded
in a Darvas
box in 2005.

In a similar scenario, you could’ve placed a stop loss level below the support
level of $27.30. However, I’d recommend placing a stop loss level just under
the resistance range, near $30.50. Remember: If the breakout’s genuine, the
security doesn’t reenter the Darvas box.
If you’re asking yourself why I advise adjusting Darvas’s methods, you should
know that Darvas wasn’t a swing trader. His time horizon was longer than
that of the swing trader’s, and he could afford to wait out a security. As a
swing trader, you don’t have the luxury of waiting out a security’s consolidation period. Hence, the tighter stop loss level I recommend will keep you in
if the breakout is genuine and get you out if the security decides to take its
sweet time.
