
T

25

26

DESIGNING THE TRADE

of interdependent economic policies, futures and commodity exchanges
have popped up all over the globe. Commodities contracts such as soybeans, oil, and gold, once dominated by the U.S. exchanges, the Chicago
Board of Trade (CBOT), the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), and
the New York Mercantile Exchange, have found themselves sharing space
and multiple time zones with newly formed exchanges in India, China, and
Dubai.
Where once the U.S. exchanges held a virtual monopoly in offering
commodity and futures exchange contracts, they are now faced with fierce
competition from various exchanges in other countries and the entrance
of new players onto their domestic soil. A5 opposed to being leaders, they
are now pressed into taking a reactionary role. Where once their contracts
set the tone in volume and price discovery, many other similar contracts
are beginning to gain prominence worldwide and are dictating price and
market relevance.
In the midst of all of this is the trader. Whether retail or professional,
the growth of the 24-hour global trading marketplace is playing a significant role in determining everyone's long-term success. The trader's ability
to adapt to information, both technical and fundamental, as well as his ability to be serviced in multiple marketplaces are becoming more and more
relevant. There is no special secret to trading in this new environment; it
simply becomes more important that you be able to process information,
while at the same time being able to protect yourself from activities occurring halfway across the world while you sleep.
In this chapter we explore the recent merger of the CBOT and CME
and what it means to the everyday trader's activities. We also take a look
at the various new exchanges popping up across the United States and
abroad. In addition, we look at the future of single-stock futures (SSFs) in
the United States and their international counterparts, contracts for difference (CFDs), and discover which one is more relevant.
Next, we look at the impact that the over-the-counter (OTC) forex market has on the exchange-traded currency markets, if any. We also discuss
the revolutionary importance of the Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk
(SPAN) risk management system and the natural interaction of the spot,
futures, and options markets. We take an honest look at the difficulties
of trading these various markets in real time and in back-testing, both of
which are important in order to develop the necessary tools to succeed.
Finally, we highlight the five key markets that will be used as examples
throughout the book (S&P 500, gold, oil, euro, and com). While these are
not the only markets in the world to trade, many ofthese are traded in multiple arenas and time zones and are affected on a global scale by policies
and regulations that do not originate in the United States.

Markets and Margin

27

EXCHANGES
In the spring of 1848, little did the original 83 merchants of the Chicago
Board of Trade know that they would forever change the world. From this
humble beginning the asset class of derivatives has exploded. Nobel Prizes
have been awarded to mathematicians who have come up with formulas
to predict the behavior of option derivatives. Companies have come and
gone, almost taking entire economies with them, trying to beat derivatives.
Countries that once banned commodity trading are now jumping on the
bandwagon. All of this activity has forced commodity exchanges to grow
from trading just agricultural products to trading a wide array of financial ,
climate, and currency products that could not even have been imagined
160 years ago.
The success of the derivatives asset class is fueled solely by traders
worldwide wanting to participate in markets that they could not afford
otherwise. The versatility of the commodity exchange model has moved
it so far from its original roots as to almost confuse those who are familiar
with agricultural commodities and stocks into believing that the products
being presented to them are somehow different from what they have been
trading all along. This is not the case.
Since the inception of the forward contract, there have been two markets for it. There have been the standardized contracts, what we know as
futures contracts, and the customized contracts, what we know as overthe-counter (OTC) contracts. Whereas the liquidity of the standardized
contracts has always been guaranteed by the exchanges themselves, the
OTC market was thought to be nearly illiquid because of its customization.
Since two counterparties are agreeing to an arrangement with very specific
criteria, it was thought that it would be difficult to find anyone else who
would be willing to accept the same terms. The OTC markets, realizing the
dilemma, decided to take a page out the commodity exchange handbook
and simply standardize the sizes and increments of their custom contracts.
Consequently, they have added a tremendous amount of volume to their
activities. OTC forex trading is a prime example of that; it currently trades
approximately $2 trillion worth daily, all between counterparties with no
central pricing exchange.
The far-reaching effects of the commodity exchange model have quite
literally changed the world. Largely because of passage of the Commodity
Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA) , there are exchanges all over
the world that will allow you to trade on various future events, like presidential elections, greenhouse gas emissions, and the weather. The Commodity Futures Modernization Act paved the way for OTC trading of energy credits and electronic energy trading, along with the development

28

DESIGNING THE TRADE

of single-stock futures. There are exchanges that have tapped into these
simple expansions of power in new and amazing ways. They have developed ways to minimize traders' losses by stylizing their product offerings
through so-called binary futures and binary options, along with developing all-electronic trading markets. No matter what the product is or how it
is administered, the same elements always apply: The contracts are leveraged, the product traded is not the actual product, and the product is primarily designed to manage unseen risk.

Exotic Exchanges
The CFMA has led to many exchanges popping up that do not fit the traditional mold. Some are recognized members of a trading exchange, while
others are traded OTC. Whatever the case, they do not fall in line with
what is traditionally traded, yet they have an impact on what occurs in
today's trading environment and may actually be what retail traders have
an opportunity to trade in the future. At one time the OTC forex market
was considered solely the domain of banks and major corporations protecting themselves from import and export risks. Today it is commonly
traded by retail investors and is a major contributor to the U.S. $500 trillion
OTC market.
TradeSports Ltd. was originally founded in
2000 in Dublin, Ireland, as an online web site with the express purpose of
letting speculators choose whether or not future outcomes will come to
pass. Within five years the site had accrued more than 50,000 members and
had monthly trading volume of almost four million trades. In order to make
sure it was not limited to being just a sports betting site, TradeSports separated its sports-related trading site from its nonsports markets by acquiring
Intrade. The Intrade.com web site offers traders the ability to speculate on
the outcomes of presidential nominations, U.S. recession figures, as well as
the Dow Jones final close for the year. Each position is simple: If you buy
(go long), you think the event will happen; if you sell (go short) you think
the event won't happen. In order to facilitate a better understanding of the
odds, the sites have developed a simple 0 to 100 system, with 0 being 0
percent likelihood of an event occurring and 100 being 100 percent likelihood of an event occurring. Any figure in between 0 and 100 represents
the market's overall sentiment at that time. When I originally wrote the
manuscript for this book the web site predicted that there was a 72 percent likelihood of the United States going into a recession in 2008 and that
Barack Obama had an 82 percent likelihood of winning the Presidential
Election. As we now know, the web site was right in both instances.
'rradeSports Ltd.llntrade

Markets and Margin

29

While this exchange is exciting, it is an OTC exchange that acts as
the go-between for various counterparties and is not without controversy.
Since the contracts are customized, the wording can be very strict and if
not followed closely you can be left a little confused about whether you
can receive your payout.
Although rare, one contract stands out clearly. In July 2006 North
Korea gave out a press release stating that it could successfully fire ballistic missiles outside of its airspace. At the time, Intrade had a contract that
revolved around this potential outcome. Those who had bought a contract
(they believed that the outcome could occur) felt that they should be paid
out. The fine print of this contract, however, stated that two stipulations
had to occur simultaneously: First, North Korea had to be able to fire ballistic missiles outside of its airspace; and second, this had to be confirmed
by the U.S. Department of Defense. The U.S. Department of Defense never
confirmed the test, which led to the Intrade buyers not being paid out on
their contract purchases.
In 2005 Intrade applied to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to become a recognized exchange in the United States.
lIedgeStI'eet In 2004 HedgeStreet became the first Internet-based
futures/derivatives exchange. The goal was to provide a forum where speculators and retail investors could protect themselves by hedging against
major economic events and price movements. In an attempt to differentiate itselffrom the typical options and futures contracts, HedgeStreet chose
two innovative products, binary options and capped futures. Each product
was chosen for its ability to minimize the losses of the retail traders who
decided to invest in what they called "hedge lets. "
Binary options were not completely new, but HedgeStreet was the first
exchange to build its entire business model around them. Binary options
are simple yes/no contracts, similar to Intrade's wilVwon't setup. You are
paid out only if the final price is above the strike price. You receive a flat
$10 for getting it right and nothing if you get it wrong. The capped futures
have a variable price payout, but it is capped at an upper limit, and losses
are limited to a predetermined floor.
Although both products are exciting, HedgeStreet has had difficulty in
developing volume, liquidity, market makers, and the right set of products
to present to the public. As of this writing, it has been acquired by IG Group,
a major binary option player in the United Kingdom.
Chicago Climate Exchange The Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX) is
the brainchild of Richard Sandor. Through his efforts, major corporations,
states, municipalities, universities, and farm bureaus have joined together

30

DESIGNING THE TRADE

to create the only voluntary, legally binding greenhouse gas reduction
exchange in North America.
CCX has developed a market in six greenhouse gas emissions: carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, sulfur hexafluoride, perfluorocarbons,
and hydrofiuorocarbons. Since its inception in 2003, it has reached two
monumental milestones: First, it has committed its members to reducing
aggregate emissions by 6 percent by 2010; and second, it has accumulated
an aggregate baseline of 226 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (credits), which is equal to the United Kingdom's total allocation.
Like any effective exchange-traded market, CCX has started at the
base-the market makers, those companies that are in need of greenhouse gas credits, and those capable of qualifying for greenhouse gas
credits-and brought them together. That means that in the not-too-distant
future retail traders will be able to participate in the trading of greenhouse
credits themselves or at the very least some form of derivative of the greenhouse credit program.
New U.S. Exchanges

The futures and commodities market took 160 years to develop in the
United States. In just the past eight years, since the passing of the CFMA,
the entire culture has been turned on its ear. What were once considered
foregone conclusions about the exchanges- member-owned exchanges,
floor brokers, and open-outcry trading-are quickly becoming a thing of
the past.
In November 2002 the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) became
the first commodities exchange to be listed as a public company. In
much the same way that agricultural commodities account for less than
30 percent of the active contracts traded, electronic trading has begun to
replace open-outcry trading. Floor brokers have had to either adapt to a
changing environment of trading from a screen (as opposed to gaining their
cues from other traders on the floor) or leave the business altogether. In the
midst of all of this change, more and more foreign entities have succeeded
in gaining a foothold in the U.S. commodities exchange markets. This has
led to a pan-global trading environment, the likes of which we had never
seen before.
While some of these exchanges are not 100 percent new, they have
been retooled and revamped in such a way as to be unrecognizable from
the original. Oftentimes they provide the only way that foreign entities can
come into the United States and hope to succeed in developing a relationship with the retail market. Make no bones about it: They are changing only
the name, not everything else that has worked for them in the past; electronic platforms, OTC quoting, and access to international markets are just
a few of the things that are here to stay.

Markets and Margin

31

u.s. Futures Exchange The U.S. Futures Exchange, LLC, was originally called Eurex US. It was established by Eurex, quite literally the
world's largest derivatives exchange. In 2006 alone Eurex executed more
than 1.5 billion contracts. It has established trading and clearing relationships all throughout Europe and Asia. What has made the exchange so
powerful over the years is its ability to deliver trading and clearing fully
electronically. As a pioneer in the electronic arena, Eurex felt that it could
easily expand its global reach into the United States. After only a few years
in the U.S. market, Eurex sold 70 percent of its stake to the Man Group.
The two have teamed up to make a second go of the U.S. market, utilizing
Man's extensive U.S. introducing broker (IE) and retail network.
ICE Futures U.S. (ICE/NYBOT) The Intercontinental Exchange (ICE)
is a direct product of the CFMA. Founded in 2000, the exchange's original intent was to provide an around-the-clock transparent OTC derivatives
energy exchange. It quickly outpaced its competitors and expanded into
the futures business through the acquisition of the International Petroleum
Exchange. With the development of its electronic platform, ICE has succeeded in moving its entire energy futures contracts electronically. Continuing its progressive move forward, in 2007 ICE acquired the New York
Board of Trade (NYBOT).
Before 1998 the New York Board of Trade didn't even exist. Just like
ICE, it is an amalgamation of multiple exchanges that have merged over
the years. A combination of the Coffee, Sugar, & Cocoa Exchange, Inc.,
founded in 1882, and the New York Cotton Exchange, founded in 1870,
NYBOT became the premier exchange for the soft commodities in the
United States. While the currently retooled NYBOT still maintains an openoutcry pit concurrently with the new electronic offerings, ICE's drive to
make its energy contracts fully electronic will most likely be repeated.
ICE's experience in international markets located in the United
Kingdom and Canada as well as its OTC business provides an unparalleled
level of access and a robust amount of information for U.S.-based traders.
As traders begin to understand the quotes and utilize the platform, they
will see opportunities for arbitrage and an unparalleled level of service that
didn't exist in the old limited open-outcry format.
NYSE Euronext With the express goal of being the world's number
one equities exchange, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) acquired
Euronext N.V. Euronext has a huge array of financial products and services spread out over five countries. It currently operates five derivatives
exchanges and six cash equity exchanges; combined with the might of the
NYSE, this group will be able to offer trading in security and futures products 21 hours a day. While they are currently focused on dominating the

32

DESIGNING THE TRADE

equities market, they have the infrastructure and the capability to branch
out into the futures and commodities markets at a moment's notice and
dominate the domestic environment with a slew of offerings never seen
before.
CME Group: The Last U.S. Exchange?
The competition worldwide is getting cutthroat. In order to have any
chance at competing in this global environment, U.S. exchanges have had
to look toward consolidation in order to survive the monolithic power of
mergers like the NYSE Euronext and the aggressive move by Eurex to enter
the U.S. market. While this activity looks exciting on the surface, the move
of the big fish to eat the little fish leads to many casualties. The floor brokers and traders are clearly seen as being impacted by these consolidation
moves, which are driving the markets to become electronically traded, but
all of the support staff is being adversely affected as well, many of whom
have been doing their jobs for years with little prospect of being properly
retooled and retrained at this point.
The most high-profile merger of commodities exchanges has been the
CME and CBOT merger. This merger has brought together under one roof
the United States' two oldest exchanges. The combined power of these
two exchanges will allow the CME Group to compete in today's new environment. It will be able to reduce costs, transition to electronic trading,
and use the might of the merged exchanges' combined capital to acquire
competitors, like NYMEX, and to increase its ownership position in joint
venture partners, like the Singapore Exchange (SGX).
From humble beginnings, the CME and the CBOT not only have made
themselves relevant for the twenty-first century, but they also are considered serious players. Smaller exchanges, such as the Kansas City Board of
Trade and the Minneapolis Grain Exchange, will find it difficult to continue
their exchange life quietly and without disruption. There is no doubt that
in the near future they will be absorbed in some form or fashion in order
to stay competitive.
Critical Worldwide Commodity Exchanges
At an unprecedented speed since the 1990s, futures exchanges have been
popping up around the world in the most unlikely places. From China and
India, both countries that banned futures in the 1950s, to places like Dubai,
futures exchanges are exploding. This worldwide growth in the development of the commodities markets has been a major contributing factor to
the global renaissance in commodity prices. As countries allover the world
begin to use the futures markets as a form of price discovery, disparities

Markets and Margin

33

in the value of goods around the world quickly begin to dissipate. Large
profit margins, which were once the domain of aggressive importers and
exporters willing to traverse the world to find bargains, are becoming more
difficult to find as electronic markets are linked up around the world.

China In China there are two prominent commodity exchanges. There
is the Dalian Commodity Exchange and the Shanghai Futures Exchange.
They each comprise 50 percent ofthe Chinese marketplace in terms of dollar volumes in trading. In the Dalian exchange alone the total trading volume for 2007 reached U.S. $1.67 trillion. The Futures Industry Association
recently reported that the Dalian exchange has been the dominant futures
exchange for the past eight years. With only 110,000 investors in a nation of
1 billion people and a growing middle class, the Dalian exchange is poised
to be the largest exchange in the world. Currently, the exchange has been
limited to trading soybeans, soy meal, soy oil, corn, palm oil, and linear
low-density polyethene. These limits have been put in place by the Chinese
government in large part to control the rampant fraud and unscrupulous
behavior that existed in the early years of the reintroduction of commodity
trading in China. The Dahan Commodity Exchange has stated on its web
site that it intends to release a hog/pork belly futures contract, a coal futures contract, and a commodity index futures contract within 2008. The
Dalian exchange also plans to launch options on its actively traded soybean and corn futures contracts.
Dubai The only question is "What took them so long?" Dubai, one of the
jewel cities of the United Arab Emirates, has finally established its own
gold, commodities, and energy exchanges. With only 6 percent of its revenue generated from oil, Dubai has a long history of encouraging free trade
in the region. With multiple free trade zones in media, technology, and
manufacturing, Dubai is one of the most ethnically diverse and businessfriendly cities in the world. Established in 2005, the Dubai Gold and Commodities Exchange is fast becoming one of the region's most important
exchanges. Located right in the middle between Europe and the East, this
exchange helps provide for the continuous trading that a 24-hour marketplace needs in order to thrive. As of this writing, the market trades in gold,
silver, euro, British pound, Japanese yen, Indian rupee, and fuel oil futures.
The exchange is expected to develop product offerings in steel, jet fuel,
and cotton.
A second exchange, the Dubai Mercantile Exchange, is set to be the
first energy exchange of the Middle East. Created as a joint venture of
Tatweer, NYMEX, and the Oman Investment Fund, it is poised to be an
international competitive powerhouse for the region.

34

DESIGNING THE TRADE

India The Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX) is extending its footprint
across the globe. While operating an exchange in India, it is also a significant partner of the Dubai Gold and Commodities Exchange. Based in
Mumbai, the exchange has taken a policy of working with both the spot
and futures markets in key agricultural products. This has led it to retaining
72 percent of India's market share. With India being the number one importer of gold worldwide and currently importing over 3,000 tons of silver
