
But let me show you who he was. Of those three stock ideas, two
he never acknowledged to me. The third? More than fifteen years later,
in my forties, he sent me a short note to tell me I had done well with
ithe owned it still then and years later. When I recalled the other two



Introduction 13

ideas to him, he acknowledged them but no further. No congratulations.
No thank you. Because I was always less fearful of him than others were,
I verbally kicked at him a bit at times, which I did then, asking who else
had he ever gotten three successful investment ideas from. He pointed
out to me that there was no one, but that wasn’t so important. The key
was in him, he explained, in knowing which ideas to follow and which
to discard and that he hadn't followed any of my bad ideas. That annoyed
me. So, I retorted that he had followed plenty of other people’s bad ideas,
and then he got mad at me and we didn’t speak for about a month. Then
he forgot he was ever mad at me, and the subject never came up again.
That was who he was: cool, cold, hard, tough, disciplined, non-social,
never quitting, ever confident externally but internally often scared. And
amazing. 1 know he respected me; but to the people he respected most,
he had the hardest time communicating that directly.

What was his daily grind like? In 1958, as Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits was published, Father arrived home from work in the
late afternoon, changed clothes, ate dinner with the family formally in
the dining room, and then retired to the living room, where he read,
sometimes business materials but usually library murder mysteries—
until bedtime. When I was a child, he would take a break at our bed-
time to tell my brothers and me bedtime stories, which he lavished on
us—more on me than on my brothers because I liked them better.
Sometimes they were non-fiction history about heroic figures or events,
like Joan of Arc, the American Revolution, Paul Revere’s ride, the life
of Napoleon. Others were fiction of his own creation, something he
hoped eventually to turn into children’s books but never did. They were
all great. My brothers and I had separate bedrooms, and Father would
sit on the bed’s edge of whomever he was telling the story to. One or
more of us would lie on the floor nearby, and when we fell asleep, he
carried us to bed. He and mother went to bed about ten. In the morning,
he drove us kids to school at 7:30 in a beat-up old blue Oldsmobile and
drove on to a point a half mile from San Mateo’s train station. He walked
to the station and rode the rails into San Francisco. Early-morning San
Mateo retailers came to call him “the flash” because he walked so fast,
leaning forward in a world long before “power walking.” He believed
that if rain wasn’t hard, it did no good, and that if walking wasn’t fast, it
was a waste of mileage. He loved the railroad train and had been riding
trains since childhood. His morning train departed at 8:00. It arrived at
the San Francisco depot at Third and Townsend Streets at 8:30 (a block


14 Introduction

from its current location). On the train he read business materials, every
day. If someone approached him to talk, he told them he was busy
working, which he was, and then kept reading. Cool. Solitary. He then
walked a mile to his office in Mills Tower at the corner of Bush and San-
some Streets. If someone wanted to walk with him, they couldn't
because he walked so fast that they couldn’t keep up. Cool. Solitary. A
sort of gunslinger of his own creation. At Mills Tower, he took the ele-
vator to the eighteenth floor and entered his office. Alone. Actually, he
had two offices over the years. He was at suite 1810 from World War II
until 1970, when he moved to suite 1820. The pictures on the back
cover of the dust jacket of Conservative Investors Sleep Well were in both
offices, and they sit today on the wall of a conference room at my cor-
porate headquarters.

His furniture never changed all those years. Same desk, which now
sits in my old childhood bedroom. Chairs, and every form of appoint-
ment—none of it changed for forty years and was all Spartan. He was
Spartan. His luxury there? The view of San Francisco Ray. When he
moved to 1820, he got the corner suite with bay views in two direc-
tions, high luxury. In the 1950%, Mills Tower was one of the city’s two
tallest office buildings, along with the Russ Building. When he moved
in 1970 to suite 1820, the view to the bay out both windows in both
directions was clear. By the mid-1980’s when I moved him out, he
could see nothing but the taller office buildings across the street in any
direction at all. Tied to the San Francisco office building boom of the
1970's, the city just grew up around himm—and with the lack of bay
view, much of his passion for being there faded.

Each night, he walked the mile back to the train station and read
more on the way home, although late in his life, as said earlier, he fell
asleep a lot on the train in the afternoon. He was in the office at 9:00
and left at 4:00 to return home. When it rained, he took the bus and
hated it. The bus put him in close contact with all kinds of street people—
after all, anyone can get on the bus—and even with the best of folks (and
he wasn't a people person), he felt uncomfortable there. Compared to
most business successes, he never worked very long hours or all that hard
or frantically. Early on, I marveled at how someone could have succeeded
as well as he did working as few hours as he did or with as little stren-
uous effort as he exerted; but it was because of his genius. At times, he
was like a laser beam and beautiful to behold. You only need a relative
few of those times in a career to accomplish a great deal if you don’t



Introduction 15

screw up too badly at other times. He had the one and not the other,
and that made it work.

And he was always alone. Until my brother went to work with him
in 1970, he never had more than a part-time secretary around him,
several half-days a week. For decades, up until the early 1970's (which
also marked the beginning of his business decline), it was one woman,
Mrs. Del Poso. As a young man, | never got to know her in any real way
at all, which I now regret because I’m sure I could have learned lots
about Father from her. Otherwise he was solitary. Non-social. Thinking.
Reading. Talking on the phone, yes, but not oriented toward being with
people. A very definite non-people person.

Father loved to watch election returns. Always. A passion. He had a
marvelous memory before dementia. Routinely, he memorized the
names of all 435 members of the House of Representatives and the
100 senators. To put himself to sleep at night, he would go state by state
through their names until he drifted off. He also memorized each state
capital and made me do it as a kid. To him, reciting them wasn’t chal-
lenging because they never changed. But congressmen did, which gave
him new grist. The only time this ever really backfired on him was
when Warren Buffett first started interacting with him. Because he had
Buffett’s father’s name stuck in his head from Howard Buffett’s days as
Omaha’s congressman, Father kept referring to Warren Buffett as
“Howard,” which came to periodically embarrass him when he caught
it. Warren never called it to his attention. | pointed it out to Father
several times, and he told me to mind my own business. But he loved
watching election returns because it was the beginning of the next
memorization cycle. It also linked to his interest in analyzing politics,
something that always fascinated him. And he wasn’t bad at it. He started
with an advantage. Because he had all these guys names already memo-
rized so well, he was a leg up on most folks. I’ll bet at any one time there
aren’t 500 people in all of the United States who know all the names of
all members of the House and the Senate. But he did. Always.

Also, because he knew the names, it was easier for him than for most
folk, as elections approached, to learn and to memorize which were the
races that were close and could go either way. Long before folks like
political analyst Charles Cook refined his analytical structure, Father had
the races categorized into groups by region as to safe seats for either
party, semi-safe seats, and seats that were competitive to toss-ups. On
election night, he would hone in on those relatively few seats that were


16 Introduction

the closest races and likely to go cither way. As returns came in, he loved
staying up late at night collecting data and writing them down and
re-calibrating what that meant to the balance of power in Congress in
the next two years and how that might effect the president and US. politics
in general. He was not very good at knowing what would cause those
close races to likely go one way or the other, nor did he think he was;
but he knew which ones were close and watched them like a hawk. Just
because I knew he wasn’t good at knowing what would cause them to
break one way or the other, I later put effort into getting specifically-
trained to do just that—because I wanted to learn something I knew he
didn’t know how to do. Late in his life, he marveled that I could do it
because it was inconceivable to him that anyone could. But it is a pret-
ty simple set of skills. The irony is that if earlier in his career someone
had taught him how to do it, he could readily have done it quite well
and, I’m sure, far better than I could. But another feature of his life was
that any technique he didn’t learn before age fifty, he probably never
learned. He had a lot going on by that age, which is just when Common
Stocks and Uncommon Profits appeared.

The book’s publication tied into other personal qualities that were
weird. Note his dedication in Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits. 1t
says, “This book is dedicated to all investors, large and small, who do
NOT adhere to the philosophy: ‘T have already made up my mind, don’t
confuse me with facts” ” As long as I knew him, in any area outside
investing, he didn’t want to be confused with facts because he didn’t
want his life disrupted because he was a creature of habit, almost above
and beyond all things. Everything had to stay just as it was. You couldn't
replace anything with a new-and-improved version. That he tore down
his house and re-built it was miraculous. He just didn’t want facts if they
might lead him to change. It impacted everything from his garden to his
cars, clothes, furniture, acquaintances; whatever it was, he didn’t want
change. When | worked for him briefly, I didn’t really know him well at
first in a business sense, but I could see that his office was antiquated. So
I set out to do minor improvements.

In 1972, he still had a battery of three rotary-dial telephones on his
desk, and he was hard of hearing. So, he would be talking on one and
another would ring and he would have no idea which one it was; and
he would regularly pick up the wrong one and slam it back down hur-
rying to the other. I installed a standard single-set, touch-tone phone
with multiple lines and flashing lights. It took him months to get over



Introduction 17

being mad at me. | interfered with his world, and he could not accept
it as an improvement. But he learned the business point of it, and for
business he would change; and he finally got used to it—it became a
new habit and he forgot he was ever mad at me. But when I was four-
teen and used money I'd saved from ‘working part-time jobs to buy him
a jacket to wear in the woods with me on a family trip, he would never
wear it, preferring to wear, believe it or not, an old sport coat he had
owned forever. He hated change.

He had an old hand-crank adding machine in his office that was
probably first operated by Tyrannosaurus rex. When | first saw him
pounding on that darned thing, I thought his desk would implode or
his wrist would shatter. Three feet from where I sit now, I have a col-
lection of memorabilia. One item, from his office, was an October 20,
1961, Wall Street Journal announcement of what was the first four-
function calculator. It wasn’t called that at the time. It was called a
pocket computer, and it used integrated circuits (Jack Kilby of Texas
Instruments co-invented the integrated circuit in the 1950's for which
he later won a Nobel prize), which were then called, “solid circuit semi-
conductor networks.” The calculators were for the space program and
weighed ten ounces and cost $29,350 each. My father had been one of
Texas Instruments’ earliest public investors as described in his FAF
monograph; and by the time I arrived, he was very devoted to Texas
Instruments. So, in 1973, I got him a very early commercial electronic
calculator and junked his aged hand-cranker. I thought he would like it
because it was from Texas Instruments and was so vastly superior to his
adding machine and because he could do all kinds of things not before
possible. But he didn’t like it one bit because it involved change; and it
took him most of a year to get over being annoyed at that habit change.
Still, he finally got used to it, and then it was as if he had always owned
it. He sold his Texas Instruments stock in the 1980’s but continucd to
use old and antiquated Texas Instruments calculators the rest of his
career because he hated changing.

By Father's admission, he had just five friends in his whole life—
David Samuels (his younger first cousin), Ed Heller, Frank Sloss, Louis
Langfeld, and John Herschfelder—and they from fairly early on and all
but one family connected. Despite all these friends being local, as a
mature adult, he rarely saw them. Father knew David Samuels all his life
and telephoned him regularly but only saw him, maybe, twice a year.
Mentioned earlier, Ed Heller was a half generation older and successful


18 Introduction

and wealthy before my father’s time and became a major mentor early
on. They met when Ed married a cousin. Heller was a successful stock
market investor, an overall businessman, and a venture capitalist and may
have becn the man Father admired most until the early 1950's, when
Father concluded Heller was a womanizer and ended the relationship.
Heller died soon thereafter. Frank Sloss shared a room with Father at
Stanford, and they remained close ever after and, hereto, Frank married
a cousin and Father and Frank remained close until Frank died in the
1980's. Frank was what today we call an estate planning attorney in San
Francisco and did most of Father’s non-securities legal work until Frank
died; and in that way they spoke often. But they saw little of each other
otherwise. Louis Langfeld was himself a distant relative and a client of
father for many years, and they often commuted together into San
Francisco. I saw him far more often than the others because he lived
close by and picked father up to commute together on the train. Louis
died in the 1950's; his son allegedly refused to pay the final bill, and
Father sued him and won. Cool. Tough. Pretty darned solitary. And the
son? He is now dead himself. Father’s longest lasting friend? John Her-
schfelder, an engineer, who had been close to Father since childhood.
But he only saw or spoke to Johnny maybe once every four years as an
adult, Father couldn’t stand the guy’s wife—drove him crazy. Still, when
Johnny was in the hospital, dying, Father made regular trips there to sit
with him. Johnny was important to Father. Yet in life, he couldn’t find
ways to be with the man, because Father was solitary. Stoic. Alone,
except with my mother. He just didn’t like people very much. Most
people like to be around friends, just to be with them and bask in their
companionship, sort of glowing. He didn’t.

He liked to be alone or with my mother; and pretty much of the
time when he was with my mother, they were both alone, she in the
family den and he in the living room. It was just who he was. But he
was beyond anxious if he was separated from her when he wasn’t at
work or in the garden. Other people? He just didn’t like being around
other people much. He liked me, but if T was around him too much, it
bugged him. Or Arthur, and he liked Arthur better than anyone but my
mother. He cared for my brother Donald less than me, and that took a
toll on Donald. He cared for Arthur more than me, and that took a toll
on Arthur. But the reality is that Father was just a solitary guy. Regard-
less of with whom he interacted, it was all relative degrees of solitude.
When Arthur and then I came to work with him in the early 1970’, it


Introduction 19

drove him nuts, in my opinion. He had been pretty much alone and
solitary his whole career, and being around us all that time was too
much. Seeing that it drove him nuts, realizing I hadn’t yet really learned
who he was and, as stated earlier, realizing there wasn’t a career oppor-
tunity with him because he couldn’t delegate, I determined rather
promptly to distance myself a bit to make him and me less nuts. 1 quit
his employment and started out on my own within a year. But I
remained in the same building. I had an unusual ability to not be both-
ered much by Father’s weirdness and to separate from him but remain
fairly close. Arthur couldn’t do that.'Too much emotion. Arthur isn’t as
emotionally tough as I am, never was; I don’t know why. I always
thought both my brothers took Father much too seriously and, ultimately,
couldn’t take him nearly as much or as well as I could. Ultimately
Father’s emotion took too big a toll on Arthur, and he left the industry
completely in 1977 and moved to Seattle and on to academics. My
father was simply not a man to be close to people.

He was pretty frugal sometimes; and when I was young and we
went somewhere on business, I had to share a hotel room with him. We
did this even after I could afford my own room because he couldn’t
handle the notion of me “wasting” the money. When I was about thirty,
[just couldn’t do it any more. But one night in the early 1970's, we were
together in Monterey at one of the first elaborate dag-and-pony shows
for technology stocks—then known as “The Monterey Conference” —
put on by the American Electronics Association. At the Monterey Con-
ference, Father exhibited another quality I never forgot. The conference
announced a dinner contest.'There was a card at each place setting, and
each person was to write down what he or she thought the Dow Jones
Industrials would do the next day, which is, of course, a silly exercise.
The cards were collected. The person who came closest to the Dow’s
change for the day would win a mini--color TV (which were hot new
items then). The winner would be announced at lunch the next day,
right after the market closed at one o’clock (Pacific time). Most folks, it
turned out, did what I did—wrote down some small number, like down
or up 5.57 points. I did that assuming that the market was unlikely to
do anything particularly spectacular hecause most days it doesn’t. Now
in those days, the Dow was at about 900, so 5 points was neither huge
nor tiny. That night, back at the hotel room, I asked Father what he put
down; and he said, “Up 30 points,’ which would be more than 3 per-
cent. I asked why. He said he had no idea at all what the market would


20 Introduction

do; and if you knew him, you knew that he never had a view of what
the market would do on a given day. But he said that if he put down a
number like I did and won, people would think he was just lucky—that
winning at 5.57 meant beating out the guy that put down 5.5 or the
other guy at 6.0. It would all be transparently seen as sheer luck. But if
he won saying, “Up 30 points,” people would think he knew something
and was not just lucky. If he lost, which was probable and he expected
to, no one would know what number he had written down, and it
would cost him nothing. Sure enough, the next day, the Dow was up 26
points, and father won by 10 points.

When it was announced at lunch that Phil Fisher had won and how
high his number was, there were discernable “Ooh” and “Abhhh”
sounds all over the few-hundred-person crowd. There was, of course,
the news of the day, which attempted to explain the move; and for the
rest of that conference, Father readily explained to people a rationale for
why he had figured out all that news in advance, which was pure fiction,
and why the market had done what it did, again pure fiction and
nothing but false showmanship. But I listened pretty carefully, and
everyone he told all that to swallowed it hook, line, and sinker. Although
he was socially ill at ease always, and insecure, I learned that day that my
father was a much better showman than I had ever fathomed. And, oh,
he didn’t want the mini-TV because he had no use at all for change in
his personal life. So he gave it to me and I took it home and gave it to
mother, and she used it for a very long time.

THE THREE W’s

What else did my father enjoy? Three big W’s: walking, worrying, and
work. He loved them all. I never really saw him relax in the ways most
folks do, I think because he loved to worry so much. Underneath his
surface was a sort of endless undulating nervous energy that he liked to
channel into worrying. He could worry about anything. It made him
feel safe in some way. It was as if he somehow believed if he worried
enough, he would have covered all the risks and nothing bad could hap-
pen to him. He would worry about the same things over and over and
over. Because he always worried so much and because I was always a
rebel, I never much worried. That bugged him. I have always been prone
to simply thinking things through as thoroughly as I can once and then



Introduction 21

going with my decision. If | conclude I’m wrong, I may conclude to
change. That drove him nuts. Father used to say to me, “Ken, I wish you
would run scared more often. How about just once? I just wish you
would run scared.” He prided himself on “running scared.” For the life
of me, I couldn’t think why I would want to live life that way; but he
not only wanted that for me, he wanted it for himself.

In the garden, my father could sit and worry about all the things he
cared about, and that made him feel better. It may well have contributed
to why he made fewer investment mistakes than most investors do. He
worried everything over until he had worried it to death. Maybe he had
reduced risk that way. But that also may well have contributed to why
he wasn’t richer than he was. He wasn’t willing to take risks on things
for which he hadn’t worried the mistakes down to marginality. In that
way, he was never a big risk taker, and those who get really rich take
bigger calculated risks than he was ever willing to take.
