
Size Matters
Making or losing money in the market depends in part on how much
you put into your account. Two people can take identical trades, but one

THE FIRST STEPS

33

will grow equity, while the other will bust out. How could this be if they
buy and sell the same quantity of the same stock at the same time?
Suppose we meet and decide to pass an hour tossing a coin, playing
heads-or-tails—heads you win, tails you lose. Each of us will bring $5
to the game and bet 25 cents on each flip. As long as we use a fair coin,
by the end of the hour we will be about even, each with about $5.
What happens if we play the same game and use the same coin,
only now you start with $5, while I bring only $1? You’ll probably end
up taking my money. You are likely to win because your capital provides greater staying power. It would take a string of 20 losses to bankrupt you, while for me a string of just 4 losses would be fatal. Four
losses in a row are much more likely than 20. The trouble with a small
account is that it has no reserves to survive even a short run of losing
trades. Winning trades are always interlaced with losers, and a short
losing streak wipes out small traders.
Most beginners start out with too little money. There is plenty of
noise in the markets—random moves that defy trading systems. A small
trader who runs into a noisy period has no safety cushion. His longterm analysis may be brilliant, but the market will do him in, because
he does not have the staying power to ride out a losing streak.
Back in 1980, as a greenhorn amateur, I walked into a Chase bank
around the corner and drew a $5,000 cash advance against my credit
card. I needed that princely sum to meet a margin call in my depleted
trading account. A beady-eyed cashier called the manager, who
demanded my thumbprint on the receipt. The transaction felt dirty, but
I got the money—which I proceeded to lose within a few months. My
system was correct, but the market noise was killing me. It wasn’t until
I got my trading account into a comfortable high five figures that I
started making money. I wish someone had explained the concept of
size to me in those days.
Trading a small account is like flying an airplane at treetop level.
You have no room to maneuver, no time to think. The slightest slip of
attention, a piece of bad luck, a freaky branch sticking out into the
air—you crash and burn. The higher you fly, the more time you have
to find your way out of trouble. Flying at a low altitude is tough
enough for experts, but deadly for beginners. A trader needs to gain
altitude, get more equity, and buy some space for maneuvers.
A person with a large account who bets a small fraction on any
given trade can stay calm. A person with a small account grows tense

34

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

knowing that any single trade can either boost or damage his account.
As the stress rises, the capacity to reason goes down.
I saw the best example of how money can twist a player’s mind
while teaching my oldest daughter to play backgammon. She was about
eight at the time but very determined and bright. After a few months of
practice she began beating me. Then I suggested we play for money—
a penny a point, which in our scoring meant a maximum of 32 cents
per game. She kept beating me, and I kept raising the stakes. By the
time we reached 10 cents a point she started losing and soon gave back
every last penny. Why could she beat me playing for little or no money
but lost when the stakes increased? Because for me $3.20 was pocket
change, but for the kid it was real money. Thinking about it made her
a little more tense and she played slightly below her peak level—
enough to fall behind. A trader with a small account is so preoccupied
with money that it impairs his ability to think, play, and win.
Other beginners bring too much money to the game, and that is not
good either. A beginner with too much capital goes chasing after too
many rabbits, becomes careless, loses track of his positions, and ends
up losing money.
How much should you have in your trading account when you start?
Remember, we are talking about trading capital. It doesn’t include your
savings, long-term investments, retirement funds, house equity, or
Christmas club. We only count the money that you want to spin in the
markets, aiming to achieve a higher rate of return than you can get
from Treasury bills.
Do not even dream of starting with less than $20,000. That is the
barest minimum, but $50,000 provides a much safer flying altitude. It
allows you to diversify and practice sensible money management. At
the same time, I do not suggest starting with more than $100,000. Too
much money in a trading account makes a beginner lose focus and
leads to sloppy trading. Professionals can use a lot more, but beginners should stay below $100,000 while learning to trade. Learn to fly a
single-engine plane before moving up to a twin-engine model. A successful trader needs to get into the habit of being careful with money.
Beginners sometimes ask me what to do if they have only $10,000
or $5,000. I urge them to study the markets and paper-trade, while getting a second job to accumulate capital. Start trading with a decentsized account. You’re going into battle, your capital is your sword, and

THE FIRST STEPS

35

you need a weapon that’s long enough to give you a chance in combat with well-armed opponents.

Hardware and Software
Thinking about my first purchases of trading technology is pure nostalgia. I walked into a drugstore in Florida and bought a pocket calculator. A year later I acquired a programmable calculator with a tiny engine
that pulled magnetic memory cards through its slot. Then I bought my
first computer. It had two floppy drives—one for the program, the
other for the data diskette. I upgraded it from 48K to 64K RAM (that’s
kilobytes, not megabytes!), and it was a rocket. My first modem collected data at a brisk 300 baud, later upgraded to a sizzling 1,200.
When hard drives became available, I bought myself a 10-MB unit
(they also had a 20-MB model, but who needed such a monster?).
There was only one good program for technical analysis, and it cost
$1,900. Today, I can buy a hundred times more powerful software for
a tenth of that price.
Does every trader need a computer? My friend Lou Taylor did all his
research on scraps of paper. I used to offer him computers, but to no
avail. Most traders, including myself, would be lost without a computer.
It expands our reach and speeds up research. Just keep in mind that
computers do not guarantee profits. Technology helps, but does not
guarantee victory. A poor driver will crash the best car.
To become a computerized trader, you must choose a computer,
trading software, and a source of data. Trading programs tend to be
undemanding and run well on older, slower machines. A good program for technical analysis must download the data, plot daily, weekly,
and possibly intraday charts, and offer a multitude of indicators. A
good program should allow you to add your own indicators to the system and let you scan lists of securities according to your parameters.
The list of programs for traders keeps growing, so that by the time you
read this book any review will be out of date. My company keeps
updating our brief software guide, which we send out as a public service. To request a current copy, please contact us at the address that
appears in the back of this book.
A striking development in recent years is the wealth of resources for
traders available on the Internet. Today you can analyze markets with-

36

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

out buying any software—just go to a website, key in your stocks or
futures, select the indicators, and click your mouse. Some websites are
free, while others are subscription-based. With all those websites, why
buy technical analysis software? For the same reason that in a city like
New York, with its good public transportation system, some of us own
cars. Clients often ask me how to add some new indicator to their
favorite website. When you travel by bus, you cannot ask the driver to
take your favorite route.
Can you program your own indicator into a website and scan charts
with it, posting green dots for buy signals and red dots for sell signals?
When you find a website that can do it, you may no longer need software. Until that time, those of us who are serious about research will
continue to buy technical analysis software. You can get a top-notch
program for a few hundred dollars. A historical database with a year’s
worth of updates will cost a couple of hundred more. If you have a
tiny account, however, use free websites. Always try to push your
expenses down to the smallest possible percentage of your account.

Data
Signing up with a data service appears simple, but raises several questions that go to the heart of trading. How many markets should you
follow? How far back should you go in your research? Do you need
real-time data? Answering these questions takes you deep into the trading enterprise and forces you to review your decision-making process.
How Many Markets Should You Follow? Beginners make the common mistake of trying to follow too many markets at once. Some look
for software to scan thousands of stocks and quickly bog down.
Serious beginners should pick no more than two or three dozen stocks
and track them day in and day out. You need to get to know them,
develop a feel for how they move. Do you know when your companies release their earnings? Do you know their highest and lowest
prices for the past year? The more you know about a stock, the more
confidence you have and the fewer surprises can jump out at you.
Many professionals focus on just a few stocks, or even on a single one.
Which stocks should you track? Begin by choosing two or three currently hot industries. Technology, Internet, telecommunications, and
biotechnology industries are in the forefront of the market at the time

THE FIRST STEPS

37

of this writing, but the list is likely to change. It always does. Pick half
a dozen leading stocks in each of those industries and follow them
daily. That’s where you’ll find the highest volumes, the steadiest trends,
the crispest reversals. Several months later, after you get to know your
stocks and make some money, you may be ready to add another
industry group and pick its top six stocks. Remember, the depth of
your research is much more important than its breadth. You can make
more money from a handful of familiar stocks.
The choice is easier for futures traders—there are only about three
dozen futures, in six or seven groups. Beginners should stay away from
the most volatile markets. Take grains, for instance. You should analyze
corn, wheat, and soybeans, but trade only corn because it tends to be
the slowest and quietest of the group. Learn to ride a bicycle with training wheels before starting to race. When it comes to tropicals, analyze
all, but trade only sugar—a big, liquid, and reasonably volatile market,
leaving aside coffee and cocoa, which can move as fast as the S&P.
Needless to say, a beginner has no business with stock index futures,
whose nickname on the floor is “rockets.” You may graduate to them in
a couple of years, but at this stage, if you have an opinion on the stock
market, trade SPDRs or QQQs, exchange-traded market indexes.
How Far Back Should You Go in Your Research? A daily chart on a
computer screen will comfortably show five or six months of history.
You’ll see less with candlesticks (see p. 72), which take up more space.
Daily charts alone aren’t enough, and you need weekly charts with at
least two years worth of history. Learning history prepares you for the
future, and it could be helpful to glance at a 10-year chart and see
whether that market is high or low in the long-term scheme of things.
Charts spanning 20 or more years are especially useful for futures
traders. Futures, unlike stocks, have natural floors and ceilings. Those
levels are not rigid, but before you buy or sell, try to find out whether
you’re closer to the floor or the ceiling.
The floor price of futures is their cost of production. When a market
falls below that level, producers start quitting, supply falls, and prices
rise. If there is a glut of sugar and its price on the world markets falls
below what it costs to grow the stuff, major producers are going to start
shutting down their operations. There are exceptions, such as when a
desperately poor country sells commodities on the world markets to
earn hard currency, while paying domestic workers with devalued

38

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

local money. The price can dip below the cost of production, but it
cannot stay there for long.
The ceiling for most commodities is the cost of substitution. One
commodity can replace another if the price is right. For example, with
a rise in the price of corn, a major animal feed, it may be cheaper to
feed animals wheat. As more farmers switch and reduce corn purchases, they take away the fuel that raised corn prices. A market in the
grip of hysteria may briefly rise above its ceiling, but cannot stay there
for long. Its return to the normal range provides profit opportunities
for savvy traders. Learning from history can help you keep calm when
others are losing their heads.
Futures contracts expire every few months, making long-term charts
difficult to analyze. When it comes to dailies, we look at the currently
active month, but what about the weeklies? Here we have to use continuous contracts, mathematical devices that splice several contract
months. It pays to download two data series—the currently active contract, going back about six months, and the continuous contract going
back at least two years. Analyze weekly charts using continuous data,
and switch to the front month to study daily charts.
Do You Need Real-Time Data? Real-time data flows to your screen
tick by tick, as prices change in the markets. A live screen is one of the
most captivating sights on Earth, right up there with nude co-ed volleyball or a chain collision on an expressway. Watching your stock dance
in front of your face can help you find the best spots for buying and
selling—or make you forget reality and swim in adrenaline.
Will live data improve your trading? The answer is “yes” for a few,
“maybe” for some, and “no” for most. Having a live screen on your
desk, says a trader friend, is like sitting in front of a one-armed bandit.
You invariably end up feeding it quarters.
Trading with live charts looks deceptively easy, while in fact it is one
of the fastest games on the planet. Buy at 10:05 A.M., watch the price rise
a few ticks, and take a couple of hundred dollars off the table by 10:15.
Repeat several times a day, and go home at 4 with thousands of dollars and no open positions. Sleep like a baby and return in the morning. Trouble is, you need perfect reflexes to do that. If you pause to
think, delay taking a profit, or quibble accepting a loss, you’re dead.
Most successful day-traders are men in their early 20s. I’ve met very few
successful day-traders over 30. There are exceptions, of course—a friend

THE FIRST STEPS

39

in her 70s is a fantastic day-trader, but she is an exception who confirms
the rule. This game requires lightning-fast reflexes, as well as a certain
thoughtless capacity to jump, that few of us preserve past the age of 30.
Beginners do not need live data because they have to put all their
attention into learning to trade with daily and weekly charts. Once you
start pulling money out of the markets, it might be a good idea to apply
your new skills to intraday charts. When longer-term charts give you a
buy or a sell signal, use live data not to day-trade but to dance into or
out of positions.
Once you decide to use live data, make sure it’s real and not delayed. Most exchanges charge monthly fees for real-time data, while the
Internet is full of websites offering free data, delayed by 20 minutes.
That delay does not interfere with the entertainment value, but trading
with it is suicidal. If you need real-time data, be sure to get the best.

ANALYSIS AND TRADING
Markets generate vast volumes of information: annual and quarterly
reports, earnings estimates, corporate insiders’ reports, industry group
studies, technology forecasts, weekly, daily, and intraday charts, technical indicators, trading volume, opinions in chat rooms, the neverending discussion circles on the Internet. With so much data, you soon
realize your analysis can never be complete.
Some traders who have lost money fall into paralysis from analysis.
They develop a quaint notion that if they analyze more data, they’ll
stop losing and become winners. You can recognize them by their
beautiful charts and shelves crammed with stock reports. They will
show you indicator signals in the middle of any chart, but when you
ask them what they will do at the right edge, they only mumble
because they do not trade.
Analysts are paid to be right; traders are paid to be profitable. Those
are two different goals, calling for different temperaments. Institutions
tend to separate traders and analysts into different departments. Private
traders have no such luxury.
Analysis quickly reaches the point of diminishing returns. The goal
is not to be complete but to develop a decision-making process and
back it up with money management. You need to develop several
analytic screens to reduce a huge volume of market information to a
manageable size.

40

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

Fundamental Analysis
Fundamental analysts predict price movements on the basis of supply
and demand. In stocks, they study supply and demand for company
products. In futures they research supply and demand for commodities.
Has a company announced a new technological breakthrough? An
expansion abroad? A new strategic partnership? A new chief executive?
Anything that happens to the business can influence the supply of its
products and their costs. Almost everything that happens in society can
influence the demand.
Fundamental analysis is hard because the importance of different
factors changes with the passage of time. For example, during an economic expansion, fundamental analysts are likely to focus on growth
rates, but during a recession, on the safety of dividends. A dividend
may seem like a quaint relic in a go-go bull market, but when the chips
are down the ultimate test of a stock is how much income it generates.
A fundamental analyst must keep an eye on the crowd, as it shifts its
attention from market share to technological innovation to whatever
else preoccupies it at the moment. Fundamental analysts study values,
but the relationship between values and prices is not direct. It’s that
mile-long rubber band all over again.
The job of a fundamental analyst in the futures markets isn’t much
easier. How do you read the actions of the Federal Reserve, with its
great power over interest rates and the economy? How do you analyze weather reports during the critical growing seasons in the grain
markets? How do you estimate carryover stocks and weather prospects in the Southern versus the Northern Hemispheres which are six
months apart in their weather cycles? You can spend a lifetime learning the fundamentals, or you can look for capable people who sell
their research.
Fundamental analysis is much more narrow than technical. A moving average works similarly in soybeans and IBM, on weekly, daily,
and intraday charts. MACD-Histogram flashes similar messages in
Treasury bonds and Intel. Should we forget about the fundamentals
and concentrate on technicals? Many traders take the path of least
resistance, but I think this is a mistake.
Fundamental factors are very important to a long-term trader who
wants to ride major trends for several months or years. If the fundamentals are bullish, we should favor the long side of the market, and

THE FIRST STEPS

41

if bearish, the short side. Fundamental analysis is less relevant to a
short-term trader or a day-trader.
You do not have to become an expert in the fundamental analysis
of every stock and commodity. There are very intelligent people who
specialize in that, and they publish their research. Many of them also
bang their heads against the walls, unable to understand why, if they
know so much about their markets, they cannot make money trading.
If we can take our ideas from fundamental analysts but filter them
through technical screens, we’ll be miles of head of those who analyze
only fundamentals or technicals. Bullish fundamentals must be confirmed by rising technical indicators; otherwise they are suspect.
Bearish fundamentals must be confirmed by falling technical indicators.
When fundamentals and technicals are in gear, a savvy trader can have
a field day.
WHERE DO I GO FROM HERE?

The main book on the fundamental analysis
of stocks is Security Analysis by Graham and Dodd. Both authors are long
dead, but the book is being kept up-to-date by their disciples. If you
decide to study it, make sure to get the latest edition. Warren Buffett, a
student of Graham, became one of the richest men in the world. There
is an easy-to-read book that explains his approach to fundamental analysis—The Buffett Way by Robert G. Hagstrom.
The best review of futures fundamentals is in The Futures Game by
Teweles and Jones. This classic volume is being revised and updated
every 10 years or so (be sure to get the latest edition). It has a section
on the fundamentals of every futures market. Whether you trade soybeans or Swiss francs, you can quickly read up on the key factors driving that market.

Technical Analysis
Financial markets run on a two-party system—bulls and bears. Bulls
push prices up, bears push them down, while charts show us their
footprints. Technical analysts study charts to find where one group
overpowers the other. They look for repetitive price patterns, trying to
recognize uptrends or downtrends in their early stages and generate
buy or sell signals.
The role of technical analysis on Wall Street has changed over the
years. It was very popular in the early part of the twentieth century,

42

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

ushered in by Charles Dow, the founder of The Wall Street Journal
and the originator of the Dow averages. Several prominent analysts,
such as Roger Babson, predicted and identified the 1929 top. Then came
a quarter century of exile, when institutional analysts had to hide their
charts if they wanted to keep their jobs. Technical analysis has become
hugely popular since the 1980s. Easy access to personal computers has
put technical software within easy reach of traders.
The stock market has become increasingly short-term oriented in
recent years. Gone are the days of “buy-and-hold” when people bought
“good stocks” for the long run, put them away, and collected dividends. The pace of economic change is increasing, and stocks are moving faster and faster. New industries emerge, old ones sink, and many
stocks have become more volatile than commodities. Technical analysis is well suited for those fast-paced changes.
There are two main types of technical analysis: classical and computerized. Classical analysis is based solely on the study of charts, without using anything more complex than a pencil and ruler. Classical
technicians look for uptrends and downtrends, support and resistance
zones, as well as repetitive patterns, such as triangles and rectangles.
It is an easy field to enter, but its main drawback is subjectivity. When
a classical technician feels bullish, his ruler tends to inch up, and when
he feels bearish, that ruler tends to slide down.
Modern technical analysis relies on computerized indicators whose
signals are much more objective. The two main types are trendfollowing indicators and oscillators. Trend-following indicators, such as
moving averages, Directional System, and MACD (moving average
convergence-divergence), help identify trends. Oscillators, such as Stochastic, Force Index, and Relative Strength Index (RSI) help identify reversals.
It is important to select several indicators from both groups, set their
parameters, and stay with them. Amateurs often misuse technical analysis by looking for indicators that show them what they want to see.
The main tool of technical analysis is neither the pencil nor the computer, but the organ that every analyst is supposed to have between his
ears—the brain. Still, if two technicians are at the same level of development, the one with a computer has an advantage.
Technical analysis is partly a science and partly an art—partly objective and partly subjective. It relies on computerized methods, but it
tracks crowd psychology, which can never be fully objective. The best
model for technical analysis is a public opinion poll. Pollsters use scientific methods but need psychological flair to design questions and
