
Technical Analysis Is Universally
Accepted
In 1980, traders viewed technical analysis largely as an oddball or even crackpot backwater of investment theory. The explosion of interest in technical
analysis since then can be attributed to numerous forces, including
✓ The failure of fundamental-based advisors and managers to deliver
consistent and high returns

www.pdfdummies.com

308 Part VI: The Part of Tens
✓ The spread of personal computers to almost every home
✓ The Internet
So pervasive has technical analysis become that today you can find it in
social networks like YouTube and Twitter. Someone who mentioned MACD
in 1980 may have been considered a nut job; today if you don’t know the
term, you’re hopelessly outdated. Note that change in the investor and trader
mind-sets are arising from the retail masses and the software geeks and brokers who serve them, rather than from the academics or the conventional
investment management firms. Technical analysis is the tool of a democratic
revolution against security market elites. Now the crackpots are the ones
denying the usefulness of technical analysis.

Algorithmic Trading Is on the Rise
The rise of algorithmic trading is the logical extension of the acceptance of
technical analysis. Algorithmic trading is automated order-entry designed in
advance by traders employing computer programming but executed entirely
by computers. Algo trading is also named robot trading (and the program is
named a robot). Algo trading identifies high-probability trades by using indicator analysis, arbitrage opportunities, intermarket analysis, or some other
aspect of price behavior. Traders widely use algorithmic trading in equity
and commodity markets, including foreign exchange, and it accounts for a
high and rising percentage of total volume.
A special variety of algo trading is high-frequency trading that seeks to
exploit tiny and momentary price gaps identified directly from electronic
information, usually price information but also volume and other inputs.
Because computer data processing is far faster than human brain data processing, trades can be executed in rapid-fire manner, with hundreds of trades
executed in a minute or two.

Foreign Exchange Is More Prevalent
Those individuals discouraged by the difficulty of beating the market or even
just keeping even in equities are often seduced by the idea that trading foreign exchange (or FX) is somehow easier and, because of the use of leverage,
more profitable. Client standards are low because the broker has the right to
close any trade the instant it falls to breakeven, thereby preventing a loss the
customer may not be able to cover. A trader is allowed to open an account
with a small charge (as small as $500) on a credit card and begin trading the
same day.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 20: Ten Ways the Market Has Changed
A new breed of spot FX retail brokers promote the idea that FX trading is an
easy way to get rich quick, even though it should be obvious that in all trading, the little guy is always up against big institutions with deeper pockets.
Having said that, the FX market is the biggest in the world at about $4 trillion
per day and operates virtually 24 hours per day, reducing liquidity risk and
the ability of any single player to move the market. The FX market is also
fairly immune from insider information, and best of all, it is highly trended
and thus suitable for technical analysis.

Hard Assets Have Revived Interest
Technical analysis can be applied to any security, even when you know absolutely nothing about the fundamentals. Technical skills encourage traders to
feel qualified to foray into hard assets as well as equities.
Hard assets include precious metals such as gold and industrial metals such
as nickel and copper, as well as oil and more perishable commodities like
grains, cocoa, and sugar. Interest in hard assets as an investment class
waxes and wanes throughout history, but until recently, trading them was
too expensive for the average trader to attempt. Now brokers offer minicontracts, exchange-traded funds, and complex structured deals that allow
anyone to participate in the hard-asset markets.
In addition, during the early 2000s, U.S. commodities exchanges modernized
the reporting of volume from next day to same day. Commodity traders still
don’t get live real-time volume, as on the equity exchanges, but at least they
get it before the sun goes down. Volume can be a critical confirming or warning
factor.

Intermarket Trading Is Blooming
Because you can apply technical analysis to any security, the resulting widespread embrace of trading multiple asset classes simultaneously has some
odd side effects. Big price moves occur without any real connection to the
fundamental supply-and-demand dynamics of one security and often without
the technical indicators giving the customary signals (such as overbought
or oversold) because of a change in either the fundamentals or technicals in
another seemingly correlated security. Oil, for example, moves in an inverse
correlation with the U.S. dollar, so you can’t look at only your oil price
chart — you also have to look at the chart of euro-U.S. dollar exchange rate.
Sometimes gold is inversely correlated with the dollar and sometimes with
the euro.

www.pdfdummies.com

309

310 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Intermarket trading capability has resulted in some bizarre and frightening
outcomes, like the number of barrels of oil referred to in crude oil futures
contracts exceeding the number of barrels of oil in existence during the late
2000s. The key concept behind intermarket integration is risk appetite and
its mirror image, risk aversion. Traders become risk averse when indicators
suggest a security is overbought, but now traders become risk averse when
some other security’s indicators suggest it is overbought. This factor adds
another layer of needed work on top of the chart work you’re doing on your
security.

Leverage Is Dangerous
When your indicators fall in line one by one to increase your confidence
in your trade, you may be tempted to increase your position by borrowing money to supplement your starting capital. Leverage is the use of debt
issued by brokers to traders. In the U.S. equity markets, the most a trader
can borrow from the broker is 50 percent of the face amount of the trade,
with each broker applying its own standards so that the amount of leverage
extended to the trader is often a great deal less. In commodity trading and in
some foreign markets, the allowable leverage is a lot higher.
In foreign exchange, for example, leverage of 100 to 300 times used to be
commonplace but was reduced in 2010 to 50 times. Even this reduction in
leverage means that the trader with a capital stake deposited at the broker
of $10,000 can trade contracts collectively worth $500,000. It should go
without saying that trading with such high leverage is seldom a good idea, if
only because you may be tempted to ditch your stops or otherwise engage
in wishful thinking instead of heeding your trading rules. Technical analysis
can’t stand alone without trading rules.

Internationalization Is Becoming
More Popular
Due to technology, foreign brokers are able to offer the same services as
domestic brokers, often at vastly reduced costs, and escaping U.S. regulations. For example, in 2009, the National Futures Association instituted a new
regulation disallowing a foreign exchange trader from creating a hedging
position in the same account (in other words, the first position was long a
currency and the new position is short to offset — or hedge — the first one).
This regulation applies only to U.S. trading accounts and traders can circumvent it by having an account outside the United States.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 20: Ten Ways the Market Has Changed
Second, internationalization is seen in the form of domestic investors in a
country (such as Japan) that is actively seeking higher returns in foreign markets and currencies, even when they’re using domestic brokers who now offer
special securities with embedded options like limited foreign exchange risk.
Last but not least, internationalization takes the form of corporations or sovereigns issuing securities, usually bonds or specialized forms of bonds, in
foreign countries in its own currency or the foreign country’s currency. Some
of these securities are wildly complicated, such as a bond-like derivative contract that offers a fixed 8 percent return for five years on a foreign exchange
contract of the Brazilian real-Euro cross rate with a 2 percent floor on foreign
exchange losses. Eek!
Internationalization raises market participation and thus liquidity, but also
introduces new uncertainties to your comfort level in your technical analysis.
New regulations and the existence of these newfangled exotic contracts and
blended securities make it very hard to backtest your indicators. Also, you
may think that you know where support and resistance lie on your chart, but
you will be wrong if some big institution has an options strike price under
or over it. Plus, some event in a foreign country can move the price of your
security in a new, never-seen-before way.

Hedge Funds and Sovereign Wealth
Funds Are the New Big Dogs
Hedge funds were invented in the late 1940s and sovereign wealth funds in
1953 (Kuwait) but accelerated as a trend around 2000. Both types of funds
embrace trading strategies that travel far beyond the buy-and-hold idea,
including sophisticated technical analysis applications as well as the following:
✓ Taking short positions to benefit from down markets
✓ Diversifying holdings into asset classes previously dominated by a small
group of specialists (such as oil, metals, and agricultural commodities)
✓ Getting into emerging markets
Hedge funds and sovereign wealth funds are run by well-educated, advancedmath managers who question conventional ways of thinking about markets,
and in many cases engage in algorithmic trading, including high-frequency
trading. They are the big new players or “agents” in many markets. As technical analysis-oriented players with deep pockets, they are market leaders and
may promote more trendedness and higher volatility, which means that you
need to stay on your toes and keep your indicators adaptive.

www.pdfdummies.com

311

312 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Platforms Are Emerging
A platform is a computer capability upon which software applications can be
built. In trading applications, the platform provider offers two-way data transmission (prices and analysis to the user and trade orders from the user), usually with security, storage, and analytical options built in. Some platforms,
such as Metatrader, allow open-source contributions from users that are
then available to everyone.
Among the first major trading platforms was TradeStation, which started as
a technical analysis software company and transformed itself into a broker
that offers live, online technical analysis woven into the order-entry process. Interactive Data is another broker that joined with data and technical
analysis vendor eSignal. Instead of doing your chart work on one PC and then
switching to the broker’s electronic order-entry Website, you perform all the
functions in one space — and with the platform offering you ideas, analysis,
and real-time alerts. Anyone can build an automated trading system using an
advanced platform — this is, of course, both a curse and an opportunity.

Exchange-Traded Funds
Have Made Their Mark
Exchange-traded funds (ETF) is a class of investment fund that bundles
together related securities and trades like an individual stock on an
exchange. An ETF consists of a basket of securities that trades in its own
right as a proxy for the collection. For example, the SPDR (“Spider”)
exchange-traded fund serves as a proxy for the S&P 500 index.
From a single ETF in 1993, the range of ETFs expanded to nearly a thousand
ETFs in the U.S. alone, with more being created by the month. Most ETFs replicate the performance of a stock, bond, or commodity market — or take a
position that effectively shorts that market. ETFs are an alternative to mutual
funds, which create a pool of generally unrelated securities and almost never
outperform the market indices. ETFs, while designed to trade at about the
same price as the net asset value of its components, are subject to supply and
demand of their own, and prices can vary widely from the collective prices of
the underlying securities. ETFs sometimes offer double or triple leverage and
can trade erratically, which reduces confidence in your technical analysis.

www.pdfdummies.com

Appendix

Additional Resources

Y

ou may be overwhelmed the instant you start searching for material on
technical analysis. A lot of the information you find is full of jargon and
math, and some of it is downright crackpot (although you don’t know that at
first). Much of it is just intimidating.
Relax. You don’t need all this stuff, just enough to get started. Of course,
start with the main chapters of this book, which give you all the basics you
need to know to launch your technical analysis career. However, if you want
some additional reads, this Appendix lists some I find useful and complementary to Technical Analysis For Dummies, 2nd Edition.
Plenty of technical traders use a single, easy-to-master technique to achieve
their financial goals. I know one trader who made his first million after reading one book (Edwards and Magee — see the “Additional Reading” section
later in the chapter). Others try all the ideas and methods, and don’t want to
miss a trick.
Why spend time and money on research? Because you never know when
you may come across an idea that strikes a resounding chord in you — the
Eureka! moment, when you say to yourself: I can do this.

The Bare Minimum
You can use price quotes from the newspaper and graph paper, but realistically, you need charting software and an electronic data source, plus a few
additional books as you discover what aspects of technical analysis and technical trading are most appealing and workable for you.

Online resources
Become familiar with charting conventions you can find on Web sites such as
www.stockcharts.com, www.stockchartwizard.com, finance.yahoo.com,
chartadvisor.com, and other free sites.

www.pdfdummies.com

314 Technical Analysis For Dummies, 2nd Edition
In no time at all you can find many excellent newsletters and blogs, too, but
in the beginning, resist the temptation to start following them because you
really should do some charting work yourself in order to be qualified to evaluate the newsletter or blogger.

Charting software
You want to survey what is out there for free because after you buy a charting package and invest the time and energy to master it, changing horses is
hard. Many traders are satisfied with their broker’s charting programs, which
are becoming more advanced all the time. Using your broker’s charting software saves time and reduces errors by combining analysis with order entry.
I have been using Metastock by Equis (www.equis.com) since the early
1980s and so to me it is the most user friendly. It comes with preset indicators, a user guide, and data to get you started.
Equally valuable is the TC2000 software from Worden (www.worden.com).
The principle is to scan the equities universe on fundamental criteria, and
then apply key indicators. Worden offers first-class free seminars, too.
Other charting software packages are
✓ eSignal (www.eSignal.com)
✓ EnsignSoftware (www.ensignsoftware.com)
✓ NeoTicker (tickquest-inc.software.informer.com)
✓ NinjaTrader (www.ninjatraderpro.com)
✓ TradeStation (www.tradestation.com)
What should you require of your software? At the least, your charting
software should have an easy interface with your source of raw data. You
should be able to switch time frames along a wide range (from three minutes
to monthly). Your software should be able to show bars in regular OHLC
format, candlestick format, and point-and-figure. It should allow you to draw
an unlimited number of lines at any slope and contain at least ten standard
parameter indicators, including moving averages, MACD, stochastic oscillator, Bollinger bands, and linear regression and linear regression channel. You
also want it to be capable of writing your own formulas and modifying the
ones included in the charting package.
Futures magazine (www.futuresmag.com) and Technical Analysis of Stocks
and Commodities magazine (www.traders.com) both offer annual reviews
of all the charting software, all the system vendors, all the brokers, and so
on. Active Trader magazine (www.activetradermag.com) offers articles on
trading system design.

www.pdfdummies.com

Appendix: Additional Resources

Additional Reading
I like books. Books are the medium through which other traders deliver new
ideas and offer guidance on avoiding mistakes. I begin this section with a list
of my favorites. I recommend these resources because they are written by or
about real traders who suffered through the process of figuring out how to
trade profitably. Note that I organize each book section in the order of what I
find most important and useful so you can know where to start reading.

My favorites
✓ How I Made $2,000,000 in the Stock Market, by Nicholas Darvas (Lyle
Stuart)
✓ How I Made $1,000,000 Trading Commodities Last Year, by Larry Williams
(Windsor Books)
✓ Long-Term Secrets to Short-Term Trading, by Larry Williams (Wiley)
✓ Trader Vic — Methods of a Wall Street Master, by Victor Sperandeo
(Wiley)
✓ Evidence-Based Technical Analysis, by David Aronson (Wiley)
✓ Candlestick and Pivot Point Trading Triggers, by John Person (Wiley)
✓ Profitable Candlestick Trading, by Stephen Bigalow (Wiley)
✓ Market Wizards: Interviews with Top Traders, by Jack Schwager
(HarperBusiness)

Encyclopedias
✓ Trading Systems and Methods, by Perry Kaufman (Wiley)
✓ Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns, by Thomas Bulkowski (Wiley)
✓ Encyclopedia of Candlestick Charts, by Thomas Bulkowski (Wiley)
✓ Encyclopedia of Technical Market Indicators, 2nd Edition, by Robert Colby
(McGraw-Hill)
✓ Technical Traders Guide to Computer Analysis of the Futures Market, by
Charles LeBeau and David Lucas (McGraw-Hill)

Classics
✓ Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, by Robert Edwards and John Magee
(Saint Lucie Press)
✓ Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, by Edwin Lefevre (Wiley)
✓ Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, by Charles
Mackay (Harmony Books)

www.pdfdummies.com

315

316 Technical Analysis For Dummies, 2nd Edition
Special areas
✓ The Definitive Guide to Point and Figure, by Jeremy du Plessis (Harriman
House)
✓ New Thinking in Technical Analysis: Trading Models from the Masters by
Rick Bensignor (Bloomberg Press)
✓ Bollinger on Bollinger Bands, by John Bollinger (McGraw-Hill)
✓ Beyond Technical Analysis, by Tushar Chande (Wiley)
✓ Street Smarts, by Laurence A. Connors and Linda Bradford Raschke (M.
Gordon Publishing Group)
✓ PPS Trading Sytem, by Curtis Arnold (Irwin)
✓ Advanced Swing Trading, by John Crane (Wiley)
✓ The New Science of Technical Analysis, by Thomas DeMark (Wiley)
✓ The Master Swing Trader, by Alan S. Farley (McGraw-Hill)
✓ Price Pattern & Time: Using Gann Theory in Trading Systems, James A.
Hyerczyk (Wiley)
✓ Channels & Cycles: A Tribute to J.M. Hurst, by Brian Millard (Traders
Press)
✓ Elliott Wave Principle, by Robert Prechter and Alfred Frost (New Classics
Library)
✓ Martin Pring on Market Momentum, by Martin Pring (McGraw-Hill)
✓ Steidlmayer on Markets, by J. Peter Steidlmayer (Wiley)
✓ Maximum Adverse Excursion, by John Sweeney (Wiley)

Money management
✓ When Supertraders Meet Kryptonite, by Art Collins (Traders Press)
✓ Trading for a Living, by Alexander Elder (Wiley)
✓ How To Take a Chance, by Darrell Huff and Irving Geis (W. W. Norton &
Company)
✓ A Mathematician Plays the Stock Market, by John Allen Paulos (Basic
Books)
✓ Van Tharp’s Definitive Guide to Position Sizing, by Van Tharp
(International Institute of Trading Mastery)
✓ The Mathematics of Money Management, by Ralph Vince (Wiley)

www.pdfdummies.com

Index
• Symbols and Numerics • adjusting
moving average, 214–217
%D, 238–240
%K, 238–240
1-2-3 method, 175–176
2 percent stop rule
adding to position, 88
adjusting to new position, 89
compared with indicator stops, 85
overview, 81–82
5-day moving average
overview, 213
weighing against 20-day, 217–220, 268
9-day exponential moving average, 223
10-day moving average, 206
11, as magic number, 37
20-day moving average
overview, 213
volatility, 250
weighing against 5-day, 217–220, 268
30-percent retracement rule, 33
200-day moving average, 214

•A•
acceleration
applying, 233–235
calculating, 227–231
compared with momentum investing, 230
confirming trend indicators, 234–235
cycles, 233
defined, 227
filtering, 232–233
percent rate of change, 230–231
relative strength index (RSI), 235–238
smoothing price changes, 232
stochastic oscillator, 238–242
accumulation, 30, 46, 172
Active Trader (magazine), 314
Adam and Eve double bottom, 162
adaptive moving average (AMA), 215–216
adding
new indicators, 269–275
to positions, 88

positions, 30, 86–89
advance/decline ratio, 48
Advanced Swing Trading (Crane), 316
advancing issues, 48
after-hours trading, 98–99
algorithmic trading, 283, 308
all known information, 13
AMA (adaptive moving average), 215–216
analysis (technical). See also speciﬁc
topics
overview, 9–12, 21–22
reliability of, 16–17
scope of, 20–22
universal acceptance of, 307–308
Appel, Gerald (investment advisor),
222–225
applying
indicators, 72
momentum, 233–235
patterns, 260–262
stops to adjusted positions, 89
Arnold, Curtis (author)
PPS Trading System, 158, 316
Timing the Market, 158
Aronson, David (author)
Evidence-Based Technical Analysis, 315
assets (hard), 309
ATR (average true range)
bands, 252–253
indicator, 249–250
overview, 133–135
auction model of supply and demand,
23–25
average trading range, 131–135
average true range. See ATR (average true
range)
avoiding
curve-fitting, 301
emotional impulses, 299–300
misinterpretation, 107–108

www.pdfdummies.com

318 Technical Analysis For Dummies, 2nd Edition
•B•
backtesting
combined indicators, 269
evaluating risks of, 72–73
importance of, 288
indicators, 305
optimization, 69–70
refining, 70–71
bandwagon effect, 25
bar placement, 114–115
bars (price). See also candlestick charting
closing price, 98–100
daily data, 109–110
defined, 94
down day, 99
drawing channels, 185–187
high, 101–102
identifying downtrends, 104
identifying uptrends, 103–104
importance of, 303
length, 129–130
low, 102
nontrending, 15–16, 109
opening price, 96–98
overview, 93–96
reading, 104–108
time frames, 108–112
unreadable, 108
up day, 99
zooming in/out, 110–112
bear/bearish, 21, 100
bearish divergence, 241
bearish engulfing candlestick pattern, 147
bearish market, 21
bearish sentiment, 42
beating the market, 17–19
behavior (crowd)
compared with individual behavior, 26
estimating retracements, 26
identifying, 25–27
overbought, 30–31
oversold, 30–31
overview, 29–30
retracements, 31–32
behavioral economics, 34
benchmark levels, establishing, 67
