
clothes. Most people can't do it. Most people want to follow a trend. "The trend is your friend."
Maybe that is valid for a few minutes in Chicago, but for the most part, following what everyone
else is doing is rarely a way to get rich. You may make money that way for a while, but keeping it
is very hard.
But actually, your whole style of trading involves staying with a trend for years. So isn't what
you are saying contradictory?
That kind of trend—a trend that is economically justified—is different. You have to see the
supply/demand balance change early, buy early, and only buy markets that are going to go on for
years. By "trend following," I meant buying a market just because it goes up and selling it just because it goes down.
What trading rules do you live by?
Look for hysteria to see if you shouldn't go the opposite way, but don't go the opposite way until
you have fully examined the situation. Also, remember that the world is always changing. Be aware
of change. Buy change. You should be willing to buy or sell anything. So many people say, "I
could never buy that kind of stock," "I could never buy utilities," "I could never play commodities."
You should be flexible and alert to investing in anything.
If you were counseling the average investor, what would you tell him?
Don't do anything until you know what you are doing. If you make 50 percent two years in a row
and then lose 50 percent in the third year, you would actually be worse off than if you just put your
money in a money market fund. Wait for something to come along that you know is right. Then
take your profit, put it back in the money market fund, and just wait again. You will come out way
ahead of everybody else.
Are you ever wrong on a major position play? That is, are one of your almost sure shots ever
wrong, or are they so well selected that they just invariably go?
I don't want to make it sound like I don't know how to lose money—because I know how to lose
money better than most people—but there has not been a major mistake in a long time. But you
have to remember that I don't trade that often. It is not as though I'm making three decisions a
month. I may make three decisions a year, or five decisions a year, and I'll stay with them.
How often do you make a trade?
Well, there is a difference between making a trade and deciding to buy bonds in 1981. I've owned
bonds since 1981, but I sell around the position. I make trades, but basically I own them. I went
short the dollar at the end of 1984. Now, I have made a fair amount of trades in currencies since the
end of 1984, but it is basically one trade with a lot of trades around it.
Very few investors or traders are as successful as you have been over time. What makes you
different?
I don't play. I just don't play.
I can understand that. But still, very few people can analyze the same fundamentals you are
looking at and so consistently be correct in assessing all the variables.
Just don't do anything until you know you've got it right. As an example, until you see American
agriculture hit a low, then no matter what happens in the world—unless the world is going to stop
eating—you can't go wrong. American agriculture is now so competitive, and so many marginal
farmers have been washed out, that it has to go up. You just watch American agriculture
deteriorate, deteriorate, deteriorate, and then you buy. You may buy early or late. In my case,
usually a little bit early. But, so what? The worst that happens is you bought it too early. Who
cares?
Is there anything else besides the fact that you are very selective that sets you apart?
I have no boundaries. I am totally flexible. I am open to everything, and I pursue everything. I have
no more compunction about speculating in Singapore dollars or shorting Malaysian palm oil than I
do about buying General Motors.
What happens when you have one scenario for currencies, one for the stock market, one for
153

the bond market, and not everything meshes?
Then I won't do anything. It happens all the time. I don't do anything until all the pieces fit.
What is your opinion about chart reading?
I haven't met a rich technician. Excluding, of course, technicians who sell their technical services
and make a lot of money.
Do you use charts yourself?
Yes, I look at them every week. I use them for knowledge, to see what is going on. I learn a lot
about what is going on in the world by looking at charts.
But you don't ever look at charts and say, "I've seen this type of pattern before and it usually
means the market is topping."
I look at charts to see what has happened.
Not what will happen?
What has happened. If you don't know what has happened, you'll never know what is going to
happen. The charts say to me that there is a runaway bull market. They give me facts, but that's it. I
don't say—what is that term you used earlier, reversal?—there is a reversal here. I don't even know
what a reversal is.
A reversal simply is—
Don't tell me. It might mess up my mind. I don't know about those things, and I don't want to know.
Do the markets behave any differently now because so much money is being managed by
trend-oriented systems?
No. They may not always have been on a computer, but there always have been systems. I
guarantee that you can go back 100 years in the market and not find a single decade where there
hasn't been some kind of system, some kind of new formula developed to play the markets.
So the markets today are basically the same as the markets in the 1970s, 1960s, and 1950s.
The same as the markets in the nineteenth century. The same things make markets go up and down.
They have not changed the rules of supply and demand.
Do you have any goals at this point?
I'm looking for adventure. I'd like to be able to wean myself more and more from the markets.
There are two problems. First, investing is such a wonderful pastime that it is hard to give up. I
haven't changed from when I was twenty-two years old. I always wanted to read and know
everything that was going on and figure out the future. The second problem is what do I do with my
funds if I just stop? If I turn it over to my friendly broker at XYZ, I would be broke in five years,
and then I would have to go back to work.
Any last words?
Good investing is really just common sense. But it is astonishing how few people have common
sense—how many people can look at the exact same scenario, the exact same facts and not see
what is going to happen. Ninety percent of them will focus on the same thing, but the good investor—or trader, to use your term—will see something else. The ability to get away from
conventional wisdom is not very common.
Jim Rogers' unique approach may be difficult to emulate in its entirety, but many of his trading
principles are of great relevance to all traders. His basic concepts are:
1. Buy value. If you buy value, you will not lose much even if your timing is wrong.
2. Wait for a catalyst. Bottoming markets can go nowhere for very long periods of time. To avoid
tying up your money in a dead market, wait until there is a catalyst to change the market direction.
3. Sell hysteria. This principle is sound, but its application is far from easy. Rogers' methodology
can be paraphrased as follows: Wait for hysteria, examine to see whether the market is wrong, go
against the hysteria if fundamentally validated, be sure you are right, and then hold on tight. The
tricky parts are the last two steps. Very few traders have Rogers' analytical skills and intuitive
insights to wade through the maze of facts and statistics in the "three-dimensional puzzle" of world
154

markets and arrive at the correct long-term projections with uncanny high ac
curacy. Without this type of accuracy, the ability to sit tight could be a lethal virtue. And, even if
you can predict long-term economic trends with a sufficient degree of accuracy, there still remains
the problem of being able to sit tight, particularly when the financial steamroller of market hysteria
is running counter to your position.
For example, I doubt many traders would have been able to sell gold at $675, stay short while it
surged to $875 in only four days, and then hold the position through the subsequent long-term
collapse, eventually liquidating at a large profit. Even if you have the steel nerves necessary to
duplicate this feat, you probably lack the financial resources to outstay this type of market or the
same high degree of accuracy in picking your shots. Perhaps this particular concept should come
with a caution label attached: Warning! Any attempts by the unskilled practitioner to apply the
method described herein can lead to financial ruin.
4. Be very selective. Wait for the right trade to come along. Never trade for trading's sake. Have the
patience to sit on your money until the high probability trade sets up exactly right.
5. Be flexible. Biases against certain markets or types of trades limit your field of opportunity. A
trader who says, "I will never go short," has a distinct disadvantage compared to the trader who is
willing to go short as well as long. The trader who is open to examining a broad range of markets
has a distinct advantage over someone who is willing to participate in only one market.
6. Never follow conventional wisdom. Keep this principle in mind and you will be less likely to buy
stocks after the Dow has already moved from 1,000 to 2,600 and everyone is convinced that there
is a shortage of stocks.
7. Know when to hold and when to liquidate a losing position. If you believe the market is going
against you because your original analysis was flawed (such as when you realize you overlooked an
important fundamental factor), then as Rogers states: "The first loss is the best loss." However, if
the market is going against you, but you are convinced your original analysis was right, then sit out
the hysteria. As a cautionary word, this latter condition should be applied only by traders who fully
understand the risks involved.

155

Mark Weinstein-High-Percentage Trader
After a brief period as a real estate broker, Mark Weinstein became a full-time trader. His start in
trading was so naive that he virtually threw his money away. After that early failure, Weinstein
withdrew to seriously study the markets and earn another trading stake. With the exception of one
disastrous trading experience, Weinstein was a successful trader from that point on. He has
intensively traded a wide variety of markets, including stocks, stock options, stock index futures,
currencies, and commodities. Although he is reluctant to divulge specific details, it is clear that he
has profited handsomely in all these trading arenas.
I met Mark Weinstein through a mutual friend. Although he was very intrigued by the project, his
desire for anonymity made him reluctant to tell his story. He would call me and say, "OK, I will do
it, let's schedule the interview." Then the next day he would call and say, "I changed my mind. I
don't want the publicity." This pattern was repeated several times, with each decision accompanied
by lengthy phone conversations regarding the merits and drawbacks of doing the interview. Finally,
in exasperation, I said, "Mark, we could have done three interviews in the time we have spent
talking about it." That was our last conversation regarding the matter until about two months later
when, impressed by the caliber of traders who had agreed to participate in this book, Weinstein
decided to do the interview.
Weinstein met me at my office one summer evening. Because the building turns off the airconditioning after 5:00 P.M., we were forced out into a corner lobby, which, although warm, was at
least less stifling. The interview was conducted over a dinner of deli sandwiches and soda. Through
our phone conversations, I knew Weinstein had a strong tendency to go off in many directions in
any conversation—that's how his mind works, one topic leads him to think of five others and their
various interrelations. Dreading a mammoth editing task, I stressed to Weinstein the need for
remaining focused on the specific questions. I could tell that Weinstein was making an extra effort
to heed this advice. This fact notwithstanding, the interview lasted five hours and yielded a 200page transcript.
How did you first get involved in trading?
Back in 1972, when I was a real estate broker, I had a friend who was a commodity broker. He and
I had gone to school together.
Did your friend get you interested in the markets?
It didn't take much to get me interested because my father's hobby was gambling. He was very
good at percentages, and I used to watch him at the crap tables. In a sense, I think being a trader is
in my genes. Also, trading fascinated me because of my mathematics and science background in
college and because I had a commodity broker friend who was into computer strategies.
Do you remember your first trade?
I remember it exactly. I opened up a commodity account with $8,400, and I went long corn based
on a recommendation made by the firm's grain analyst. Three days later, I was out $7,800.
Did your broker friend advise you to follow the analyst's recommendation?
Yes, and he also followed it. What I didn't realize then was that the market had been rising for some
time and was already overbought when I went long. It wasn't even a bad reaction. I just got in on
the move too late. I didn't have enough margin to keep the position going. Also, my guts turned on
me, and I didn't want to put up any more money.
It sounds to me like your friend let you put on a position that was clearly out of line with any
money management principles.
It was one of those get-rich-quick schemes.
Did you know anything about the markets at the time?
Absolutely nothing. If I flipped through a chart book, it looked like a collection of TV test patterns
to me.
Did you have any idea of the risk involved?
I knew that the chances of my winning were very slim because I didn't know what I was doing.
156

Didn't it occur to you that you should learn something before you started?
No, because I was desperate for a change; I didn't like being a real estate broker.
Was the money that you invested a substantial part of your savings at the time?
It was all the money I had.
When did you get enough money to come back into the markets?
It took me approximately six or seven months. I worked seven days a week and rented as many
apartments as I could get my hands on. I also sold a few co-ops. By that time, I had saved up about
$24,000.1 took out $4,000 to live on, and used the remaining $20,000 to open an account.
Did you make any effort to learn anything about the markets in the interim?
Yes. I studied the gold market, learned how to chart, and became familiar with the concept of
overbought and oversold markets. I figured that if I bought a severely oversold market and left
myself enough money for two margin calls, I couldn't lose unless something drastic happened in
the economy. That was my method.
But if you use that approach in a trending market, you are going to get killed.
It worked in that market. I guess ignorance was bliss.
What were your trading results the second time around?
I did well for several years after that and managed to build a small fortune. But a lot of that was due
to luck.
It couldn't have all been luck. What were you doing right when you were making money?
In relation to what I know now, there was very little that I was doing right. I think I just had good
markets. In those days, commodities seemed to follow chart patterns a lot better than they do now.
Very few people knew anything about technical analysis then, so the markets were much more
orderly. I got a break by learning as much as I could about technical analysis at a time when it was
working pretty well.
Did you have a method for controlling risk?
No, and I still don't. I depended on my nervous system and gut reaction. I covered positions when I
did not feel right about them. Sometimes it would be after two days; sometimes after two hours.
Were you spending all day trading?
All day and all night. I was losing friends left and right. I sat in a studio apartment with charts
plastered on every wall. I probably looked like a madman to the friends I had left.
So this was really a full-time endeavor.
Not only an endeavor—it was an obsession! I slept with it; I dreamt about it. Sometimes I would
stay up all night thinking about what I would do the next day. If I didn't need sleep, I would have
done it twenty-four hours a day. At that point, it wasn't the money that was motivating me. I was
hooked on the game: on the challenge of trying to figure out the market.
Did you sometimes wake up with a feeling that you knew the gold market was going higher or
anything like that?
No, it had nothing to do with the direction of the market. It was just an extension of what I was
doing during the day. I would take so much of it to sleep that I ended up exploring unconsciously
what I had been doing consciously that day.
Did you have any goals when you set out?
Well, the great American dream is to make a million dollars, and that was particularly true in those
days. I never really had a materialistic dream until I started vacationing and traveling in Europe.
When was this? How many years after you started trading?
It was in the mid-1970s. I had been trading for about three or four years.
Had you passed the million dollar mark by that point?
Yes, and I had made enough money to be able to relax, start vacationing, and think about things I
wanted to buy. At that point, I was feeling confident enough to know that I could replace the money
157

I spent with my trading profits. I figured the next logical step was to start appreciating the money I
was making. I saw a castle in the south of France that I wanted. I was particularly impressed that
the castle had a moat around it, and the idea of living there appealed to me. It was on the market for
only $350,000, and I figured it would take about $50,000 a year to keep it up.
That doesn't sound like a lot of money for a castle.
Today it is probably worth $5 million. When I came back to the U.S., I wanted to make the money
to pay for the castle almost immediately. That was a tremendous mistake.
I don't understand. You already had the money to buy the castle; you didn't have to make it.
Even though I had the money, I still looked at it in terms of how much it cost. I know people in this
business who have $17 million in their trading account and won't buy a new car.
So you didn't take your money out of the account to buy the castle.
No, I came back and decided that making the money was going to be my goal.
In other words, your next $350,000 in profits was going to go for the castle.
Exactly.
What happened?
On my next trade, I put on a large long position in soybeans. The market closed up the first day,
and I had about a 25 percent profit on my money. I was planning to get out of the position at the
end of the week. The biggest mistake I made was having a specific target of what I wanted out of
the trade.
The target being determined not by market analysis, but rather by the $350,000 you wanted
to make on the trade. Did you trade differently because you were trying to make money for a
specific purpose?
Yes, I didn't consider the risk and took on too large a position. I was not using any type of rational
judgment. I was being guided by my material desires. The market went up again the next day, but
collapsed suddenly late in the session, locking limit-down.
Did you get stuck with your position at limit-down?
Yes, I couldn't get out. The next day I showed up at the brokerage office and the market opened
offered limit-down. I waited all day to see if it would come off of locked limit-down, but it didn't.
I take it that you would have liquidated your position if you could have.
If the market had traded, I would have sold out at any price.
Do you remember your emotions at the time?
I was in a state of shock and had no decision-making capability left whatsoever. I couldn't fall
asleep, and found myself almost praying the market would somehow trade the next day. On the
third day, I called the office about a half an hour before the opening, and they told me it didn't look
like there was any hope. I didn't even bother going in because I couldn't face the people in the
office. I was certain that they were getting a big thrill out of my situation.
Why is that?
There were a few other professional traders in the office who were never able to make the kind of
money I had been making. When this situation developed, they were almost relieved. It seemed to
justify all those years of their not taking positions like I did. They were really heartless. The only
person who was really upset was my broker, and, frankly, that was probably because he was afraid
of losing the account.
Did the other traders kid you about it?
They over consoled me and then laughed about it behind my back. They wanted to see me come in
and fall apart. That is why I stopped coming to the office.
Do you think they relished your predicament because it made them seem less deficient as
traders?
It went beyond that. I think there are a lot of people in this business who just enjoy watching others
lose money.
158

Once you stopped going into the office, what did you do during the day?
I checked with other brokerage houses, trying to get price quotes.
Why didn't you just call your own broker? I was too embarrassed, and I didn't want to take
the derision. Your own broker was kidding you?
I didn't know what to think of him. I was starting to get paranoid and hostile because nothing could
be done. I went to a competing firm and spoke to their grains analyst. I was looking for someone to
hold my hand. He told me I would be OK, because the fundamentals were still strong and there
would be a tremendous demand for soybeans if the market went down another day. Of course, on
the fourth day, the market locked limit-down again.
How much were you losing each day?
About $ 125 thousand a day. This was at a time when the average annual salary was $15,000.1 was
not born rich, and I couldn't stop thinking of my loss in those terms.
Could you put that loss in perspective relative to your account size?
Before that trade, I had nearly $1.5 million in my trading account. So I was losing nearly 10 percent
of my equity level prior to the trade each day.
I was devastated. I felt like I was wounded in a trench and watching myself bleed to death. The
market went limit-down five days in a row, and I lost over $600,000. On the fifth day, I remember
sitting in a park holding hands with a girl I had picked up, literally crying on her lap. I was
practically in a psychotic state. I thought about getting out of the business altogether. I started to
think that what everybody was telling me was true—maybe it was just luck that I had made money
all those years. I worried that if I continued trading, I could wind up losing it all, and being forced
to go back to some job I didn't like.
Which was more devastating, the large monetary loss, or your feelings about going from
success to failure?
It was the money and the limit situation, and the fact that I couldn't act. My exact thoughts were:
Here I am, a person who thought it was un-American to go short, and what I found out was really
un-American was not being able to get out of a position.
So you felt cheated by not being able to get out?
I definitely felt cheated. To this day, I think there is something wrong with limit price moves.
Are you implying that price limits that were supposedly created to protect the public actually
work against them by preventing people from getting out of their losing positions?
Yes. I think the market should be totally free of restraints.
There is talk about putting limits on stock markets as a way of reducing volatility. Would that
actually be jumping from the frying pan into the fire?
Absolutely. Now, the average investor knows that if he wants to get out, he can at least get out at
some price. Imagine if this guy calls his broker and finds out that he can't even get out of the
market.
In other words, you are saying that those who are expounding the idea of limits are really
going to make matters worse for the small investor.
It is absolute lunacy. It is a law that is being proposed for the benefit of sophisticated institutional
investors.
Your earlier comment implied that, prior to the soybean trade, you always traded the long
side of the markets. Is that right?
Yes. I never went short. I felt it was un-American. After the soybean trade, I realized that the
business I was in was the height of capitalism, and it really made no difference what side of the
market you were on. All I could think about was that the people who were short made money and I
lost money.
How long did the emotional impact of this experience last?
Months. I didn't want to trade commodities anymore. I ripped every chart off my walls. I tore up
everything in my house that had anything to do with commodities.
159
