
25

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

350

Home price index (1983-1 = 100)

300
250

Boston

200

Los Angeles

150
Miami
Phoenix

100
50
0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 3.2
Home Prices in a Sample of U.S. Cities, Quarterly, 1983–2014
Source: Fiserv/S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices Inc., deflated by the U.S.
Consumer Price Index, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, and rescaled to 1983 = 100.

prices in Miami and Phoenix completely missed the first of these two booms.
Boston held much of its value increase—in 2014, remaining over twice its
1983 real value—but Miami and Phoenix hardly changed at all in real value
between 1983 and 2014.
It is commonly said that there is no national home market in the United
States, only regional markets. There is something to that statement, but it is
not completely true and appears to be getting less true. While many markets
in the United States had been highly stable and trendy, there were enough
markets that were moving rapidly by the mid-2000s that the national series
began to show signs of life, and it continues to be lively.
The period of home price increase starting in 1998 in the United States
was concentrated in some states and metropolitan areas, and where it was
concentrated, there were many stories about the psychological correlates of
the boom. Stories abounded in the U.S. during the bubble years 2000–2006 of
aggressive, even desperate, bidding on homes, of homes selling the first day
on the market for well above the asking price, of people buying homes in a
rush to beat the market—homes that they had sometimes hardly even had
a chance to look at. People were afraid that the price of housing would soon
rise beyond their means and that they might never be able to afford a house,

26

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

450
400
Paris
Vancouver
London

Home price index

350
300
250

Sydney
Boston

200

New York
Shanghai
World

150
100
50
0
1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

2014

2019

Figure 3.3
Home Prices in Some World Cities and for the World,
Quarterly, 1985–2014
Source: Boston (1983-1 = 100, heavy line) and New York (1983-1 = 100, dashed line):
S&P/Case-Shiller (Fiserv, CoreLogic); London (1983-1 = 100, heavy line): Halifax;
Paris (1983-1 = 100, dashed line) price per square meter of existing apartments in
Paris: Indice Notaire INSEE since 1991, before 1991 Chambre des Notaires de Paris,
data courtesy Philippe Trainar, Fédération Française des Sociétés d’Assurances;
Shanghai (1995-1 = 100, solid thin line): China Real Estate Index System through
2003 linked to eHomeday second-hand home price index starting 2003; Sydney
(1986-2 = 100, solid line): Australian Bureau of Statistics; Vancouver (1983-1 = 100,
dot-dash line): index through 2004 courtesy of Tsur Somerville, University of
British Columbia, linked to Teranet series starting 2004; Equally-Weighted Global
House Price Index (2000-2 = 100, gray line) from the International Monetary Fund
(52 countries). Each home price index is deflated by a Consumer Price Index of the
respective country. Each index was multiplied by a constant to be 100 in 1983-1
where possible.

and so they rushed to bid on homes. But, in other cities, where there was not
a history of home price volatility, there were few such stories, and investors
were relatively less reactive to home price changes.
It is in the big glamorous cities (and associated regions) of the world that
these bubbles tend to happen. Taken together, these regions can experience
a massive boom. It appears that for these cities, there is indeed more than a
national market for real estate. There is an international market, as Figure
3.3 illustrates.

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

27

This figure shows real home prices up to 2014 in Boston, London, New York,
Paris, Shanghai, Sydney, and Vancouver, all of them glamorous international
cities, and for the entire world. The similarity among the price paths for these
cities is striking (really stunning price increases both in the late 1980s and after
the late 1990s, with stagnant or falling prices in between), as is the similarity
of popular stories of exaggerated excitement about and speculation in homes.
And these were not the only prominent cities undergoing spectacular housing booms in the early 2000s. Others include Bombay, Copenhagen, Dublin,
Hangzhou, Istanbul, Las Vegas, Madrid, Melbourne, Rome, San Diego, Tianjin,
and Washington, D.C. Whatever it was that drove this excitement, it could cross
vast oceans. This notable trend was part of what prompted my warning in 2005
that we were in the midst of a housing bubble of unprecedented proportions.
Since 2005, the picture has become more mixed. Some cities continued their
upward trend, with only small retrenchments. Others fell from their lofty
heights and have yet to return. Many have seen a leveling-off in price increases.
The cities shown in the figure were selected for this plot based on their
newsworthiness and volatility in price movements. The Global House Price
Index, produced by the International Monetary Fund for 52 countries around
the world, shows much less volatility, and indeed, some other world cities
showed a very different pattern. For example, real residential urban land
prices in Tokyo more than doubled between 1985 and 1990, at the same time
as the 1980s boom in the cities shown in the figure, but then embarked on a
steady downtrend, showing no signs of the boom after 2000, and falling by
nearly half by 2004.12 Prime residential property in central Delhi doubled in
real terms in the period from 1991 to 1995, when prices in the cities shown in
Figure 3.2 were falling, and then fell by half by 2003, when prices in the cities
shown in Figure 3.2 were rising.13 Still, it is a puzzle that home prices in so
many cities, such as those shown in Figure 3.3, among the most glamorous
cities of the world, are so strikingly similar. We will try to understand this
similarity later in this book.

The Absence of a Substantial Long-Run
Uptrend in Real Home Prices
The reader may find it striking, in looking over the series of home prices since
1890 in Figure 3.1, that there appears to be no overall continuing uptrend in
real home prices. It is true that for the United States as a whole, real home
prices were almost twice as high in 2006 as in 1890, but all of that increase
occurred in two brief periods: the time right after World War II (with the first
increases occurring in the early 1940s, just before the war ended) and a period
that appears to reflect a lagged response to the 1990s stock market boom (or a
response to its boom and crash), with the first signs of increase occurring in

28

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

1998. Other than those two periods, real home prices overall have been mostly
flat or declining. Moreover, the overall increase (with real prices up 48% in the
124 years from 1890 to 2014, or 0.3% a year) was not impressive.
Why then do so many people have the impression that home prices have
done so well? I think that, since homes are relatively infrequent purchases,
people still remember the prior purchase price of a home from long ago and
are surprised at the difference between then (when prices, including consumer
prices in general, were lower) and now. The same thing does not happen with
stocks, since companies periodically authorize splits to keep the price of the
stock, in the United States, around the conventional $30-a-share level. Thus,
people do not have long-run comparisons thrust upon them for stocks as they
do for houses.
For example, in closing out the estate of an elderly couple in the early 2000s,
one may have been surprised to see that they purchased a house in 1948 for
only $16,000 and that the estate sold that same house in 2004 for $190,000. The
appearance is that the investment in the house did extremely well. But, in fact,
the Consumer Price Index rose eightfold between 1948 and 2004, and so in
fact the real increase in value was only 48%, an increase of less than 1% a year.
Moreover, part of the increase should be attributed to a sequence of investments in the house or the neighborhood that improved its quality. Even if the
house sold in 2004 for twice as much as the median then, $360,000, it still does
not imply great returns on the investment, for that price would imply only a
tripling of real value in over fifty years, a real annual rate of increase of a little
less than 2% a year. About the only time that our attention is called to such
long-term changes in asset value is when we hear stories about houses, and
we may be over-impressed; most of us are not good at evaluating such stories.
To try to check further whether these data, showing so little real appreciation of homes, might be in error, I asked economists I know to direct me to
other very long-term home price indices that might provide some independent
evidence about the long-term behavior of such prices. I was able to locate a
few other long-term home price indices, and, even though they are not for the
full time period or for an entire country, they may provide some more clues
about long-term trends.
The U.S. Census has asked, in its decennial censuses since 1940, for homeowners’ estimates of the value of their homes. Their median reported value
in real (inflation-corrected) terms increased by 2.0% a year from 1940 to
2000, considerably more than the 0.7% real increase over the same interval
revealed by the home price index shown in Figure 3.1. A growth rate of 2.0%
cumulated over 60 years implies twice the total appreciation in home value
that the 0.7% growth rate implies. However, the Census data take no account
of the increased quality and size of homes as does the index shown in Figure
3.1. There have been big changes in homes since 1940. Note, for example, that

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

29

in 1940, according to the U.S. census, 31% of U.S. dwelling units did not have
running water, and 38% did not have a bathtub or shower. The standard of
living has improved massively since then, and surely homes are a lot better
now. With the U.S. population doubling and real per capita income quadrupling since 1940, a great many more substantial homes have been built. The
smaller and lower quality homes of 1940 have largely been torn down over
the years, and so we are likely to have a mistaken impression from the older
homes we observe today that homes of long ago were comparable to homes
of today. Much of the Census’ reported 2.0% per year increase in value must
really reflect this, not the appreciation of individual unchanged homes.
There is a remarkable high-quality index from 1628 to 1973 of prices of
houses along the Herengracht, one of the old canals of Amsterdam. According
to Professor Piet Eichholtz of the University of Amsterdam, this area is a good
place to construct a home price index, since the houses there have remained
remarkably unchanged over the centuries and since home price sale data have
been meticulously recorded and preserved. The index shows quite a number
of ups and downs in home prices over this period—as one might expect
from the city that gave us the tulip mania, the remarkable boom in the price
of tulips in the early 1600s. According to Eichholtz’s data, Herengracht home
prices doubled between 1628–29 and 1632–33, just before the peak of the tulip
mania, and home prices fell almost back to their 1628–29 level before tulips
peaked in 1637. The market for these homes was certainly volatile. But when
this index is corrected for inflation over this whole period, we see that there
was not much overall home price increase. From 1628 to 1973 the Herengracht
annual real price increase was only 0.2%. Real home prices did roughly double,
but took nearly 350 years to do so.14
My colleague Karl Case produced a long historical index of land values in
the Boston area by searching the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds for sales of
property described in words such as “a certain parcel of pure land” or “a certain
tract of land” and with no mention of buildings or improvements. This way
he was able to purge the price index of the effects of quality change. He found
that, from 1900 to 1997, the real increase in the price per square foot of land was
3.9% per year. This is a much higher rate of price increase than is suggested
by the price index shown in the plot, exceeding the growth rate of real GDP.15
There is a famous study of land prices in Chicago by economist Homer
Hoyt, One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago, published in 1933. Hoyt too
found dramatic increases in land prices. For example, his data show that prices
of lots per front foot on State Street and Michigan Avenue (major downtown
addresses) rose 5.9% a year in real (inflation-corrected) terms from 1877 to
1931, for a twenty-two-fold increase overall.16
But, of course, these figures for Boston and Chicago are hardly reliable estimates of the increase in prices of real estate in the United States overall. Boston

30

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

and Chicago are not typical of U.S. real estate, any more than Microsoft was
typical of start-up companies. The success of these cities was a local surprise
that people could not have predicted with confidence. Hoyt himself was quite
clear about the surprising growth of Chicago, for he noted, “The growth of
Chicago in the nineteenth century has been paralleled by no other city of a
million population or over in either ancient or modern times. . . . It compressed
within a single century the population growth of Paris for twenty centuries.”17
Moreover, land prices are not a good proxy for home prices, which involve
a structure as well as land. Land values long ago accounted for only a tiny
fraction of a home’s value, and so land prices could appreciate at a relatively
high rate in successful cities without making home prices climb rapidly.
Reflections from casual observation ought to convince us that homes have
not appreciated significantly over the decades. People are living in larger
homes than they were decades ago and are spread out over more properties;
more people are living in a house by themselves over the decades, if not during the slow years just after the 2007–9 financial crisis; more children have
been moving out and starting their own homes rather than living with their
parents until marriage.18 How could they afford this if home prices were rising steeply? This suggests that in the United States, real home price growth
must have been less than real per capita disposable income growth, which
was 2.0% a year from 1929 to 2013.
The bottom line appears to be that, while there is some uncertainty about
the actual path of home prices, most of the evidence points to disappointingly
low average rates of real appreciation of most homes.

Why Has There Not Been a Strong Uptrend in Real Home Prices?
The reader may be puzzled that these data show so little evidence of an
increase in real home prices in the United States over so long a period. The
popular notion that real estate prices always go up is very strong, so strong
that in Japan, Korea, and China there is a name for this notion: “the real estate
myth.” Isn’t land scarce, and isn’t its price going to go up steadily as population increases and as the level of prosperity increases?
Actually, the theoretical argument that home prices can be expected to
appreciate faster than consumer prices in general is not strong. Technological
progress in the increasingly mechanized construction industry may proceed
faster than technological progress in other sectors, such as the important service
sector. Barbers and teachers and lawyers and counselors are doing things more
or less as they always have, but new materials, new construction equipment,
and prefabrication, as well as new technology for building high-rise apartment
buildings, help make housing cheaper. If new homes can be built more cheaply,
then the price of homes should tend to fall relative to other prices to reflect that.

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

31

Public attention seems to focus most on congested big cities that have little
land available for building, and where land prices can get very high. But most
cities have abundant land. Developers who eye these abundant-land cities for
prospective sites do sometimes complain about the shortage of land there, and
about barriers erected by conservationists and neighborhood associations,
but what they are really talking about is a shortage of lots in the prime areas
where they would most like to build.
These abundant-land cities show long-run price paths that never deviate
too far from building costs. This should come as no surprise. If ever home
prices were to far exceed the cost of construction, there would be an incentive
for builders to supply more houses, and a steady increase in supply would
continue until the extra supply depressed price back down to cost.
The situation in these stable cities ought to be considered typical of much
of the United States. The land on which homes are built is of course limited:
except for a few projects to reclaim land from the sea, they are not making any
more land. But almost all of the country’s land is still in agriculture, forestry,
or other non-intensive uses; this is land whose price is very low per buildable
lot, and so there is still plenty of room to spread out. According to the 2010
census, urban land area was only 3.1% of total land area in the United States.
However, there is little empty land available to build on in Los Angeles
or Boston or, for that matter, in London or Sydney. And yet the same safety
valve ought to operate there to prevent home prices from rising too far, at
least if people were rational and far-seeing. When home prices rise to the
point that mortgage payments take up a large share of family income, there
is a powerful incentive to move to a lower-cost area. This safety valve tends,
in the long term, to prevent the price of homes from rising too much in real
(inflation-corrected) terms and to burst bubbles that have inflated too far.
The safety valve is more effective in cities where buildable land is abundant
nearby, but it is also effective in cities far from buildable land, because people
and businesses will, if home prices rise high enough, move far away, even
leaving an area completely.
The problem is that people in glamorous regions often tend to believe that
land prices, already a significant component of home value there, will keep
going up and up. Surely, they think, there is some advantage to living in those
areas. People do enjoy the prestige of living in an area where celebrities live,
and they also benefit from the business opportunities there. It is easy for
residents there to imagine that more and more people are thinking similarly,
and that they will continue to bid up real estate prices in their city. This is
irrational exuberance in the context of real estate.
But, in reality, if home prices get sufficiently high in a city relative to the
income of the people who live there, and thus make it difficult to afford a
decent home, people start taking a hard look at these assumptions. The fact

32

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

is that the prestige one derives from simply living in a glamorous city is not
very significant. And although individual cities may have reputations tied up
with specific businesses, with a little imagination one sees that other centers
in the same businesses are constantly being set up, like the North Carolina
Research Triangle set up in former tobacco fields. These centers eventually
cause corporate relocators to draw population away from older centers to
these new centers, thereby relieving upward pressure on real estate prices in
the older centers.
Beyond this, very high home prices create political pressures for the easing
of land-use restrictions. Eventually there is an increase in supply of homes
(as for example in high-rise apartments) in the glamorous cities themselves.
Thus, in glamorous speculative cities, there has been a tendency for home
prices to rise and to crash, but to show little long-term trend. Prices rise while
people are optimistic, but forces are set in motion for them to crash when they
get too high. It is striking to note from Figure 3.2 that the increase in real home
prices over the three decades from 1983 to 2013 in Miami and Phoenix was
just about zero overall, though they had both doubled along the way. Based on
these trends, owner-occupied housing is looking like a bad long-term investment relative to the stock market: despite the occasional volatility of real estate,
nationally it has offered practically no capital gains for long-term investors.
But one must remember the implicit dividends that one receives from living
in a home, that is, the value of the shelter and other services provided by a
home. These dividends are untaxed. It is often said (correctly) that there is
a tax advantage to owning rather than renting. If one swapped houses with
one’s neighbor living in an identical house and each paid rent to the other (so
that the rent received would cancel out the rent paid), the transaction would
be virtually meaningless from an economic standpoint, but it would incur
taxes, since the rent received would be taxable, while the rent paid would not
be deductible. For this reason, most people are well advised to buy rather than
rent the homes they live in.
Another reason to buy rather than rent is that the rental contract carries with
it intrinsic moral hazard problems: the renter cannot be given proper incentives
to maintain the property as would a homeowner. The moral hazard problem
is reflected both in higher rents and in restrictions on the homeowner’s rights
to engage in certain activities or to remodel the property to taste.
There is no accurate measure of the tax-free implicit dividends in the form
of housing benefits that housing provides to compare with the (usually taxable) dividends paid on stocks, nor of the costs of maintenance that must be
offset against the dividends homes provide. There actually can be no accurate
measure of the implicit dividends on homes, since there is no way to put a
dollar value on the psychic benefit one gets by owning and living in one’s
own home, as against the psychic costs one incurs by having to take care of
