
For the United States, the two most important components of the balance
of payment are the Current and Capital Accounts. The Current Account

34

Inside the Currency Market

measures trade in goods and services based on inﬂows and outﬂows, a standard measure that traces back to the classical model. It is a measure of the
value of imports to exports. The term merchandise trade is used by the popular
media to characterize these numbers.
Next, the Capital Account measures the total outﬂow of net capital
account payments. Income Accounts measure receipts and payments of
foreign-owned assets in the United States and U.S.-owned foreign assets.
The last category is the unilateral account that includes transfer payments
to foreigners, such as grants. Together, a trade deﬁcit or surplus is derived
and released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis every three months and an
exchange rate is determined by the markets based on the released ﬁgure.
A deﬁcit or surplus will see a revaluation among spot currency pairs to
reﬂect the increase or decrease in prices among nations. A surplus will see a
devaluation of the U.S. dollar while a deﬁcit will see appreciation to reﬂect
the various degrees of price. The U.S. dollar has an inverse relationship to its
economic releases.
With price variables, the theory is that eventually equilibrium in the
trade balance will reach parity as prices adjust to the reported deﬁcit or surplus within nations. Due to the many variables in the above models such as
GDP, prices, income, and interest rates, many models to gauge spot prices
developed over the years to streamline the various factors.
The long-run model and one popularized by Keynes is the monetary
approach with a focus on elasticities highlighted by demand. This approach
is generated by government money and investments that create societal
demand. Critics would argue that it eliminates the focus on capital ﬂows,
so many would rule out the possibility to ﬁnd equilibrium within the above
variables and a proper exchange rate.
The Austrian School of Economics popularized by Von Mises and more
recently Von Hayek in the 1940s would argue cash balances, income, and
prices rather than GDP, money supply, or price levels is the equilibrium
determination.
Milton Friedman and the early Monetarists School of Economics
believed monies should target the money supply on a weekly basis in rising
and falling economies to ﬁnd equilibrium. While these arguments may
appear outdated, the Monetarists actually won the argument by adoption
when Ronald Reagan became president in 1980. Von Hayek, Keynes, and
Friedman still live within today’s economic studies because their research
forms the foundation of today’s worldwide economic system.
Von Hayek and Ludwig Von Mises are descendents of the Austrian School of
Economics, an offspring that dates its history to Thomas Aquinas in the ﬁfteenth

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

35

century. The last argument not considered until now are nations such as Canada
and the United States that traditionally ran deﬁcits knowingly and willingly.
The argument suggests that foreigners would ﬁnance deﬁcits by the purchase of government bonds. The Japanese traditionally ran trade surpluses with
the United States as far back as World War II, while the Europeans and Great
Britain ran surpluses sporadically as deﬁcits and surpluses waxed and waned
with spot prices. Equilibrium or exchange rates were never factors to consider
in this model.
GDP models to determine equilibrium and exchange rates operate on
the assumption that if surpluses are reported, GDP is greater than consumption, investment and government expenditures, and total income exceeds
investments. A deﬁcit in the current account means GDP is less than consumption, investment, and government expenditures, and income is then less
than expenditures. All are basic models that nations adopted in a uniform
manner today.
A widely popular model is the Taylor Rule where i  r*  pi  0.5
(pi  pi*)  0.5 (y minus y*) where p*  target inﬂation, i  nominal fed
funds rate, pi  rate of inﬂation, y  logarithm of real output and y*  log
potential output. No coherent equation can be derived without Gustav
Cassel, considered the founder of purchasing power parity (PPP), also termed
the Law of One Price.
Purchasing Power Parity

Swedish Economist Gustav Cassel set out in the early 1920s to determine
a true exchange rate between nations at various price levels when the gold
standard broke down at the outbreak of World War I. Exchange rates were
allowed to free ﬂoat, causing an anomaly never understood—inﬂation. The
Law of One Price asks the question how much does a tradeable good in nation
A cost in relation to nation B? The Law of One Price says goods expressed in
one price in one market should sell for the same price in another market or
an arbitrage would exist to equalize prices.
Suppose a bushel of wheat costs $15 in the United States and $30 in
Japan. The spot price of wheat in United States divided by the price of wheat
in Japan is equal to $15 U.S. dollars divided by $30 Japan is equal to a 0.50
exchange rate. This is termed absolute purchasing power parity. It is a measure of price levels. The formula:
Spot Rate  Price in nation A/Price in nation B

36

Inside the Currency Market

is an implied rate that will determine if one side of a spot pair will appreciate
or depreciate based on the price of goods and the Law of One Price. It is a
measure to determine and possibly encounter misalignments and equilibrium
from the previous examples. Cassel believed that either the exchange rate or
purchasing power would adjust until parity existed.
Relative purchasing power parity measures the real effective exchange
rate (REER) measured by inﬂation between two nations. Suppose inﬂation
in Nation A was 8 percent and 2 percent in Nation B. REER is supposed to
reﬂect the difference and the market will equalize the rates. The formula is:
Real Effective Exchange Rate  (Actual Exchange rate P foreign price)/
P domestic price
Cassel believed the higher prices in one nation, the lower the purchasing
power. His absolute PPP example is a measure of price levels, while the relative
PPP compares price changes. The relative PPP is employed today by central
bankers because it reﬂects market conditions and spot rates more quickly than
the absolute method, especially if the correct price index is used as the gauge.
OECD-Eurostat PPP Program

Since the 1960s, the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) in conjunction with Eurostat established the PPP Program to determine exchange rates for euro zone- and OECD-member nations. 2008 marks
the ninth round of the PPP (OECD 2010).
The program gauges exchange rates among nations by a comparison of
prices paid for products and services between nations’ GDPs. By a comparison of prices paid within the basket of goods measured for GDP, the PPP
Program can determine an approximation of the health of an economy in
terms of future GDP levels and exchange rates.
With ﬂoating exchange rates, a whole new body of knowledge has developed over the years to explore the validity of Cassel’s PPP, only to determine
that prices may equalize in terms of exchange rates but would take a few years
to do so and that would depend on the spot pair. Some pairs can ﬁnd imbalances for many years. Another factor is the measure of prices employed.
Suppose relative PPP through the REER was employed against the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) that measures inﬂation. The International
Monetary Fund (IMF), central banks, and other world organizations use

Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

37

the REER approach against a basket of trade weights. The weightings could
be a number of factors that incorporate REER such as the GDP deﬂator,
producer prices, wholesale prices, or manufacturing output because of its
focus on inﬂation. The OECD reports that every 10 percent fall in the euro
trade weighted exchange rate lifts nominal output 1.8 percent. Real effective
exchange rates are usually factored as:
Q t  St-P1,t  P1,t to represent a spot rate in
logs in relation to quantity to price
The monetarists approach represented by Von Hayek to exchange rates
and equilibrium can be deﬁned by the equation
Spot rate  V  Y  MS
where

V  Velocity of money, domestic  foreign,
Y  Real Output, and
MS  Money supply.
Spot  (Vd/Vf )  (Yf/Yd)  (MSd/MSf )

Von Hayek believed this formula would maintain a stable price, provided
that the speed of velocity of money was orderly without the production of
inﬂation.
Irving Fisher introduced the Fisher Effect and the International Fisher
Effect in the 1930s to further gauge the correct spot-currency price based
on inﬂation. Inﬂation is a measure of the general price level. High inﬂation
erodes the purchasing power of money by its ability to purchase fewer goods
and services. This can only be measured by interest rates.
The Fisher Effect says the nominal interest rate is equal to the real rate
plus the expected rate. Suppose the interest rate in Nation A was 8 percent
and Nation B was 5 percent and the expected rate was 2 percent. The real rate
would be 1 percent. The International Fisher Effect then compares spot rates
based on inﬂation. The formula is:
E1  E2/E2  100  1$  1 yen

38

Inside the Currency Market

Where E is the exchange rate, and I$ and 1Y are national interest rates.
E1  E2/E2  1$  1Y/1  1Y
1$ 1Y  Spot rate

Conclusion

This chapter addressed quite detailed concepts in terms of currency pairs,
margin, rollover, brokers, and histories as they relate to exchange rates and
PPP. It is the basic chapter to understand how exchange rates factor within
the larger concept of today’s currency market. More important is the concept
of how a currency and how currency pairs are viewed in the context of each
nation that it trades. This chapter was the foundation as currency pairs will
begin the process to be priced in the traded markets. Now that an exchange
rate is understood, the next chapter will address theories and foundation of
effective exchange rates.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 3

Exchange Rates and
Trade Weight Indices
This chapter will address all the necessary conditions and formulas to
understand a true exchange rate and factor that true rate in terms of a basket of currencies in an index based on weights in the index according to each
nation’s currency and weight. These are known as trade weight indices (TWIs).
To factor another nations’s currency in a TWI sometimes holds the key to
gauging the proper levels of exchange rates between nations. Many formulas
and index-construction methodologies are provided for each nation to allow
a true picture of an exchange rate but enough information is provided to
allow anyone to form their own desired index.
The last factor of exchange-rate determination is to survey real-world
examples of individual nations and ascertain how they factor real effective
Exchange Rates (REER) in relation to their TWI, also known as an effective
exchange rate index.
Effective exchange rates are employed so one nation can measure trade
against a basket of weights assigned to another nation’s currency in the index.
This process can be managed on a daily basis much more easily than managing the volatility of spot rates. To manage spot rates means the market must
be monitored on a constant basis around the clock so entries and exits can
be obtained in relation to a preferred spot price in order to lock in a rate to
export a good. Days may pass before a market price can be obtained.
The REER formula in its basic yet effective form is employed and
factored as a basic purchasing power parity (PPP) model by
Qt  Spott  pt  pt  pt

39

40

Inside the Currency Market

because it is the preferred method for central bankers and world organizations
due to its focus on inﬂation and as a more rapid measure of changes to prices
within nations. The measure is a spot price in logs in relation to quantity and
price within a nation. The formula can be rewritten as
Q t  Spott  pt  pt  pt
Log spot prices or exchange rates always allow a truer picture of a price
rather than for example a correlation formula that measures exchange rates in
relation to quantity and price.
TWIs are relatively new and became a function of ﬂoating exchange rates
the world has experienced since the breakdown of the Louvre Accords in the
early 1980s. It was the path to determine exact dollar terms of merchandise
trade, identify trade partners, and effects on spot prices. The ﬁrst constructed
indices for some nations were fairly primitive, but today the importance and
value of a nation’s spot price and the importance of TWIs are a vital function of a central bank and the nation it serves. It gauges an overall economic
picture of a nation even when that picture is not so clear.
For example, too high a spot price may mean a nation may gain in their
exports but gain nothing in their imports. What if the spot price of the U.S.
dollar/Japanese yen was 125 yen to dollars? Japanese vehicles sold in the
United States would sell at a high value. That’s great for the Japanese because
they earn revenue. Now the Japanese repatriate their monies home and they
ﬁnd an overabundance in the supply of yen. This overabundance of yen leads
to an erosion of prices in Japan and deﬂation takes over. The true purchasing power of the yen in Japan erodes as new money loses its value to old
money. Credit then paid in new money deteriorates against the old money.
So the Japanese lower their prime interest rate to accommodate consumers. But
the Japanese continue to export and earn even more revenue. The downward
spiral continues; as interest rates drop so does the value of the yen.
In a different example, deﬂationary yen is exported while inﬂationary
yen is repatriated home instead of the reverse scenario. In this instance, a balance
must be found, an equilibrium of spot rates that is conducive to both export
revenue and consumer health. This is one reason why PPP failed as a model
under ﬂoating exchange rates because every nation has economic factors that
may not match against another nation’s economy.
Japan is dependent on trade but it must import the resources for its
manufacturers in order to export those goods, so it may never experience
parity against the United States nor any nation under their normal trade
circumstances. To deﬂect this conundrum, Japanese companies established
satellites in all the major export nations of Japan to alleviate a deﬂationary

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

41

environment at home. Japan in 2007 began to then view their currency as
fair effective exchange rate (FEER) rather than REER. FEER allows a target
range that is set by the markets due to world interest rates among the major
nations at their historically low levels and monetary policy contained within
those levels. The answer to this conundrum for nations was TWIs.
TWIs forced nations to view their economies from an import and export
perspective of competitiveness. From an export perspective, nations determined their strengths, resources, major companies, cost of production, export
goods and services, trading partners, and revenues earned from exports.
Imports determined necessary resources for the health of the economy and
the general population.
Many nations rely on export revenue to fund their domestic needs.
Central banks of each nation were tasked with construction of a proper index,
the correct measures employed to ensure a timely monetary policy that would
balance inﬂation against change in prices and imports to exports based on
exchange rates. Due to the uniqueness of various economies, TWIs vary in
size, scope, and measures.
When indices were ﬁrst constructed in the 1970s, factors such as ﬁxed
and ﬂoating exchange rates and taxes and tariffs had to be considered. Major
trading nations today are quite different from those considered in the early
1970s. China is one nation that factors into this equation, but a whole host
of emerging-market nations now exist as trading partners that weren’t considered in the 1970s.
With the introduction of the euro in 1997, all nations overhauled their indices to reﬂect new trading arrangements. The standard indexes constructed then
remain the common practice today, with an annual review by all central banks.
One difference is the overhaul of indices around 2005 by nations to
reﬂect a growing need to include services in trade calculations. An advanced
trader could possibly factor a balance-of-payment determination and proﬁt
as the TWI is factored on a daily basis and released at the same time every
day. The release is a factor of the price of the respective nations’ exchange
rate against the U.S. dollar for the most part. Yet cross rates play an equally
important role.
Think of these indices as a measure of one currency against a basket
of other currencies. It is an external measure of prices as the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) is an internal measure of prices. Think about the spot
yen or euro that may trend upward against the U.S. dollar but trend down
against another currency. The implication for overall direction of the trend
of exchange rates against a basket of currencies says much in regard to overall
direction of the yen or euro and may bring into question or reinforce the
intensity of that trend.

42

Inside the Currency Market

What inﬂuences any TWI is spot and other market rates. Yet what inﬂuences spot is any TWI and other market rates such as short-term interest
rates. This is why market rates are monitored constantly by central bankers—
their economies depend on healthy rates.
The TWI ﬂuctuates on a daily basis and on occasion it trends because it is
a measure of a nation’s internal cost and external price competitiveness. That
trend is real because it is gauged against a basket of currencies. A high index
number says cost measures may be too high for the health of an economy. In
other instances, a high index number may be appropriate. Fixing times occur
daily at a predetermined time.
For example, New Zealand ﬁxes its TWI at 11:10 a.m. Wellington time.
This means the daily funding for contracts is paid at 11:10 a.m. New Zealand
time, 7:10 p.m. eastern daylight time. Great Britain publishes its rates on its
Exchange Rate Index (ERI) every two hours London time with a close at 4:00 p.m.
London time, 10:00 a.m. New York time. Trade weight numbers reported
throughout any trading day are called indicative rates and will be covered in
the next sequence. The euro zone is one circumstance where the reported trade
numbers are reported as a reference rate, also covered in the next section.
Trade-Weight Methodology

The ﬁrst question for any nation is how should an index be constructed to reﬂect
imports and exports with trading partners and who should be included? Also, how
should competitiveness of nations and prices be reﬂected? Should a nation target
inﬂation, prices, exchange rates, reserves, interest rates, or none of the above?
Central banks ﬁrst constructed nation weights that included trading partners.
Each nation receives a share of its value to trade within the index. Some
nations use trade shares, others utilize a percentage. Some nations ﬁx their
weights; others use a chained-link index. Some nations report an ofﬁcial
index and quantify that index against a broader list of cross rates within the
ofﬁcial index so that a market event doesn’t capsize the index and the ofﬁcial
reported ﬁgure is correct.
Broader indices are backdated and tested against the U.S. dollar and
against other price measures to ensure integrity of the ofﬁcial reported number. Cross rates are always tested by home nation/trade partner.
The derivation of cross pairs occurred in the 1990s as new nations
became members of import and export markets and the U.S. dollar wasn’t a
factor in those exchanges. Think about the Japanese that export to the euro
zone. The euro/Japanese yen is more of a factor in the transaction than the
U.S. dollar. Prior to cross pairs, only U.S. dollar pairs existed, so money

43

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

was repatriated through a triangulation of euro/U.S. dollar to Japanese yen/
U.S. dollar. Cross pairs eliminated the U.S. dollar and streamlined imports,
exports, and repatriations. An extraordinary amount of money depends on
the accuracy of index numbers.
Some indices measure strictly bilateral trade, others incorporate a variable
to capture a competitor’s competition by a chain link. This is the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) approach, and it ﬁrst incorporated this model when
it became a formal organization at the signing of Bretton Woods in 1944.
The IMF monitors world trade by its own trade weight index. All IMF members are listed in the index and held together by a chain link.
Some nations ﬁx their indices once daily, others ﬁx throughout the day
at regular market intervals. All report daily index prices on their central bank
sites. All report historical prices. An index is used because spot prices are too
volatile for true evaluation of trade, price, and exchange-rate measures.
What is incorporated is a price index that measures the rate of change of
prices over time based on a base period. Proper measurement incorporates
number theory as not only a measure of prices as quantiﬁed, but a scale factor
must be incorporated. Which index to employ as a true measure depends on
the quantiﬁcation of the index and the scale factor. Some indices are ﬁxed,
some are chain weighted. Research suggests chain-weighted indices work best
because of their gauge against another economic index, but as periods move
further out from their base years, problems may develop in their accuracy.
So they must be adjusted every few years. An example of CPI as a scale factor
works like this following formula.
n

V = ∑ Pi Q i
i1

where

pi  ith item in national currency units,
qi  corresponding quantity in the time period, and
i  ith item in the group of n that comprise the aggregate v.

The question is the base period.
In 1871, Ernst Louis Etienne Laspeyres invented this practical formula:
Pi i,t

∑P W
, w =p q
∑w
i,o

i,o

i,o

i

i,o

i,o

i,o

i

This is a weighted average of price ratios of each item weighted by expenditures at the base period. Quantities are ﬁxed at the base period.
