
Sharon, like Astrid, was not a shrieker. She was quietly invited to Susie Jr.’s Thanksgiving dinners and
included in bridge games with Bill Gates. A year after Bill and Melinda’s wedding, the Gateses were
celebrating their first anniversary on January 1, 1995, at their house in San Diego. Buffett invited Bill, Charlie
Munger, and Sharon to come over for a New Year’s Day bridge game. While Susie, long accustomed to
Warren’s choosing his own pursuits even in the midst of a family gathering, spent the day with family and
friends, Gates, Osberg, and Buffett sat down at the bridge table to wait for Munger. Buffett, who always ran
precisely on schedule, noted that it was time to begin but otherwise ignored Munger’s tardiness since nobody
else seemed bothered by it.
Gates was in a pleasant mood, but as they chatted, Buffett began growing irritated that they were being kept
waiting. When Munger did not appear after a few minutes, Osberg suggested a game of three-handed bridge
to keep the others entertained, partnering with both Buffett and Gates while keeping up her end of the
conversation.
After forty-five minutes of three-handed bridge, Buffett, who was playing the polite host, cracking jokes and
making conversation, trying to make everything okay, had become noticeably jumpy and restless. Suddenly,
he flew out of his chair. “I know where he is,” he said. He snatched up the phone and called the Los Angeles
Country Club.
Whoever answered the phone went off to search. Within a few minutes he had located Munger in the golf
grill, sitting with his cronies, as he habitually did every day when not at the office. He was about to take a
bite of a sandwich.
“What are you doing, Charlie?” Buffett asked. “You’re supposed to be playing bridge with us.”
“I’ll be there in a few minutes,” Munger replied.
Without a word of apology, he hung up the phone, put down his sandwich, and headed out to the car.
Half an hour or so later, Munger strolled into the Buffetts’ house at Emerald Bay, sat down at the table
exactly as if nothing had happened, as if he hadn’t noticed that he’d kept Bill Gates waiting for an hour and a
half on his first anniversary, and said:
“Happy New Year. Let’s play.”
Stupefied, the other three sat in silence for a moment.
Then Gates said, “Okay. Let’s play.”
They played.
***
Another group of Buffett’s loyal friends joined him for their biennial ritual when the Buffett Group held their
meeting at the Kildare Club in Dublin in September 1995. Because Bill Gates was present (for Gates
straddled all of Buffett’s worlds, since Buffett would have liked to become his Siamese twin), the government
of Ireland treated them like emperors. They were met at the airport by official government limousines and
watched over by security agents in helicopters. They dined with the chairman of Guinness, the Taoiseach*30
and his wife, and the U.S. ambassador, walked the cobblestones of Trinity College to the Book of Kells, and
clapped their hands in awe at the sleek hunt stallions of the Irish National Stud in County Kildare.
Never—even under Kay Graham’s auspices in Williamsburg—had they experienced such luxury. Filled with
incredible artwork and antiques, the K Club raised all of its own food on site and prepared it with a European
staff and chefs.

The gloss and glamour of the surroundings belied the fact that the Buffett Group members, many of them
fabulously wealthy by now, were largely unchanged. Warren saw some of these people only once a year or
so; yet he remained utterly devoted to them. Bill Ruane was still gregarious and told long, funny stories.
Walter Schloss still lived in a tiny apartment and picked stocks the same way he’d always done. The
Stanbacks, among the richer members of the group, still would not dream of flying any class but coach. Sandy
Gottesman still questioned everything skeptically and wanted an override on every deal. Tom Knapp had
finished buying up huge chunks of the Maine coastline and started in on Hawaii. Jack Byrne was as pumped
full of energy as ever. Roy Tolles still kept his thoughts to himself, except for shooting off a one-liner every
now and then. Ed Anderson and Joan Parsons pumped money into human-sexuality research, but Ed still
picked up pennies in the street, unless they were really dirty. Marshall Weinberg was still an irresistible flirt.
Lou Simpson was still such a good stock picker that he had become one of the Superinvestors of Grahamand-Doddsville. Carol Loomis had made enough money from Berkshire stock to fly in a private jet but still
couldn’t buy a jar of pickles without reflecting on the luxury of pickles during her Depression-era
childhood.39 Retired from building gigantic dams and bridges, Walter Scott now built gigantic houses instead.
After going to the theater, Joyce Cowin still walked up Broadway and across the park to the Upper East Side
in a snowstorm rather than take a cab. Ajit Jain, now a Buffett Group member, spent most of his time in his
room during the meetings, doing deals at a furious pace to please Buffett. Ron Olson, who had once been
liked by most people that Buffett knew—except Judge Brieant—was now liked by most of the people in
greater Los Angeles. Then there were Bill Scott, Mike Goldberg, and Chuck Rickershauser, all in various
states of retirement from working for years close to the nice, warm sun, also all in various stages of
recuperation from the effects of Rickershauser’s Law of Thermodynamics.40 Bill Gates, unlike the rest in so
many ways, shared the group’s intellectual interests and complete lack of pretense. As for Kay Graham, she
remained their one real connection to echelons of society that titillated them even while failing to seduce
them. “Oh, Princess Diana,” she would say. “Such a good friend. Much more there than is obvious.”
Amid the K Club’s luxury, Buffett handed out copies of a booklet, The Gospel of Wealth by turn-ofthe-century industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie. As he celebrated his sixty-fifth birthday, and
took stock of his life to date, he had been rereading Carnegie. Now he led the group in a debate of Carnegie’s
premise that “He who dies rich dies disgraced.” Carnegie had honored that philosophy, spending nearly his
whole fortune, one of the greatest in history at the time, to establish libraries in towns and cities all over the
United States.41 Buffett had always planned to die rich and disgraced, as Carnegie would put it, so that there
would be more to give away after he was gone. He insisted that the best use of his talents was to keep making
more money until he died, and he had no interest in being personally involved in the foundation’s work. That
would be Susie’s project. But he wanted to hear what other people thought and obviously was giving some
consideration to this question.
They went around the table. Bill Ruane, who had never cared much about money and was poor compared
with the rest, was about to undertake a project to transform the worst of New York’s public schools. He
would later go on to work with Columbia University to screen thousands of New York City schoolchildren
for mood disorders and suicide risk.42 Fred and Alice Stanback were among the most important donors to
environmental causes in the United States. Tom Murphy was chairman of Save the Children. Jane Olson,
Ron’s wife, chaired the international board of Human Rights Watch. Before Dan’s death, the Cowins had
donated an important collection of art to the American Folk Art Museum. Charlie Munger gave to Good
Samaritan Hospital and education. Walter and Suzanne Scott had donated huge amounts of money in Omaha.
Ruth Gottesman served on the Albert Einstein College of Medicine Board of Overseers. Marshall Weinberg
was gradually giving away nearly all of his money for scholarships, world health, Middle East issues, and
educational research. The others had their own causes.
When his turn in the conversation came, Bill Gates said, Shouldn’t the measure of accomplishment be how
many lives you can save with a given amount of money? He agreed with Buffett that you had to make the
money first in order to have the money to give away. But as soon as he had made a certain amount, Gates
said, he was going to use it to save more lives in the present, by giving most of it away.43
The Buffett Foundation was spending very little money in proportion to Buffett’s wealth. Buffett had chosen
two main philanthropic issues, overpopulation and nuclear proliferation, problems that are almost

