
10

CMGI began corporate life as College Marketing Group, which sold information about college professors and courses to academic publishers—a
business that bore a faint but disturbing similarity to National Student Marketing, discussed by Graham on p. 235.

482

Commentary on Chapter 18

stocks stopped rising in price, then went straight down. No longer
able to sell them for a profit, CMGI had to take their loss in value as a
hit to its earnings. The company lost $1.4 billion in 2000, $5.5 billion
in 2001, and nearly $500 million more in 2002. Its stock went from
$163.22 at the beginning of 2000 to 98 cents by year-end 2002—a
loss of 99.4%. Boring old CGI, however, kept cranking out steady
earnings, and its stock rose 8.5% in 2000, 43.6% in 2001, and 2.7%
in 2002—a 60% cumulative gain.
PA I R 6 : BA L L A N D S T RY K E R
Between July 9 and July 23, 2002, Ball Corp.’s stock dropped from
$43.69 to $33.48—a loss of 24% that left the company with a stockmarket value of $1.9 billion. Over the same two weeks, Stryker Corp.’s
shares fell from $49.55 to $45.60, an 8% drop that left Strkyer valued
at a total of $9 billion.
What had made these two companies worth so much less in so
short a time? Stryker, which manufactures orthopedic implants and
surgical equipment, issued only one press release during those two
weeks. On July 16, Stryker announced that its sales grew 15% to
$734 million in the second quarter, while earnings jumped 31% to
$86 million. The stock rose 7% the next day, then rolled right back
downhill.
Ball, the original maker of the famous “Ball Jars” used for canning
fruits and vegetables, now makes metal and plastic packaging for
industrial customers. Ball issued no press releases at all during those
two weeks. On July 25, however, Ball reported that it had earned $50
million on sales of $1 billion in the second quarter—a 61% rise in net
income over the same period one year earlier. That brought its earnings over the trailing four quarters to $152 million, so the stock was
trading at just 12.5 times Ball’s earnings. And, with a book value of
$1.1 billion, you could buy the stock for 1.7 times what the company’s
tangible assets were worth. (Ball did, however, have just over $900
million in debt.)
Stryker was in a different league. Over the last four quarters, the
company had generated $301 million in net income. Stryker’s book
value was $570 million. So the company was trading at fat multiples of
30 times its earnings over the past 12 months and nearly 16 times its
book value. On the other hand, from 1992 through the end of 2001,
Stryker’s earnings had risen 18.6% annually; its dividend had grown

Commentary on Chapter 18

483

by nearly 21% per year. And in 2001, Stryker had spent $142 million
on research and development to lay the groundwork for future growth.
What, then, had pounded these two stocks down? Between July 9
and July 23, 2002, as WorldCom keeled over into bankruptcy, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average fell from 9096.09 to 7702.34, a 15.3%
plunge. The good news at Ball and Stryker got lost in the bad headlines
and falling markets, which took these two stocks down with them.
Although Ball ended up priced far more cheaply than Stryker, the
lesson here is not that Ball was a steal and Stryker was a wild pitch.
Instead, the intelligent investor should recognize that market panics
can create great prices for good companies (like Ball) and good
prices for great companies (like Stryker). Ball finished 2002 at $51.19
a share, up 53% from its July low; Stryker ended the year at $67.12,
up 47%. Every once in a while, value and growth stocks alike go on
sale. Which choice you prefer depends largely on your own personality, but bargains can be had on either side of the plate.
PA I R 7 : N O R T E L A N D N O R T E K
The 1999 annual report for Nortel Networks, the fiber-optic equipment
company, boasted that it was “a golden year financially.” As of February 2000, at a market value of more than $150 billion, Nortel’s stock
traded at 87 times the earnings that Wall Street’s analysts estimated
the company would produce in 2000.
How credible was that estimate? Nortel’s accounts receivable—
sales to customers that had not yet paid the bill—had shot up by $1
billion in a year. The company said the rise “was driven by increased
sales in the fourth quarter of 1999.” However, inventories had also ballooned by $1.2 billion—meaning that Nortel was producing equipment
even faster than those “increased sales” could unload it.
Meanwhile, Nortel’s “long-term receivables”—bills not yet paid for
multi-year contracts—jumped from $519 million to $1.4 billion. And Nortel was having a hard time controlling costs; its selling, general, and
administrative expense (or overhead) had risen from 17.6% of revenues
in 1997 to 18.7% in 1999. All told, Nortel had lost $351 million in 1999.
Then there was Nortek, Inc., which produces stuff at the dim end of
the glamour spectrum: vinyl siding, door chimes, exhaust fans, range
hoods, trash compactors. In 1999, Nortek earned $49 million on $2
billion in net sales, up from $21 million in net income on $1.1 billion in
sales in 1997. Nortek’s profit margin (net earnings as a percentage of

484

Commentary on Chapter 18

net sales) had risen by almost a third from 1.9% to 2.5%. And Nortek
had cut overhead from 19.3% of revenues to 18.1%.
To be fair, much of Nortek’s expansion came from buying other
companies, not from internal growth. What’s more, Nortek had $1 billion in debt, a big load for a small firm. But, in February 2000, Nortek’s
stock price—roughly five times its earnings in 1999—included a healthy
dose of pessimism.
On the other hand, Nortel’s price—87 times the guesstimate of what it
might earn in the year to come—was a massive overdose of optimism.
When all was said and done, instead of earning the $1.30 per share that
analysts had predicted, Nortel lost $1.17 per share in 2000. By the end
of 2002, Nortel had bled more than $36 billion in red ink.
Nortek, on the other hand, earned $41.6 million in 2000, $8 million
in 2001, and $55 million in the first nine months of 2002. Its stock
went from $28 a share to $45.75 by year-end 2002—a 63% gain. In
January 2003, Nortek’s managers took the company private, buying all
the stock from public investors at $46 per share. Nortel’s stock, meanwhile, sank from $56.81 in February 2000, to $1.61 at year-end
2002—a 97% loss.
PA I R 8 : R E D H AT A N D B R O W N S H O E
On August 11, 1999, Red Hat, Inc., a developer of Linux software,
sold stock to the public for the first time. Red Hat was red-hot; initially
offered at $7, the shares opened for trading at $23 and closed at
$26.031—a 272% gain.11 In a single day, Red Hat’s stock had gone up
more than Brown Shoe’s had in the previous 18 years. By December
9, Red Hat’s shares hit $143.13—up 1,944% in four months.
Brown Shoe, meanwhile, had its laces tied together. Founded in
1878, the company wholesales Buster Brown shoes and runs nearly
1,300 footwear stores in the United States and Canada. Brown Shoe’s
stock, at $17.50 a share on August 11, stumbled down to $14.31 by
December 9. For all of 1999, Brown Shoe’s shares lost 17.6%.12

11

All stock prices for Red Hat are adjusted for its two-for-one stock split in
January 2000.
12
Ironically, 65 years earlier Graham had singled out Brown Shoe as one of
the most stable companies on the New York Stock Exchange. See the 1934
edition of Security Analysis, p. 159.

Commentary on Chapter 18

485

Besides a cool name and a hot stock, what did Red Hat’s investors
get? Over the nine months ending November 30, the company produced $13 million in revenues, on which it ran a net loss of $9 million.13 Red Hat’s business was barely bigger than a street-corner
delicatessen—and a lot less lucrative. But traders, inflamed by the
words “software” and “Internet,” drove the total value of Red Hat’s
shares to $21.3 billion by December 9.
And Brown Shoe? Over the previous three quarters, the company
had produced $1.2 billion in net sales and $32 million in earnings.
Brown Shoe had nearly $5 a share in cash and real estate; kids were
still buying Buster Brown shoes. Yet, that December 9, Brown Shoe’s
stock had a total value of $261 million—barely 1/80 the size of Red
Hat even though Brown Shoe had 100 times Red Hat’s revenues. At
that price, Brown Shoe was valued at 7.6 times its annual earnings
and less than one-quarter of its annual sales. Red Hat, on the other
hand, had no profits at all, while its stock was selling at more than
1,000 times its annual sales.
Red Hat the company kept right on gushing red ink. Soon enough,
the stock did too. Brown Shoe, however, trudged out more profits—
and so did its shareholders:

FIGURE 18-4 Red Hat vs. Brown Shoe
2000

2001

2002

Red Hat
Total return (%)
Net earnings ($ millions)

–94.1
–43

13.6
-87

–16.8
–140

Brown Shoe
Total return (%)
Net earnings ($ millions)

–4.6
36

28.2
36

49.5
–4

Note: Total returns for calendar year; net earnings for fiscal year.
Source: www.morningstar.com

13

We use a nine-month period only because Red Hat’s 12-month results
could not be determined from its financial statements without including the
results of acquisitions.

486

Commentary on Chapter 18

What have we learned? The market scoffs at Graham’s principles
in the short run, but they are always revalidated in the end. If you buy a
stock purely because its price has been going up—instead of asking
whether the underlying company’s value is increasing—then sooner or
later you will be extremely sorry. That’s not a likelihood. It is a certainty.

CHAPTER 19

Shareholders and Managements:
Dividend Policy

Ever since 1934 we have argued in our writings for a more intelli-

gent and energetic attitude by shareholders toward their managements. We have asked them to take a generous attitude toward
those who are demonstrably doing a good job. We have asked
them also to demand clear and satisfying explanations when the
results appear to be worse than they should be, and to support
movements to improve or remove clearly unproductive managements. Shareholders are justified in raising questions as to the competence of the management when the results (1) are unsatisfactory
in themselves, (2) are poorer than those obtained by other companies that appear similarly situated, and (3) have resulted in an
unsatisfactory market price of long duration.
In the last 36 years practically nothing has actually been accomplished through intelligent action by the great body of shareholders. A sensible crusader—if there are any such—would take this as
a sign that he has been wasting his time, and that he had better
give up the fight. As it happens our cause has not been lost; it has
been rescued by an extraneous development—known as takeovers, or take-over bids.* We said in Chapter 8 that poor manage-

* Ironically, takeovers began drying up shortly after Graham’s last revised
edition appeared, and the 1970s and early 1980s marked the absolute low
point of modern American industrial efficiency. Cars were “lemons,” televisions and radios were constantly “on the fritz,” and the managers of many
publicly-traded companies ignored both the present interests of their outside shareholders and the future prospects of their own businesses. All of
487

488

The Intelligent Investor

ments produce poor market prices. The low market prices, in turn,
attract the attention of companies interested in diversifying their
operations—and these are now legion. Innumerable such acquisitions have been accomplished by agreement with the existing managements, or else by accumulation of shares in the market and by
offers made over the head of those in control. The price bid has
usually been within the range of the value of the enterprise under
reasonably competent management. Hence, in many cases, the
inert public shareholder has been bailed out by the actions of “outsiders”—who at times may be enterprising individuals or groups
acting on their own.
It can be stated as a rule with very few exceptions that poor
managements are not changed by action of the “public stockholders,” but only by the assertion of control by an individual or compact group. This is happening often enough these days to put the
management, including the board of directors, of a typical publicly
controlled company on notice that if its operating results and the
resulting market price are highly unsatisfactory, it may become the
target of a successful take-over move. As a consequence, boards of
directors have probably become more alive than previously to their
fundamental duty to see that their company has a satisfactory top
management. Many more changes of presidents have been seen in
recent years than formerly.
Not all companies in the unsatisfactory class have benefited
from such developments. Also, the change has often occurred after
a long period of bad results without remedial action, and has
depended on enough disappointed shareholders selling out at low
prices to permit the energetic outsiders to acquire a controlling
position in the shares. But the idea that public shareholders could
really help themselves by supporting moves for improving management and management policies has proved too quixotic to war-

this began to change in 1984, when independent oilman T. Boone Pickens
launched a hostile takeover bid for Gulf Oil. Soon, fueled by junk-bond
financing provided by Drexel Burnham Lambert, “corporate raiders” stalked
the landscape of corporate America, scaring long-sclerotic companies into
a new regimen of efficiency. While many of the companies involved in buyouts and takeovers were ravaged, the rest of American business emerged
both leaner (which was good) and meaner (which sometimes was not).

Shareholders and Managements

489

rant further space in this book. Those individual shareholders who
have enough gumption to make their presence felt at annual meetings—generally a completely futile performance—will not need
our counsel on what points to raise with the managements. For
others the advice would probably be wasted. Nevertheless, let us
close this section with the plea that shareholders consider with an
open mind and with careful attention any proxy material sent them
by fellow-shareholders who want to remedy an obviously unsatisfactory management situation in the company.

Shareholders and Dividend Policy
In the past the dividend policy was a fairly frequent subject of
argument between public, or “minority,” shareholders and managements. In general these shareholders wanted more liberal dividends, while the managements preferred to keep the earnings in
the business “to strengthen the company.” They asked the shareholders to sacrifice their present interests for the good of the enterprise and for their own future long-term benefit. But in recent years
the attitude of investors toward dividends has been undergoing a
gradual but significant change. The basic argument now for paying
small rather than liberal dividends is not that the company
“needs” the money, but rather that it can use it to the shareholders’
direct and immediate advantage by retaining the funds for profitable expansion. Years ago it was typically the weak company that
was more or less forced to hold on to its profits, instead of paying
out the usual 60% to 75% of them in dividends. The effect was
almost always adverse to the market price of the shares. Nowadays
it is quite likely to be a strong and growing enterprise that deliberately keeps down its dividend payments, with the approval of
investors and speculators alike.*
There was always a strong theoretical case for reinvesting prof-

* The irony that Graham describes here grew even stronger in the 1990s,
when it almost seemed that the stronger the company was, the less likely it
was to pay a dividend—or for its shareholders to want one. The “payout
ratio” (or the percentage of their net income that companies paid out as dividends) dropped from “60% to 75%” in Graham’s day to 35% to 40% by
the end of the 1990s.

490

The Intelligent Investor

its in the business where such retention could be counted on to
produce a goodly increase in earnings. But there were several
strong counter-arguments, such as: The profits “belong” to the
shareholders, and they are entitled to have them paid out within
the limits of prudent management; many of the shareholders need
their dividend income to live on; the earnings they receive in dividends are “real money,” while those retained in the company may
or may not show up later as tangible values for the shareholders.
These counter-arguments were so compelling, in fact, that the stock
market showed a persistent bias in favor of the liberal dividend
payers as against the companies that paid no dividends or relatively small ones.1
In the last 20 years the “profitable reinvestment” theory has
been gaining ground. The better the past record of growth, the
readier investors and speculators have become to accept a lowpay-out policy. So much is this true that in many cases of growth
favorites the dividend rate—or even the absence of any dividend—
has seemed to have virtually no effect on the market price.*
A striking example of this development is found in the history
of Texas Instruments, Incorporated. The price of its common stock
rose from 5 in 1953 to 256 in 1960, while earnings were advancing
from 43 cents to $3.91 per share and while no dividend of any kind
was paid. (In 1962 cash dividends were initiated, but by that year
the earnings had fallen to $2.14 and the price had shown a spectacular drop to a low of 49.)
Another extreme illustration is provided by Superior Oil. In
1948 the company reported earnings of $35.26 per share, paid $3 in
dividends, and sold as high as 235. In 1953 the dividend was
reduced to $1, but the high price was 660. In 1957 it paid no dividend

* In the late 1990s, technology companies were particularly strong advocates of the view that all of their earnings should be “plowed back into the
business,” where they could earn higher returns than any outside shareholder possibly could by reinvesting the same cash if it were paid out to him
or her in dividends. Incredibly, investors never questioned the truth of this
patronizing Daddy-Knows-Best principle—or even realized that a company’s
cash belongs to the shareholders, not its managers. See the commentary
on this chapter.

Shareholders and Managements

491

at all, and sold at 2,000! This unusual issue later declined to 795 in
1962, when it earned $49.50 and paid $7.50.*
Investment sentiment is far from crystallized in this matter of
dividend policy of growth companies. The conflicting views are
well illustrated by the cases of two of our very largest corporations—American Telephone & Telegraph and International Business Machines. American Tel. & Tel. came to be regarded as an
issue with good growth possibilities, as shown by the fact that in
1961 it sold at 25 times that year’s earnings. Nevertheless, the
company’s cash dividend policy has remained an investment and
speculative consideration of first importance, its quotation making
an active response to even rumors of an impending increase in the
dividend rate. On the other hand, comparatively little attention
appears to have been paid to the cash dividend on IBM, which in
1960 yielded only 0.5% at the high price of the year and 1.5% at the
close of 1970. (But in both cases stock splits have operated as a
potent stock-market influence.)
The market’s appraisal of cash-dividend policy appears to be
developing in the following direction: Where prime emphasis is
not placed on growth the stock is rated as an “income issue,” and
the dividend rate retains its long-held importance as the prime
determinant of market price. At the other extreme, stocks clearly
recognized to be in the rapid-growth category are valued primarily
in terms of the expected growth rate over, say, the next decade, and
the cash-dividend rate is more or less left out of the reckoning.
While the above statement may properly describe present tendencies, it is by no means a clear-cut guide to the situation in all
common stocks, and perhaps not in the majority of them. For one
thing, many companies occupy an intermediate position between
growth and nongrowth enterprises. It is hard to say how much
importance should be ascribed to the growth factor in such cases,
and the market’s view thereof may change radically from year to
year. Secondly, there seems to be something paradoxical about

* Superior Oil’s stock price peaked at $2165 per share in 1959, when it
paid a $4 dividend. For many years, Superior was the highest-priced stock
listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Superior, controlled by the Keck
family of Houston, was acquired by Mobil Corp. in 1984.

492

The Intelligent Investor

requiring the companies showing slower growth to be more liberal
with their cash dividends. For these are generally the less prosperous concerns, and in the past the more prosperous the company the
greater was the expectation of both liberal and increasing payments.
It is our belief that shareholders should demand of their managements either a normal payout of earnings—on the order, say, of
two-thirds—or else a clear-cut demonstration that the reinvested
profits have produced a satisfactory increase in per-share earnings.
Such a demonstration could ordinarily be made in the case of a recognized growth company. But in many other cases a low payout is
clearly the cause of an average market price that is below fair
value, and here the shareholders have every right to inquire and
probably to complain.
A niggardly policy has often been imposed on a company
because its financial position is relatively weak, and it has needed
all or most of its earnings (plus depreciation charges) to pay debts
and bolster its working-capital position. When this is so there is not
much the shareholders can say about it—except perhaps to criticize
the management for permitting the company to fall into such an
unsatisfactory financial position. However, dividends are sometimes held down by relatively unprosperous companies for the
declared purpose of expanding the business. We feel that such a
policy is illogical on its face, and should require both a complete
explanation and a convincing defense before the shareholders
should accept it. In terms of the past record there is no reason a priori to believe that the owners will benefit from expansion moves
undertaken with their money by a business showing mediocre
results and continuing its old management.
