4. It’s much easier to find an entry system with a reliability above 50
percent if your time frame is 1 day or less (i.e., such as a planned exit
on tomorrow’s opening) than it is to find a long-term reliable exit.
5. The success of the Turtles’ trading had much more to do with their
position-sizing algorithm, as is usually the case, than it did the fact
that they traded a channel breakout system.
6. See the Recommended Readings in Appendix I.
7. The focus of this research was not on fiiding a high-R-multiple trade
or developing a high expectancy system, as we advocate in the book.
The focus of the research was on finding highly reliable entries.

CHAPTER 9

8. See the Recommended Readings in Appendix I.
9. Bruce Babcock, Trendiness in the Market (Sacramento, CA: CTCR
Products, 1995). Call 916-677-7562 to order.
10. Or whatever number your testing suggests that you should use to
meet your objectives.
11. See the Recommended Readings in Appendix I.
12. See LeBeau and Lucas (full citation given in the Recommended
Readings in Appendix I) for a thorough discussion of this work.
13. Chuck LeBeau told me that they tested every possible combination
of moving-average crossover that they could imagine. All of them
worked fairly well in trending markets but failed in sideways
markets. None of them were much better than random entry
14. See the Recommended Readings in Appendix I for Kaufman’s book,
Smarter Trading.
15. Tushar Chande and Stanley Kroll, The New Technical Trader: Boost
Your Profit by Plugging into the Latest Indicators (New York: Wiley,
1994).
16. Momentum in physics means mass times acceleration, which might
be the market equivalent of acceleration on a large volume of shares
of stock.
17. “The Big Bad Bear on Wall Street.” Fortme, January 4, 1988, p, 8.
18. Michael O’Higgins and John Dowries, Beating thr Dmu: A HighReturn, LowRiskMethodfor Investing in the Dou Jones lndustrtil Stocks
with as Little as $5,000 (New York: Harperperennial Library, 1992).

Knowing When to Fold ‘Em:
How to Protect Your Capital

Your protective stop is like a red light. You can go through it, but
doing so is not very wise! If you go through town running every
red light, you probably won’t get to your destination quickly or
safely.
Richard Hardin*

One of the attendees of a seminar I gave in the summer of 1996 was
so depressed that he could hardly concentrate on the seminar. He
was depressed over his recent stock market losses. During the first
part of 1996, he’d grown his Keogh account from $400,000 to
$1,300,000. He said that he had planned to attend the seminar,
partly so he could tell me what a great investor he’d become.
However, in the past 2 weeks, a number of stocks in his account had
fallen dramaticalIy and his account had dropped by 70 percent. He
had one stock in his account that had fallen from just over $200 per
share to about $50 per share-where he had sold at a loss. The stock
was now $60 a share, and he was convinced that he’d gotten out at
the bottom.
That story, I hope, is not a familiar one, but I suspect that it
happens all too often. People get into the market on a tip or with
some hot new entry technique. But once they have a position in the
market, they have no idea when or how they will exit. Exits,
233

234

F~A.RT

3

“ndersmding

the Key Parts of Your System

whether aborting a losing position or taking profits, are the keys to
making money in the market. In fact, the golden rule of trading
says to:

Cut your losses short and let your profits run
That golden rule seems to me like a commentary on exits.
In his marvelous book Camyaign Trading, John Sweeney makes
the following observation:
Just as it was tough when we were children to look under the bed or

in a dark closet for night monsters, it’s equally tough to look at a loss
and acknowledge it. It was easier to hide under the covers back then
and now it’s easier to adopt some defense mechanism. (The one I
hear most is “Oh, that trading rule doesn’t work!” as if the entry
strategy caused the loss.)

The important point here is that getting out of a losing trade is critical if you want to be a successful trader. Most people think mostly
about entry or setups, and that just doesn’t help you become a success. You’ll get rich trading through your exits and mastering the
art of posit& sizing.
In my opinion, you do not have a
trading system unless you know exactly
when you will get out of a market position at the time you enter it. Your worstcase exit, which is designed to preserve
your capital, should be determined
ahead of time. In addition, you should
also have some idea about how you
plan to take profits and a strategy for letting your profits run. That aspect of
exits is reserved for Chapter 10.
Here’s what some other market legends have said about protective stops:
WiUiam O’Neil: “The whole secret to winning in the stock
market is to lose the least amount possible when you’re not
right.”
@se Liz’ermore: “Investors are the big gamblers. They make a

CHAPTER 9

Knowi”g

men to Fold ‘Em

235

bet, stay with it, and if it goes the wrong way, they lose it
all.”

WHATYOURSTOPDOES
When you set a stop loss in the market, you are doing two important things. First, you are setting a maximum loss (risk) that you are
willing to take. Let’s call this initial risk, R. We’ll call it R because
it is the basis for determining your R multiples as discussed in
Chapter 6 on expectancy. Over many trades, you’ll find that your
average loss is about half of that, or 0.5-R, depending upon your
strategy for raising stops. However, sometimes the market will also
get away from you and your loss with be 2-R or perhaps even 3-R.
I hope that such larger losses are very rare for you.
Let’s say that you take a position in
corn and you decide to use a stop loss
that is three times the daily volatility.
The daily volatility is about 3 cents,
which when multiplied by 5,000 bushels
per contract equals $150. Thus, your stop
is three times that amount, or $450. If
your average loss is only half of that, or
0.5 R, then you’ll most likely lose about
$225 if the trade doesn’t work for you.
Let’s look at an example in stocks.
Suppose you buy 100 shares of ABCD
Company. The stock is trading at $48.
The daily volatility is about 50 cents, so
you decide to use a stop loss of $1.50.
Thus, you will sell the stock if it moved down to $46.50. That’s not
a big move, and it only represents a loss of $150 per 100 shares.’
The second important tKmg that you do when you enter a stop
loss is to set a benchmark against which to measure subsequent
gains. Your primary job as a trader should be to devise a plan that
will earn profits that are large multiples of R. For example, it doesn’t take many 10-R profits or 20-R profits to make a tremendous
trading system. In the case of the corn trade, it would be nice to
make a profit of $2,250 or even $4,500. You can tolerate a lot of $225
losses when you make a few profits like that.

236

PART

3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

Let’s look at our stock market example again with this thought
in mind. You purchase 100 shares of a $48 stock and you plan to get
out at $46.50. Now, let’s say you held on to the stock long enough
for it to appreciate by 20 percent. This would amount to a gain of
$9.60, or a price rise to 57.625. Basically, you have taken a risk of
$150 per 100 shares for the opportunity of making $960~that’s a
little more than a 6-R gain, which is quite possible in today’s stock
market.
Realistically, commissions and slippage in the stock market,
however, could easily represent another $150 in either the loss or
the gain, especially if you don’t trade through the Internet. If we
include costs, we have a possible loss of $300 ($150 + $150 in costs)
to produce a gain of $815 ($965 - $150 in costs). That means that
your gain is a 2.6-X gain. Do you understand how this works?
Thinking in terms of R is one of the most important concepts you
need to understand. It will transform the way you approach the
markets.
Most people’ think that their entire $4,800 is at stake when
they buy 100 shares at $48. That’s not the case if you have a clear
idea of when to exit the market and the capacity to do SO.
Your stop loss predefines your initial risk, R. But your
primary job as a trader should be to devise a plan that will
get you profits that are large multiples of R.
Think about the implications of what I’ve just said: OIW of your primary goals us a trader should be to get big-R-multiple trades.
Remember that the first purpose of your stop loss is to set up
the initial R value that you will tolerate. That R value, if small, will
make it possible for you to have very large R-multiple wins.
However, small stops also make your chances of losing on a given
trade much higher and will cut down on the reliability of your
entry technique. Remember that the reliability of our random entry
system was about 38 percent. It should have been 50 percent, but
the 12 percent increase in the rate of losses was due to transaction
costs and the fact that we had a stop (albeit, a large one). A tighter
stop would cut down your reliability even more. It could stop you
out of a trade prior to a big move in your favor. You could get right
back in on another entry signal, but many such trades would give
you very large transaction costs.

CHAPTER 9

Knowing When TV Fold ‘Em

237

As a result, it’s important to look at some criteria that might be
useful in a stop loss that you might use. These would include (1)
assuming that your entry technique is not much better than chance
and putting your stop beyond the noise of the market, (2) finding
the maximum adverse excursion of all your winning trades and
using a percentage of that as your stop, (3) having a tight stop that
will give you high-R-multiple winners, and/or (4) using a stop that
makes sense based upon your entry concept.
Going Beyond the Noise
The day-to-day activity of the market could be considered noise.
For example, if the price moves a point or two, you never know
whether it’s because a few market makers were “fishing” for orders
or whether there was a lot of activity. And even if there is a lot of
activity, you have no idea whether it will continue or not. Thus, it’s
reasonable to assume that the daily activity in the market is mostly
noise. It’s probably better for you to place your stop outside of the
likely range of any such noise.
But what is a reasonable estimate of the range of noise? A lot
of people like to put their stops in the vicinity of recent support or
resistance. However, one problem with this particular strategy is
that everyone knows where those stops are. Quite often, markets
tend to stampede in reverse and fill everyone’s stop orders before
they quietly return in the direction of the trend.
You might want to consider putting your protective stop at a
level that isn’t “logical” to the market and that is still beyond the
noise. Let’s assume that noise is represented by the activity of the
day-i.e., the whole day’s activity is mostly noise. The activity of
the day could be represented by the average true range. If you take
an average of this activity over that past 10 days (i.e., a lo-day moving average), you have a good approximation of the daily noise.
N OW, multiply the lo-day moving average of the average true
range by some constant between 2.7 and 3.4 and you’ll have a stop
that’s far enough away to be out of the noise.3 This is probably a
good stop for most long-term trend followers.
Your response to a stop that far away might be something like:
“I’d never want to put that much risk in any one position.”
However, there’s another way to look at it-which you’ll under-

238

PART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

CHAPTER 9 Knowing When to Fold ‘Em

239

stand better after going through the position-sizing chapter,
Chapter 12. A wide stop is not a lot of risk if your position size is
small or minimal. And if a minimal unit with that big of a risk
seems like a lot of money to you, then you probably should not be
trading that particular instrument--either it’s not a good opportu
nity or you are undercapitalized.
Also remember that your initial stop is your worst-case risk,
your R unit. Most of your losses will probably be about 0.5R,
because your exit will move up as the market moves and with the
progression of time.
Maximum Adverse Excursion
John Sweeney, the former editor of Technical Analysis of Stocks and
Commodities, has introduced the concept of campaign trading.” If
you understand the concept of R, mentioned earlier, you will
understand what Sweeney is trying to convey in writing about
campaign trading. Campaign trading, in my opinion, is simply
understanding that trading success is more a function of the price
movement once you are in a trade than it is a function of your entry.
Let’s think about the idea of excursion-what the price does
from the point of entry. When you start thinking about price movement from your entry point, it introduces you to several more interesting concepts. The first of these is the maximum adverse excursion
(MAE). This is the worst intraday price movement against your
position that you are likely to encounter during the entire trade. The
worst case is usually taken as being the high or low of that particular day depending upon whether you are short or long, respectively.
Figure 9-1 shows an example of adverse price excursion from
an entry point on the long side. A bar chart is shown, and the dark
line illustrates the MAE for the price data on a long signal. In this
case the MAE is $812, yet the initial stop (i.e., a three:times-ATR
stop that is not shown) is $3,582 away. Thus, the MAE is less than
25 percent of the stop value employed.
Figure 9-2 is the adverse price excursion on a losing trade. You
enter the position long at 85.35 on September 23 with a stop $5,343
away. The MAE is at 80.9-a potential loss of $2,781.25. However,
the stop is still several thousand~dollars
off that price. Eventually,

Figure 9-1 Maximum adverse excursion in a long winning
trade

Figure %Z Maximum adverse excursion in a long losing trade

the price goes up, along with the stop, and you close out the position with a loss of $1,168.75-nowhere near the stop or the maximum adverse excursion of $2,781.25. In the case of the losing trade
the MAE was twice the eventual loss, but only half of the stop
value.
Let’s create a table showing the MAE of winning and losing
trades. In this case, we looked at British pounds from 1985 through

1992, using a channel breakout system and a three-times-ATR stop.
Winning and losing trades were separated in the table. The MAE
was entered for each winning and losing trade-both in terms of
the dollar amount and in terms of its relationship to the average
true range. Those data are shown in Table 9-l.
This is a small sample and not meant as anything more than
an illustration of how to use the technique” Notice the differences
between the winning and the losing trades. You don’t have any
winning trades with MAE greater than 1.5 times the average true
range, and only 3 of 24 winning trades (i.e., 12.5 percent) had a
maximum adverse excursion above 1 average true range. In contrast, 66.7 percent of the losing trades had an MAE above 1 average
true range, and almost half of them were above 1.5 average true
ranges, with a mean for all losing trades of 1.44 average true ranges.
Do you see a pattern here?
When you compile such data (and you give yourself a big
enough stop), you will find that the MAE of winning trades will
seldom go below a certain value. In other words, good trades seldom go too far against us.
If you constantly check for what
this value is (i.e., in case markets
change), you will find that you might
be able to use much tighter stops than
you

originally

anticipated,

Thea

d

v

a

n

-

tages of tighter stops include smaller
losses (although you may get a few more of them) and bigger R
multiples on your winning trades.
Tight Stops
Tight stops can be used under certain conditions, such as when
we’re predicting a major change in the market and the market
starts to confirm that prediction. Tight stops can also be used when
we are looking at shorter-time-frame data. If your trading methodology will permit tighter stops, and remember that this is also a
function of your personal tolerance, then you have some strong
advantages going for you. First, you will lose much less money
when you abort the trade. Second, because of pour small loss, you
can make multiple attempts to capture a big move. And, third, if

CHAPTER 9

you should get such a move, it will give you a much bigger X-multiple profit.
However, tight stops have some serious drawbacks as well.
First, they will decrease the reliability of your system. You will have
to make many more trades in order to make a profit. And if you
cannot tolerate a lot of small losses, which many traders and
investors cannot, then tight stops will be your downfall.
Second, tight stops dramatically increase your transaction
costs. Transaction costs are a major part of doing business. In fact, I
seldom see a system that over a number of years produces profits
that are much bigger than the transaction costs it generates-that
is, if a system generates a million dollars in net profits, then it probably generates more than a million dollars in
transaction costs. If you are in and out
of the market all the time, then such
transaction costs can eat your profits
down to nothing. This becomes a major
factor if you are trading small size, so
that your cost per trade is much higher
than it should be.
Losing much less money when
you abort a trade is probably an exciting prospect to most of you. However,
the worst thing a trader can do is miss a
major move. Consequently, you must
be willing to get right back in the position should it again give you a signal. Many people cannot tolerate
three to five losses in a row, which this strategy will regularly produce. However, let’s say that each exit only produces a loss of $100.
You lose on five of these exits in a row and then the market suddenly gives you the move you expected. A week later you exit with
a 20 R profit of $2,000. You’ve had five losers and one winner.
You’ve been “right” less than 17 percent of the time-which most
people would have problems with-but your total profit from six
trades is $1,500 less any commissions and shippage.
In such a situation, you have to understand what is happening. Let’s suppose you used a wide stop such as three times the
ATR. Let’s also suppose that in this situation, the three-times-ATR

Knowing When to Fold ‘Em

243

stop was $600. If you predicted the move correctly, you might not
have been stopped out at all. As a result, you would have only
made one trade with a 3.33-R profit of $2,000. But your total profit
would be $1,900, including the $100 for slippage and commissions.
Remember that in the previous example, you only made $900 after
subtracting your losses and your slippage and commissions.
When you have a $600 stop, if it takes two attempts to make
the profit, the situation is still a little better than with the $100 stop.
You make $2,000 on the profitable trade, but you lose $600 on the
one loss-for a net profit of $1,400. If you subtract $200 for slippage
and commissions, you now have $1,200 net profit. This is still better than the first example in which we needed to make six trades to
get the profit. However, you might not have concluded that if you
had not made the adjustment for slippage and commissions.
With the $600 stop, your profitability drops off dramatically
when you have multiple failures. If you are stopped out twice
before you get your $2,000 profit, then you will only have a net
profit of $500. If you are stopped out three times before you get
your $2,000 profit, then you’ll have a net loss of $200.
My point in giving you these examples is that your protective
loss stop must not be taken lightly, It must be chosen carefully with
respect to your objectives and your temperament.
USING A STOP THAT MAKES SENSE
The most important factor in determining the nature of your stop
is to determine if it makes sense given your objectives, the nature
of the concept you are trading, and your temperament. You must
use something that makes sense. Let’s look at some of the other
types of protective stops that you might use and examine the issues
involved.
Dollar Stops
Many traders advocate the use of dollar stops. These have somewhat of a psychological advantage-you figure out how much you
are willing to lose on a trade and set that as a stop beforehand. In
addition, they also have several technical advantages. First, such
stops are not that predictable. Most people are not likely to figure

24s

out where you got into the market, so they are not likely to figure
out that your stop is $1,500 or $1,000 away. Second, when such
stops are beyond the MAE, they end up being very good stops.
Simply determine, in dollars, what your MAE is likely to be in a
given contract and set your stop a little beyond that.
However, some people confuse such stops with money management and ignore what we are calling position sizing. These people believe that if you want to risk 1 percent of your equity and you
have $100,000, then just put your stop $1,000 away and call it a
money management stop. This is na?ve.
If this is how vou set your stop, don’t confuse it with position
sizing. Position sizing is the most important part of your system in
determining how much you are likely to make trading the system.
Don’t give up that most important component by doing something
so ndive as to set such money management stops.
Percent

Retracemeat

Some people set stops by allowing the price to retrace a certain percentage of the entry price. This is a very common practice among
stock traders. For example, you might buy a stock at $30 and sell it
if it retraced by 10 percent to $27. Using this same methodology,
you would sell a stock you bought at $10 at $9 and you’d sell a $100
stock at $90.
This practice is fine if your retracement method is based upon
some sort of MAE analysis. But if you just picked some number out
of the air-which is a common practice-then you could be throwing away a lot of potential profits with your stop.
Volatility Stops
Volatility stops are based upon the assumption that the volatility, to
some extent, represents noise in the market. Consequently, if you
set a stop at some multiple of the ATR (we used the example of
three times the ATR previously), then you probably have a good
stop that is beyond the immediate noise of the market. My experience is that volatility stops am among the best stops you could
select.
