
IS


116

AVOIDING FINANCIAL FAKERY

guard. Its normal for CFOs to move around just like other executives, but if
you see a CFO leave a company that’s already under suspicion for accounting
issues, you should think very hard about whether there might be more going
on than meets the eye. The same applies to corporate auditors. If a company
changes auditors frequently or fires its auditors after some potentially damag-
ing accounting issue has come to light, watch out. This one may not be a big
deal by itself, but it’s definitely something to watch with firms that have al-
ready displayed other warning signs.

The Bills Aren't Being Paid

There are few things Wall Street loves more than growth, and companies go
to great lengths to keep their top line increasing as rapidly as possible. One of
the sneakier ways for a company to pump up its growth rate is to loosen cus-
tomers’ credit terms, which induces them to buy more products or services.
(Companies can also ship out more products than their customers ask for—
known as “stuffing the channel”—but this is less common.)

The trick here is that even though the company has recorded a sale—
which increases revenues—the customer has not yet paid for the product. If
enough customers don’t pay—and those looser credit terms are probably at-
tracting financially shakier customers—the pumped-up growth rate will
eventually come back to bite the company in the form of a nasty write-down
or charge against earnings.

You should track how fast A/R are increasing relative to sales—the two
should roughly track each other. But if sales increase by, for example, 15 per-
cent, while A/R increases 25 percent, the company is booking sales faster
than it’s receiving cash from its customers. (Remember, A/R measures
goods that are sold, but not yet paid for.) As a general rule, it’s simply not
possible for A/R to increase faster than sales for a long time—the company
is paying out more money (as finished goods) than it’s taking in (through
cash payments).

On the credit front, watch the “allowance for doubtful accounts,” which
is essentially the company’s estimate of how much money it won't be able to
collect from deadbeat customers. If this amount doesn’t move up in syne with
A/R, the company may be artificially boosting its results by being overly op-

timistic about how many of its new customers will pay their bills.


SEVEN OTHER PITFALLS TO WATCH OUT FOR

Changes in Credit Terms and Accounts Receivable

Finally, check the company’s 10-@ filing for any mentions of changes in credit
terms for customers, as well as for any explanation by management as to why
A/R has jumped. (Look in the management's discussion and analysis section

for the latter and in the accounting footnotes for the former.)

Seven Other Pitfalls to Watch Out For

Watching for these six warning signs will help you avoid maybe two-thirds of
potential accounting-related blowups. Unfortunately, though, there are many
other ways that firms can embellish their financial results. When you're read-

ing a 10-K or annual report, watch for the following pitfalls.

Gains from Investments

It’s reasonably common for large firms—especially in the technology sec-
tor—to make small investments in other companies. Occasionally, these in-
vestments work out well, the owner sells some of the shares, and records the
capital gain as income. This is no different from the way you or I would re-
port a capital gain as income when we're doing our taxes every year, and it’s
perfectly legal and aboveboard.

An honest company breaks out these sales, however, and reports them
below the “operating income” line on its income statement. The problem
arises when companies try to boost their operating results—in other words,
the performance of their core business—by shoehorning investment income
into other parts of their financial statements.

The most blatant means of using investment income to boost results is to
include it as part of revenue, though this isn’t very common. Companies can
also record the income “above the line” so that it is included as part of operat-
ing income and thus boosts their operating margins. This is manifestly a no-no
because accounting rules require any piece of one-time income to be separated
from income that comes from normal operations. Finally, companies can hide
investment gains in their expense accounts by using them to reduce operating
expenses, which makes the firm look more efficient than it really is.

If the firm you're analyzing is using investment gains or asset sales to
boost operating income or reduce expenses, you know you're dealing with a

company that might be less than forthcoming in other areas as well.

117


118

AVOIDING FINANCIAL FAKERY

Pension Pitfalls

Pensions can be a big ball-and-chain for companies with many retirees be-
cause if the assets in the pension plan don’t increase quickly enough, the firm
has to divert profits to prop up the pension. To fund pension payments to fu-
ture retirees, companies shovel money into pension plans that then are in-
vested in stocks, bonds, real estate, and so forth. Ifa company winds up with
fewer pension assets than pension liabilities, it has an anderfunded plan, and if
the company has more than enough pension assets to meet its projected obli-
gations to retirees, it has an overfunded plan. (More on overfunded plans in
the next section of this chapter.)

To see whether the company has an over- or underfunded pension plan,
go to the footnotes of a 10-K filing and look for the note labeled “pension and
other postretirement benefits,” “employee retirement benefits,” or some vari-
ation. Then look at the line labeled “projected benefit obligation.” This is the
first key number. It’s the estimated amount the company will owe to employ-
ees after they retire, and it’s based on assumptions about how long retirees
will live, the rate that salary levels at the company will grow over time, and
the interest rate that the company uses to discount its future obligations to
their present value. Compare this with the line labeled “fair value of plan as-
sets at end of year,” which is the second key number.

If the benefit obligation exceeds the plan assets, the company has an un-
derfunded pension plan and is likely to have to shovel in more money in the
future, reducing profits. This can be a huge number for a large company
with many retirees—General Motors, for example, had pension obligations
of $80 billion at year-end 2002 versus pension assets of $61 billion. One way
or another, GM will need to make up the $19 billion difference. (As recently
as 2000, GM had a $1.7 billion swrplus in its pension plan. When Wall Street
goes south, so do pension plans—but the obligation keeps growing as em-
ployees earn benefits.)

What did this mean for GM? In 2002, the firm chucked in a whopping
$4.9 billion to the plan. (You can see this in the pension footnote under “em-
ployer contributions.”) That's almost $5 billion in cold, hard cash that an un-
wary shareholder might have been expecting to increase the firm’s value, but
which actually went straight to GM retirees.

So, always check out the pension footnote. There's a lot of account-

ing gobbledygook there, but you can also find out whether the firm youre


SEVEN OTHER PITFALLS TO WATCH OUT FOR

looking at is going to wind up owing its retirees more money than it actu-
ally has. And if that’s the case, they'll get the money before you will as a
shareholder.

Pension Padding

Pensions can be a boon as well as a burden. When stocks and bonds do really
well, as they did in the 1990s, pension plans go gangbusters. And if those an-
nual returns exceed the annual pension costs, the excess can be counted as
profit. Flowing gains from an overfunded pension plan through the income
statement is a perfectly legal practice that pumped up earnings at General
Electric for years and boosted earnings at many defense companies by 30 per-
cent to 40 percent during the 1990s.

However, this pension-related income is a strange kind of profit. It's not
available to pay out to shareholders—it belongs to the pension plan. And the
only way to unlock that excess is to terminate the plan, which is highly un-
usual. But the excess does benefit shareholders: It should mean the company
will have to contribute less to the pension plan in the future to keep it sol-
vent. As a shareholder, you'd much rather have an overfunded pension plan
than an underfunded one. But this income is completely dependent on the
stock market, so it’s not money you want to rely on in the future. You should
subtract it from net income when trying to figure out just how profitable a
company really is.

‘To find out how much profits decreased because of pension costs or in-
creased because of pension gains, go to the line in the pension footnote labeled
either “net pension/postretirement expense,” “net pension credit/loss,” “net pe-
riodic pension cost,” or some variation. Companies usually break out the con-
tribution of pension costs to profits for the trailing three years; therefore, you
can see not only the absolute level of pension profit or loss, but also the trend.
You won't see these numbers in the income statement—they get lumped in

with other categories there.

Vanishing Cash Flow

There’s one important caveat to the general rule that cash flow is a number
to be trusted: You can’t count on cash flow generated by employees exercis-
ing options. I mentioned this wrinkle in Chapter s—the amount is labeled

“tax benefits from employee stock plans,” or “tax benefit of stock options

119


120

AVOIDING FINANCIAL FAKERY

exercised” on the statement of cash flows. Here’s why you don’t want to
count on this cash flow.

When employees exercise their stock options, the amount of cash taxes
that their employer has to pay declines. Let’s say your employer gives you 100
options with an exercise price of $10. A few years later, the stock is trading for
$30, and you decide to cash in. You pay taxes on the $2,000 difference (the
$30 market price less the $10 exercise price), and your employer gets to take a
tax deduction of $2,000 against its corporate income because taxable em-
ployee compensation is tax deductible for employers. In other words, your
employer reduced its tax bill by 700—assuming a 35 percent tax rate—just
because you exercised your 100 options.

As long as the firm’s stock keeps going up and it keeps giving out options,
this process continues. More options are exercised, tax deductions are taken,
and the firm saves cash by lowering its tax bill. But what happens if the stock
takes a tumble? Many people’s options will be worthless—their exercise prices
will be higher than the market price—and, consequently, fewer options will be
exercised. Fewer options are now exercised, the company’s tax deduction gets
smaller, and it has to pay more taxes than before, which means lower cash flow.

Therefore, when the stock price declines, the firm generates less cash than
it did when the stock was flying. Sun Microsystems, for example, reported
about $2.1 billion in cash flow from operations in fiscal 2001, $816 million of
which resulted from this lovely tax benefit. In other words, Sun would have
generated 40 percent less cash in 2001 if its employees hadn't exercised tons of
options. But the next year, when Sun's shares plunged to below $5, this portion
of cash flow dried up very fast as fewer options were exercised. In 2002, Sun’s
option-related tax benefits dropped by almost 90 percent, to only $98 million.

If you're analyzing a company with great cash flow that also has a high-
flying stock, check to see how much of that cash flow growth is coming from
options-related tax benefits. Unless you think you can predict the stock mar-

ket, that’s hot cash you want to count on in years to come.

Overstuffed Warehouses
When inventories rise faster than sales, there’s likely to be trouble on the
horizon. Sometimes the buildup is just temporary as a company prepares for

a new product launch, but that’s usually more the exception than the rule.


SEVEN OTHER PITFALLS TO WATCH OUT FOR

When acompany produces more than it’s selling, either demand has dried up
or the company has been overly ambitious in forecasting demand. In any
case, the unsold goods will have to get sold eventually—probably at a dis-
count—or written off, which would result in a big charge to earnings.

This is what happened in late 2000 to virtually every company selling
communications-related gear—inventories started to balloon as demand
from telecom carriers started to slow. At the time, many analysts (including,
I'm humbled to say, me) thought that the gear-makers had simply overesti-
mated demand temporarily and that the situation would correct itself once
telecom carriers used up the gear theyd already ordered. But it turned out
that demand was not just pausing—it was falling off a cliff. Therefore, inven-
tories continued to pile up until sales started to slow as well, and companies

such as Cisco had to write off billions in unsold goods.

Change Is Bad

Another way firms can make themselves look better is by changing any one
of a number of assumptions in their financial statements. As a very general
rule, you should look skeptically on any optional change—some accounting
changes are mandated by rule makers—that improves reported results. Odds
are good that the motivation for making the change wasn’t altruistic.

One item that can be altered is a firm’s depreciation expense. If a firm is
assuming that an asset—such as a building or factory—will wear out in 10
years, it subtracts (or depreciates) one-tenth of the building’s value from its
earnings each year. As you can imagine, the longer the depreciation period,
the smaller the annual hit to earnings. Therefore, if a firm suddenly decides
that an asset has a longer useful life and stretches out the depreciation period,
it’s essentially pushing costs out into the future and inflating current earnings.

Firms can also change their a/lowanee for doubtful accounts. If the allowance
for doubtful accounts doesn’t increase at the same rate as accounts receivable,
a firm is essentially saying that its new customers are much more creditworthy
than the previous ones—which is pretty unlikely. If the allowance actually de-
clines as accounts receivable rise, the company is stretching the truth even fur-
ther. In either case, if more customers wind up not paying than the firm
estimated, the firm will have to take a charge to earnings at some point in the

future, which means current results are overstated.

121


122

AVOIDING FINANCIAL FAKERY

Firms can also change things as basic as how expenses are recorded and
when revenue is recognized (one of those gray accounting areas). You'll gen-
erally find this kind of information in the “summary of significant account-
ing policies” section of the 10-K—and if a firm chooses to make changes that
materially reduce expenses or increase revenue, watch out. Unless these
moves were required by the accounting rule makers, the firm is probably try-

ing to cover up deteriorating results.

To Expense or Not to Expense

Companies can also fiddle with their costs by capitalizing them. As I dis-
cussed in Chapter 4, the basis of accrual accounting is that benefits have to be
matched with expenses on the income statement. Operating costs—such as
office supplies, office rents, and so forth—are expensed because they produce
a short-term benefit. (You pay the rent only one month or year at a time, and
the benefit you receive expires at the end of that period unless you make an-
other payment.) On the other hand, costs such as a new piece of machinery
are capitalized—that is, their value is recorded as an asset that slowly declines
in value over time—because they produce long-term benefits. (A machine
that you buy today will still be cranking out products three years from now,
just at a lower rate because of wear and tear.)

The tricky part is that certain types of costs, such as marketing and
some kinds of software development, can be treated either way. As you can
imagine, a company that wants to inflate profits can easily do so by capital-
izing $100 in marketing costs and spreading the expense out over several
years, rather than expensing the entire $100 in the current period. This is
exactly what AOL did in the mid-1990s—the firm argued that the sub-
scribers it was acquiring were likely to produce long-term benefits, so it
should be allowed to capitalize its marketing costs. The SEC disagreed, and
AOL had to reverse course.

Finding this kind of information will take some digging around in the
footnotes of a company’s 10-K form, but it’s time well spent. Any time you see
expenses being capitalized, ask some hard questions about just how long that
“asset” will generate an economic benefit. Looking at the aseful life assump-
tion will generally do the trick—a building might be useful for 40 years, but

a piece of office furniture or a chunk of software won't.


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST 123

Investor's Checklist: Avoiding Financial Fakery

> The simplest way to detect aggressive accounting is to compare the trend
of net income with the trend in cash flow from operations. If net income is
growing quickly while cash flow is flat or declining, there’s a good chance
of trouble lurking.

> Companies that make numerous acquisitions or take many one-time
charges are more likely to have aggressive accounting. Be wary if a firm's
chief financial officer leaves or if the firm changes auditors.

» Watch the trend of accounts receivable relative to sales. If accounts re-
ceivable is growing much faster than sales, the company may be having
trouble collecting cash from its customers.

> Pension income and gains from investments can boost reported net in-
come, but don’t confuse them with solid results from the company’s core
operations.




Valuation—The Basics

So FAR, WE'VE spent all of our time analyzing companies. If the investment
process were as simple as identifying great companies with shareholder-
friendly management teams and wide economic moats, we'd be finished—
and investing would be much easier. But even the most wonderful business is
a poor investment if purchased for too high a price. To invest successfully
means you need to buy great companies at attractive prices.

This is an idea that lost credence during the bull market of the 1990s and
was thrown completely out the window during the tech bubble. Valuations
mattered less and less because investors were always willing to pay more and
more—in fact, one popular investment commentary service stated baldly
that business quality was 100 times more important than valuation.

For a while, this strategy—relying on a greater fool to take an asset off
your hands at a higher price—was lucrative and made many people rich, at
least on paper. The trouble was that no one knew when the music would
stop. When it did, investors who bought overpriced assets hoping to sell
them at even more inflated prices were sorely disappointed.

This is the difference between investors and speculators. Investors pur-

chase an asset for less than their estimate of its value and receive a return


126

VALUATION—THE BASICS

more or less in line with the financial performance of that asset. Specula-
tors, by contrast, purchase an asset not because they believe it’s actually
worth more, but because they think another investor will pay more for it at
some point. The return that investors receive on assets depends largely on
the accuracy of their analysis, whereas a speculator’s return depends on the
gullibility of others.

Over time, the stock market's returns come from two key components:
investment return and speculative return. As Vanguard founder John Bogle
has pointed out, the investment return is the appreciation of a stock because
of its dividend yield and subsequent earnings growth, whereas the speculative
return comes from the impact of changes in the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio.
Over the entire twentieth century, Bogle found that the 10.4 percent average
annual return of U.S. equities broke down into 5 percentage points from div-
idends, 4.8 percentage points from earnings growth, and just 0.6 percentage
points from P/E changes. In other words, over a long time span, the impact
of investment returns trump the impact of speculative returns."

However, the picture is much different when we look at it over shorter
time frames. From 1980 through 2000, for example, the market’s approxi-
mately 17 percent annual return was composed of 4 percentage points divi-
dends, 6 percentage points earnings growth—and a whopping 7 percentage
points per year from the increase in the P/E ratio.

During the horrific bear market of the 1970s, the market's ‘nvestment return
was a solid 13.4 percent per year, but as the aftermath of the early-1970s Nifty
Fifty craze dragged the market’s P/E ratio down from 16 times to 7 times, the
market's speculative return was a crushing —7.5 percentage points per year. The
market returned an average of only 5.9 percent per year during the 1970s, not
because earnings and dividends refused to cooperate, but because the average

investor paid less for the average stock in 1980 than in 1970.

Paying Up Rarely Pays Off
What does all this have to do with picking solid stocks? By paying close atten-

tion to the price you pay for a stock, you minimize your speculative risk, which

‘John C. Bogle, “After the Fall: What Lies Ahead for Capitalism and the Financial Markets?”
(address given at the University of Missouri, Columbia, October 22, 2002).


PAYING UP RARELY PAYS OFF

helps maximize your total return. No one knows what a stock’s speculative
return will be over the next year—or even 10 years—but we can make some
pretty good educated guesses about the investment return. If you find great
companies, value them carefully, and purchase them only at a discount to a
reasonable valuation estimate, you'll be fairly well insulated against the vicis-
situdes of market emotion.

For example, let’s take a stock that trades for $30 per share, earns $1.50 per
share, and pays a $1.00 annual dividend. Assume that earnings and dividends
grow at 6 percent per year, and the initial P/E ratio of 20 doesn’t change.
