
again improved, and was very active during the war of the rebellion

So how d i d Benner do w i t h his forecast for 1891? A l l o w i n g Ben-

had culminated i n depression in the year 1861, after which trade

ended i n a panic bust where housing prices collapsed. N e w York's

cycle was not then complete. And the commerce and trade of the

I n 1837, 1857, 1873, and 1893 a N e w York residential b o o m

the most deplorable national calamity upon record. However, the

48 • DISPELLING SOME C O M M O N BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

Dominant Trading Cycles Are Not Time Symmetrical

• 49

1999 to early 2000 top led to a panic that pushed the early Internet
companies out of grace. Many fell from dot-coms to "dot gones."
What we are learning in this example is how to use cycle analyFigure 2.9

Index of I n t e r n a t i o n a l Battles f r o m 550-1957

Source: Cycles Classic Library Collection, Foundation for t h e Study o f
Cycles, 1987, Edward R. Dewey

sis to give us a sense of where we stand today within an historical
cycle of significance. That is far more valuable than the hunt for a
single isolated entry point to establish a new trade. Do you want

research. One easy way is to scan the papers from a year before a

September 1836 were selling for $50 in April 1837.

I ' l l leave you to answer that one as it is important to do the

into a depression, lots in the West 100s which cost $480 a piece in

dient that always contributed to the cycle panics of the past?

York Mayor Philip Hone. When banks failed and the economy fell

concerning the valuation of paper currencies. Was this an ingre-

land that sold for $100 to $150 rose to $2,000, according to ex-New

in reserves of gold and silver and the changes in public confidence

were used to supplement historical data for these studies. In 1826

economic panic? Notice how Benner takes notice of the decline

thing for us to do? The New York Times has papers on file that

tant questions, such as, how did these events build into a major

history recorded entirely by electronic means really the smartest

bigger picture is invaluable. From these cycles we can ask impor-

ing cycles is through newspaper advertising. Is having our current

in 1996. Knowing where we are now in the context of a much

1892 to 1893. One of the ways we can research economic hous-

hiding? That is why my first discussion of cycles missed the mark

national economy recorded in the years of 1837, 1857, 1873, and

a fish, or do you want to know where the entire school of fish is

housing busts were caused by recessions (or "panics") i n the

predictable.

in American business history, Benner described the year 1819 as a

will show you there are similarities in human patterns that can be

Although we are taught as students that this was the worst period

ings, the editorials, the news itself all paint a sentiment pattern that

of 1929 to 1930 was not the worst depression in American history.

market bust sets in. The ads, the real estate listings and job offer-

The Great American Depression that followed the NYSE crash

period when nine-tenths of all businesses failed.

1 have a school in North Carolina that is dedicated to teaching

being right. Most people shrug their shoulders and state that they

this cycle. The cycle mapping human sentiment was spot on and the

so they have to think in ways that will increase their probability of

developed, but not a real estate panic one might try to associate with

turn their technique into a puzzle they had never considered before

to current times, the cycle falls on 1999. In hindsight we know a panic

trader brings to the school, regardless of culture or technique, I will

of 1891 as the start of a panic contraction period and add 54 years up

tunity to learn. Don't run away from the unknown. Whatever the

years, that is, one-third of Benner s cycle. If we take Benner s forecast

is showing how a question or irregularity can become an oppor-

to panic, as Dewey also identified a 55-period quarterly cycle, or I8/3

advanced traders. One of the most important things I demonstrate

It is interesting that Benner stated that it takes 54 years from panic

50

• D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Dominant Trading Cycles Are Not Time Symmetrical

• 51

the N i k k e i price data is superficial i f the discussion goes no deeper.

that it is correct w h e n they don't really get it themselves.

increase the probability o f our work. L o o k i n g how cycles fall w i t h i n

T h e i r worst response is to take someone else's answer and assume

a broader range o f markets that provide us w i t h balance that w i l l

and want to r u n into the u n k n o w n to better their understanding.

ultimate triggers, asking ourselves questions helps us to focus on

don't k n o w the answer. T h e best traders recognize the o p p o r t u n i t y

statistical study. But first you need to have the data and lots of it.

can make. T h e race is on. But the manufacturing industry for any

F i n d i n g i f one set of data influences another set of data requires a

education is key i n America as we have to make products no one else

the changes i n the earth's magnetic field w h i c h has a similar cycle?

show that manufacturing was the key. It remains so today. T h a t means

to an 11-year cycle. Is one o f the factors influencing weather patterns

recovery after a major business cycle contraction?" B o t h state and

and solar storm activity is 11 years. Agricultural yields are also tied

i n g i n current times. W e also need to ask, "what contributed to the

T h e cycle interval is 10.8 years. W e k n o w the h a l f cycle for sunspot

about. T h e i r chart work should make us t h i n k about the risk bloom-

study of an Index of International Battles f r o m 550 t h r o u g h 1957.

cycle of consumer sentiment that Dewey and Benner both warned us

Consider f u r t h e r the work o f Dewey. Figure 2.9 shows Dewey's

T h e concerns for a diminishing confidence i n our currency f o r m a

country is tied to the ability to sell its goods elsewhere and that means

F i g u r e 2.10 is Dewey's l o n g - t e r m c h a r t for E u r o p e a n W h e a t

i n this discussion.

correlation, you better realize that G F I is based on a revenue stream

prices. I t is interesting h o w this cycle p e r i o d keeps reappearing

the gold stocks G F I and N E M and find they have a slight out-of-step

Beveridge w h o discovered there was a 54-year cycle i n W h e a t

they need not spend time on analyzing currencies. But i f you analyze

prices f r o m 1500

you need an opinion on currencies. Too many stock traders believe

to 1869. T h i s data was c o l l e c t e d by L o r d

ity i n ingenious ways. H e t h o u g h t outside the box of convention.

you want to be or not. T h i s is not about an analyst becoming a funda-

Dewey studied cycles that mapped h u m a n sentiment and activ-

i n South African Rand currency You are a currency trader whether
mentalist. It is only showing you that we must t h i n k about what we
are seeing i n our charts, indicators, cycle work, and intermarket rela-

< Trind'

• '

r-i—r-i—r-i

i - • r-r-r

r-'

tionships i n order to do exceptionally well i n this global environment.
Should we not be asking ourselves, " h o w often has the world seen
a war break out after a financial collapse?" Is there a relationship i n
t i m i n g between the collapse and political instability? Was it a loss
o f confidence i n currency that triggered the wars, a drastic change
i n the cost and availability of food that led to political instability, or debt that c o u l d not be sustained due to more benefactors
t h a n worker bees paying into the social programs? Whatever the

Figure 2.10 European Wheat Prices 1500-1869
Source: Cycles Classic Library Collection, Foundation for the Study of
Cycles, 1987, Edward R. Dewey

52 • D I S P E L L I N G SOME COMMON B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Dominant Trading Cycles Are Not Time Symmetrical

* 53

Gann wrote a segment on page 310 titled "Why Hitler W i l l Lose

probability within a complex multitiered global environment. Trade

suspect was due to concerns about the growing war i n Europe.

ing a cycle, we easily forget that the real purpose is to increase our

the 1941 release was a more open and unveiled dialogue that I

within a single market. If we stop thinking about why we are study-

of the 1941 edition that they are hand corrected. I n addition,

miss i n our own work today i f we only focus on a trading signal

Company, Inc.) i n distribution today. There are so few copies

This is part of the brilhance of his work and what we can easily

signals do not occur i n isolation any more.

the War". Keep i n mind that this student of markets was making

which he must trade and live. Gann wrote:

easier times membership declines. Dewey was not the only one to

he used this knowledge to develop a theory of the bigger picture in

In economic times of hardship church membership increases; in

fought remain true today. While Gann was a technician of markets,

Was Dewey studying the growth of the Presbyterian church? No.

United States to enter World War U. His views on why wars are

church members in the United States from 1826 through 1948.

a forecast before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor caused the

In Figure 2.11 we see Dewey's 9-year cycle in new Presbyterian

study economic cycles through various habits and trends within the
general public.

Before going into the details of why Hider will lose the war, it is

is being waged over, but when the war is over and the smoke clears

from those i n his revised 1951 edition (Lambert-Gann Publishing

of the seas. This is not a true picture or a true fact of what the war

ities (W.D. Gann & Son, Inc., 1941), describes different charts

that the war is being fought to preserve democracy and the freedom

first edition of his book. How to Make Profits Trading in Commod-

about the fight against Nazism, Communism and Socialism, and

least understood. Few students of Gann's work realize that the

important to analyze for what the war is being fought. We read much

The third cycle analyst from the United States is perhaps the

CENTi

1

I

1

,

1

,

,

1

,

,

,

,.

away, the world and the public will know for what the war was fought.
This war is no different than any other war. It is being fought
for commercial supremacy to determine WHO is to dominate the
commerce of the world in the future. Germany wants to dictate

fr
1

t*40

'

—'

prices and dominate the commerce of the world, and England
wishes to do the same. Russia would like also to do the same thing.
It now appears that the New Dealers in the United States
—J

1

• laeO
-L

1

1

NMO

1

1

l»00

11 _

JI

-

mo

JI

1,
L

would like to dictate everything to the world. England has always

»40

Figure 2.11 Growth of the Presbyterian Church in America (1826-1948)

Source: Cycles Classic Library Collection, Foundation for the Study of
Cycles, 1987, Edward R. Dewey

fought to maintain freedom of the seas and control the commerce of the wodd, and England knows that it is a part of wisdom
to work with the United States, and with Russia to determine

5 4 • D I S P E L L I N G S O M E COMMON B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Dominant Trading Cycles Are Not Time Symmetrical • 5 5

will form a pattern of distribution and go nowhere? Yes, there are

trade of the world.

to timing market entry, exits, and can we be warned when a market

United States and England dominate the seas they will rule the

cycles demonstrated in my first edition? Is there a better approach

War because they do not have control of the sea. As long as the

Did I find a solution to the problems inherent to all fixed period

the trade relations after the war is over. Germany will lose the

Comparing TIME PERIODS of the past, Hitler's campaign into
Russia has not made the progress that Napoleon made in the same

better tools for trading and we can be warned when to stay away
from a market. This alone is invaluable for risk assessment.

with calling today's market turmoil?

ten the day he made the advance into Russia. No chain is stronger

some of our current market strife, but how would Gann have fared

is wrong! It is this writer's opinion that Hitler's "Waterloo" was writ-

value in the longer term as well. Both Benner and Dewey called

with the pace of Napoleon with his horses and mules. Something

tion to the problem of timing trades, but his work is of particular

war and moving rapidly. Yet the big Blitzkreig has failed to keep up

In my opinion the work of W D . Gann has provided a better solu-

number of days. Hitler has every improved machine for waging

in Gann's writings. Mathematical Formula for Market Predictions:

and Germany will lose the war.

144. Gann describes the importance of the Square of Twelve (144)

the weak point, and that weak point will be the undoing of Hitler,

as the 56-year cycle, or the "Great Cycle," because it is based on

another smarter. The other nations fighting against Hitler will find

Gann devoted a tremendous amount of time to what he described

than its weakest link. No man has ever been so smart that there isn't

The Master Mathematical Price, Time, and Trend Calculator. The

techniques applied in recent markets.

true. In his 1952 edition, in circulation today, Gann removed

targets. But first you will want a credible example of his analysis

showed the strength of his research techniques, had been proven

had a chance to look at Gann's Wheel to extract price and time

occurred before any of these statements about the war, which

Great Cycle will be discussed further in Chapter 9 when we have

Gann's 1941 release of How to Make Profits in Commodities

asked to write Chapter 5. It was written in 2006 and the book was

when he revised the first edition.

Thinking from the World's Top Minds" (Bloomberg Press). I was

see he could prove the exact same cycles applied a decade later

edited by David Keller, "Breakthroughs in Technical Analysis: New

changed some of the chart references. Why? Gann wanted us to

Gann's approach to market timing can be found in the book

not only the commentary with his opinion on the war, but he

in current markets very well. This particular cycle of Gann's was

environment in which they are operating.

approaching on the horizon. So far Gann's cycle has performed

ers or analysts far more aware and knowledgeable about the trading

ones." I tried to warn readers in this book, as this was a horrific cycle

are difficult to recognize in shorter cycles. Longer cycles make trad-

"Gann's methods warn that the years 2008 to 2012 will be difficult

me that they are of greatest value in the longer term. Human events

released in early 2007. O n page 104 you will find the following,

The more I study cycles of fixed periods the clearer it becomes to

56

• D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Dominant Trading Cycles Are Not Time Symmetrical

• 57

before risking my own bank account and likely you do too.

failures, political unrest, and food panics stretching across 100 years

examined by chi-square tests and more. I want mathematical proof

correlated to times of great turmoil with wars, business and bank

or diminish the strength of a cycle beat. But when a strong cycle

and easier to interpret.

the cumulative sum of numerous cycles all working to enhance

other technical methods I use seem to become far more effective

1960. Fixed cycle enthusiasts will describe the beat of a cycle as

something will happen. Just give me the when and suddenly all the

The truth is, even the 54-year cycle can disappear as it did in

of history. As a trader it does not bother me that I don't know why

that nature does not depend on fixed cycles.

next bear market will unravel global markets again? Yes. The same

with an offset interval from when it was last seen. The answer is

still living through them now, can Gann analysis warn us when the

reappears, this description does not answer why the period begins

But if 2008 to 2012 were foretold to be rough years and we are

cycle and confluence of supporting cycles point to 2019 to 2021.

Gann was a master of finding confluence targets on all three axes.

natural law sciences.

lead you to study mundane astrology. But even this is mathematically

the changing intervals between cycle beats can be explained by

astrology. Eventually you will start to make connections that will

The truth is that this is also found along the time axis as well and

are a beginner, focus on astronomy (the science), and stay away from

between targets is irregular because markets expand and contract.

natural law or, in today's language, the study of astronomy. If you

fixed interval between each target zone. The separation or spread

natural law to describe the movement of planets. It was the study of

These target zones do not form a grid on the horizontal axis with a

that books written in the late 1800s and early 1900s used the term

ferent Fibonacci ratios derived from several different price ranges.

subject that is not worthy of print. What people fail to recognize is

different Fibonacci ratios cluster tightly together. They must be dif-

and the laws of vibration. There is a pile of hoopla out there on this

berg Press). Confluence price targets are narrow price ranges where

Gann's time analysis utilizes cycles borrowed from natural law

Chapter 6 and is the focus of my book, Fibonacci Analysis (Bloom-

that market, such as China, or do we focus on our own markets?

The concept of confluence price target zones will be discussed in

others? If there is a market leader do we focus on the timing of

grasp the concept of confluence time targets along the vertical axis.

whether the two dates are connected. Is one market leading all the

of a confluence target zone on the horizontal price axis, it is easier to

2012 that this bear market is not over. Therefore, we need to think

(geometry), and vertical (time) axes. If you understand the concept

begin with, one must accept from Gann's cycle warning of 2008 to

He worked to identify objectives on the horizontal (price), diagonal

However, knowing a target date doesn't end the research. To

I use in making up my annual forecasts." In Gann's book. Tunnel

in natal astrology either. The data from the NASA website can be

p. 116): "The most important thing of all is the Time factor, which

ogy when you read the phrase 'natural law' and I haven't any interest

following in one of his early works. Truth of the Stock Tape (1923,

is falling; sell all. What you are likely thinking about is natal astrol-

nary testing to develop cycles for time analysis. Gann states the

horoscopes or write an emotionally charged newsletter that the sky

Figure 2.12 shows the China Shanghai Composite with prelimi-

different from what is used to prepare a newspaper column with daily

58 • D I S P E L L I N G SOME COMMON B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

WBQHT

I

Chapter | 3

-O.OOOOtiaMS
-0.0OD2U46IO
0-8002331055
-0.0ODI32451V
0.0061 G9t» I
0C00M67O3I
0.0002415771
0-000203*031
-0,0002M7227
TRANS (»MD)

~3

lO.13.20Ce 17:38MO SV

Figure 2.12

C h i n a S h a n g l i a i C o m p o s i t e w i t h T i m e A n a l y s i s Study,

CHOOSING A N D
A D J U S T I N G PERIOD
S E T U P FOR O S C I L L A T O R S

A e r o d y n a m i c I n v e s t m e n t s Inc., © 1996-2011, Daily Market Report,
www.aeroinvest.com

Source: Market Trader Gold, Alphee Lavoie and Sergey Tarasov
Through the Air, he states through his fictitious character Robert,
" I have determined the major and minor time factors which repeat
in the history of nations, men and markets" (p. 70).
The specific event being tested in Figure 2.12 is called a retrograde cycle. We will take an introductory look at a few of Gann's

A

s the Stochastics indicator is one of the more widely used studies
in the industry, it is a good place to begin a discussion about

how to set up initial periods. As mentioned in the first chapter, quote

vendors use the same default periods for their studies. Stochastics is
generally one of the first studies that novice technical traders will

methods in Chapter 9.
While Benner, Dewey, and Gann all had different ways of charting cycles and focused on some that at first appear similar, they
had in common something even more valuable; they were thinkers.
These men used their cycle work to forecast and time the sentiment
changes that impact on their business environment based on the

add to their market data, allowing professional traders to use this
knowledge to their advantage for short-horizon market moves.
The S&P 500 futures market can be graphed in three-minute
time intervals. But clearly this would be ridiculous when the market
is moving 20 S&P points in a minute. Markets sometimes adopt
entirely different personalities and knowing the technical tool to

rhythmic patterns of the past.

use for a given environment is essential. In flash crash environments I personally do not use normalized oscillators at all that track

Endnotes

between 0 and 100. A simple detrended oscillator from two simple

Dewy, E.R., with Mandino, O., Foundation of the Study of Cycles, New York:

moving averages will keep the trade on and take it off with the best

Hawthorn Books, Inc., 1971.
59

60

•

D I S P E L L I N G S O M E C O M M O N B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup for Oscillators

* 61

charts on down to the shorter time intervals. I strongly recommend

normalized oscillators does not change.

only after extensive analysis of longer time horizons from monthly
