
A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

51

average of shorter ones. The janitor in Chapter 1 who won the lottery, if
he lived 1000 years, cannot be expected to win more lotteries. Those
who were unlucky in life in spite of their skills would eventually rise.
The lucky fool might have benefited from some luck in life; over the
longer run he would slowly converge to the state of a less-lucky idiot.
Each one would revert to his long-term properties.

Distilled Thinking on Your PalmPilot
breaking

news

The journalist, my bete noire, entered this book with George Will
dealing with random outcomes. In the next step I will show how my
Monte Carlo toy taught me to favor distilled thinking, by which I mean
the thinking based on information around us that is stripped of
meaningless but diverting clutter. For the difference between noise and
information, the topic of this book (noise has more randomness) has an
analog: that between journalism and history. To be competent, a
journalist should view matters like a historian, and play down the value
of the information he is providing, such as by saying: "today the market
went up, but this information is not too relevant as it emanates mostly
from noise". He would certainly lose his job by trivializing the value of
the information in his hands. Not only is it difficult for the journalist to
think more like a historian, but it is alas the historian who is becoming
more like the journalist.
For an idea, age is beauty (it is premature to discuss the mathematics
of the point). The applicability of Solon's warning to a life in randomness, in contrast with the exact opposite message delivered by the
prevailing media-soaked culture, reinforces my instinct to value distilled
thought over newer thinking, regardless of its apparent sophistication another reason to accumulate the hoary volumes by my bedside (I confess
that the only news items I currently read are the far more interesting
upscale social gossip stories found in Tatler, Paris Match and Vanity Fair
- in addition to The Economist). Aside from the decorum of ancient

52

SOLON'S

WARNING

thought as opposed to the coarseness of fresh ink, I spent some time
phrasing the idea in the mathematics of evolutionary arguments and
conditional probability. For an idea to have survived so long across so
many cycles is indicative of its relative fitness. Noise, at least some noise,
was filtered out. Mathematically, progress means that some new
information is better than past information, not that the average of
new information will supplant past information, which means that it is
optimal for someone, when in doubt, to systematically reject the new
idea, information, or method. Clearly and shockingly, always. Why?
The argument in favor of "new things" and even more "new new
things" goes as follows: look at the dramatic changes that have been
brought about by the arrival of new technologies, such as the
automobile, the airplane, the telephone, and the personal computer.
Middlebrow inference (inference stripped of probabilistic thinking)
would lead one to believe that all new technologies and inventions
would likewise revolutionize our lives. But the answer is not so obvious:
here we only see and count the winners, to the exclusion of the losers (it
is like saying that actors and writers are rich, ignoring the fact that
actors are largely waiters - and lucky to be ones for the less comely
writers usually serve French fries at McDonald's). Losers? The Saturday
newspaper lists dozens of new patents of such items that can
revolutionize our lives. People tend to infer that because some inventions have revolutionized our lives that inventions are good to endorse
and we should favor the new over the old. I hold the opposite view. The
opportunity cost of missing a "new new thing" like the airplane and the
automobile is minuscule compared to the toxicity of all the garbage one
has to go through to get to these jewels (assuming these have brought
some improvement to our lives, which I frequently doubt).
Now the exact same argument applies to information. The problem
with information is not that it is diverting and generally useless, but that
it is toxic. We will examine the dubious value of the highly frequent
news with a more technical discussion of signal filtering and observation
frequency further down. I will say here that such respect for the time
honored provides arguments to rule out any commerce with the
babbling modern journalist and implies a minimal exposure to the
media as a guiding principle for someone involved in decision-making
under uncertainty. If there is anything better than noise in the mass of

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

53

"urgent" news pounding us, it would be like a needle in a haystack.
People do not realize that the media is paid to get your attention. For a
journalist, silence rarely surpasses any word.
On the rare occasions when I boarded the 6:42 train to New York I
observed with amazement the hordes of depressed business commuters
(who seemed to have preferred to be elsewhere) studiously buried in the
Wall Street Journal, apprised of the minutiae of companies that, at the
time of writing, are probably out of business. Indeed it is difficult to
ascertain whether they seem depressed because they are reading the
newspaper, or if depressive people tend to read the newspaper, or if
people who are living outside their genetic habitat both read the
newspaper and look sleepy and depressed. But while early on in my
career such focus on noise would have offended me intellectually, as I
would have deemed such information as too statistically insignificant
for the derivation of any meaningful conclusion, I currently look at it
with delight. I am happy to see such mass-scale idiotic decision-making,
prone to overreaction in their post-perusal investment orders - in other
words I currently see in the fact that people read such material an
insurance for my continuing in the entertaining business of option
trading against the fools of randomness.

shiller

redux

Much of the thinking about the negative value of information on society
in general was sparked by Robert Shiller. Not just in financial markets;
but overall his 1981 paper may be the first mathematically formulated
introspection on the manner society in general handles information.
Shiller made his mark with his 1981 paper on the volatility of markets,
where he determined that, if a stock price is the estimated value of
"something" (say the discounted cash flows from a corporation), then
market prices are way too volatile in relation to tangible manifestations
of that "something" (he used dividends as proxy). Prices swing more
than the fundamentals they are supposed to reflect, they visibly
overreact by being too high at times (when their price overshoots the
good news or when they go up without any marked reason) or too low
at others. The volatility differential between prices and information

54

SOLON'S

WARNING

meant that something about "rational expectation" did not work.
(Prices did not rationally reflect the long-term value of securities by
overshooting in either direction.) Markets had to be wrong. Shiller then
pronounced markets to be not as efficient as established by financial
theory (efficient markets meant, in a nutshell, that prices should adapt
to all available information in such a way as to be totally unpredictable
to us humans and prevent people from deriving profits). This conclusion
set off calls by the religious orders of high finance for the destruction of
the infidel who committed such apostasy. Interestingly, and by some
strange coincidence, it is that very same Shiller that was trounced by
George Will only one chapter ago.
The principal criticism against Shiller came from Robert C. Merton.
The attacks were purely on methodological grounds (Shiller's analysis
was extremely rough; for instance, his using dividends in place of
earnings was rather weak). Merton was also defending the official
financial theory position that markets needed to be efficient and could
not possibly deliver opportunities on a silver plate. Yet the same Robert
C. Merton later introduced himself as the "founding partner" of a hedge
fund that aimed at taking advantage of market inefficiencies. Setting
aside the fact that Merton's hedge fund blew up rather spectacularly
from the black swan problem (with characteristic denial), his "founding"
such a hedge fund requires, by implication, that he agrees with Shiller
about the inefficiency of the market. The defender of the dogmas of
modern finance and efficient markets started a fund that took advantage
of market inefficiencies! It is as if the Pope converted to Islam.
Things are not getting any better these days. At the time of writing,
news providers are'offering all manner of updates, "breaking news" that
can be delivered electronically in a wireless manner. The ratio of
undistilled information to distilled is rising, saturating markets. The
elder's messages need not be delivered to you as imminent news.
This does not mean that all journalists are fooled by randomness
noise providers: there are hordes of thoughtful"journalists in the business
(I would suggest London's Anatole Kaletsky and New York's Jim Grant
and Alan Abelson as the underrated representatives of such a class
among financial journalists; Gary Stix among scientific journalists); it is
just that prominent media journalism is a thoughtless process of
providing the noise that can capture people's attention and there exists

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

55

no mechanism for separating the two. As a matter of fact smart
journalists are often penalized. Like the lawyer in Chapter 11 who does
not care about the truth, but about arguments that can sway a jury
whose intellectual defects he knows intimately, journalism goes to what
can capture our attention, with adequate sound-bites. Again my
scholarly friends would wonder why I am getting emotional stating
the obvious things about the journalists; the problem with my profession
is that we depend on them for what information we need to obtain.

gerontocracy

A preference for distilled thinking implies favoring old investors and
traders, that is investors who have been exposed to markets the longest,
a matter that is counter to the common Wall Street practice of preferring
those that have been the most profitable, and preferring the younger
whenever possible. I toyed with Monte Carlo simulations of
heterogeneous populations of traders under a variety of regimes (closely
resembling historical ones), and found a significant advantage in
selecting aged traders, using, as a selection criterion their cumulative
years of experience rather than their absolute success (conditional on
their having survived without blowing up). "Survival of the fittest", a
term so hackneyed in the investment media, does not seem to be
properly understood: under regime switching, as we will see in Chapter
5, it will be unclear who is actually the fittest, and those who will
survive are not necessarily those who appear to be the fittest. Curiously,
it will be the oldest, simply because older people have been exposed
longer to the rare event and can be, convincingly, more resistant to it. I
was amused to discover a similar evolutionary argument in mate
selection that considers that women prefer (on balance) to mate with
healthy older men over healthy younger ones, everything else being
equal, as the former provide some evidence of better genes. Gray hair
signals an enhanced ability to survive - conditional on having reached
the gray hair stage, he is likely to be more resistant to the vagaries of life.
Curiously, life insurers in renaissance Italy reached the same conclusion,
by charging the same insurance for a man in his 20s as they did for a
man in his 50s, a sign that they had the same life expectation; once a

56

SOLON'S

WARNING

man crossed the 40-year mark, he had shown that very few ailments
could harm him. We now proceed to a mathematical rephrasing of these
arguments.

Philostratus in Monte Carlo: On the Difference
Between Noise and Information
The wise man listens to meaning, the fool only gets the noise. The
modern Greek poet C. P. Cavafy wrote a piece in 1915 after
Philostratus' adage: For the gods perceive things in the future, ordinary
people things in the present, but the wise perceive things about to
happen. Cavafy wrote:
in their intense meditation the hidden sound of things approaching
reaches them and they listen reverently while in the street outside the
people hear nothing at all.
I thought hard and long on how to explain with as little mathematics as
possible the difference between noise and meaning, and how to show
why the time scale is important in judging an historical event. The
Monte Carlo simulator can provide us with such an intuition. We will
start with an example borrowed from the investment world (that is my
profession), as it can be explained rather easily, but the concept can be
used in any application.
Let us manufacture a happily retired dentist, living in a pleasant
sunny town. We know a priori that he is an excellent investor, and that
he will be expected to earn a return of 15% in excess of Treasury bills,
with a 10% error rate per annum (what we call volatility). It means that
out of 100 sample paths, we expect close to 68 of them to fall within a
band of plus and minus 10% around the 15% excess return, i.e.
between 5% and 25% (to be technical; the bell-shaped normal distribution has 68% of all observations falling between —1 and 1 standard
deviations). It also means that 95 sample paths would fall between —5%
and 35%.

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

57

Clearly, we are dealing with a very optimistic situation. The dentist
builds for himself a nice trading desk in his attic, aiming to spend every
business day there watching the market, while sipping decaffeinated
cappuccino. He has an adventurous temperament, so he finds this
activity more attractive than drilling the teeth of reluctant old little Park
Avenue ladies.
He subscribes to a web-based service that supplies him with
continuous prices, now to be obtained for a fraction of what he pays
for his coffee. He puts his inventory of securities in his spreadsheet and
can thus instantaneously monitor the value of his speculative portfolio.
We are living in the era called that of connectivity.
A 15% return with a 10% volatility (or uncertainty) per annum
translates into a 93% probability of making money in any given year.
But seen at a narrow time scale, this translates into a mere 50.02%
probability of making money over any given second as shown in Table
3.1. Over the very narrow time increment, the observation will reveal
close to nothing. Yet the dentist's heart will not tell him that. Being
emotional, he feels a pang with every loss, as it shows in red on his
screen. He feels some pleasure when the performance is positive, but not
in equivalent amount as the pain experienced when the performance is
negative.
At the end of every day the dentist will be emotionally drained. A
minute-by-minute examination of his performance means that each day
(assuming eight hours per day) he will have 241 pleasurable minutes
against 239 unpleasurable ones. These amount to 60,688 and 60,271,
respectively, per year. Now realize that if the unpleasurable minute is
Table 3.1 Probability of making money at different scales.
Scale

Probability

1 year

93%

1 quarter

77%

1 month

67%

1 day

54%

1 hour

51.3%

1 minute

50.17%

1 second

50.02%

58

SOLON'S

WARNING

worse in reverse pleasure than the pleasurable minute is in pleasure
terms, then the dentist incurs a large deficit when examining his
performance at a high frequency.
Consider the situation where the dentist examines his portfolio only
upon receiving the monthly account from the brokerage house. As 67%
of his months will be positive, he incurs only four pangs of pain per
annum and eight uplifting experiences. This is the same dentist
following the same strategy. Now consider the dentist looking at his
performance only every year. Over the next 20 years that he is expected
to live, he will experience 19 pleasant surprises for every unpleasant
one!
This scaling property of randomness is generally misunderstood, even
by professionals. I have seen Ph.D.s argue over a performance observed
in a narrow time scale (meaningless by any standard). Before additional
dumping on the journalist, more observations seem in order.
Viewing it from another angle, if we take the ratio of noise to what
we call nonnoise (i.e., left column/right column), which we have the
privilege here of examining quantitatively, then we have the following.
Over one year we observe roughly 0.7 parts noise for every one part
performance. Over one month, we observe roughly 2.32 parts noise for
every one part performance. Over one hour, 30 parts noise for every one
part performance, and over one second, 1796 parts noise for every one
part performance.
A few conclusions:
1. Over a short time increment, one observes the variability of the
portfolio, not the returns. In other words, one sees the variance, little
else. I always remind myself that what one observes is at best a
combination of variance and returns, not just returns.
2. Our emotions are not designed to understand the point. The dentist
did better when he dealt with monthly statements rather than
infrequent ones. Perhaps it would be even better for him if he limited
himself to yearly statements.
3. When I see an investor monitoring his portfolio with live prices on
his cellular telephone or his PalmPilot, I smile and smile.
Finally I reckon that I am not immune to such an emotional defect. But I
deal with it by having no access to information, except in rare

A MATHEMATICAL

MEDITATION

ON

HISTORY

59

circumstances. Again, I prefer to read poetry. If an event is important
enough, it will find its way to my ears. I will return to this point in time.
The same methodology can explain why the news (the high scale) is
full of noise and why history (the low scale) is largely stripped of it
(though fraught with interpretation problems). This explains why I
prefer not to read the newspaper (outside of the obituary), why I never
chitchat about markets, and, when in a trading room, I frequent the
mathematicians and the secretaries, not the traders. It explains why it is
better to read The Economist on Saturdays than the Wall Street Journal
every morning (from the standpoint of frequency, aside from the
massive gap in intellectual class between the two publications).
Finally, this explains why people who look too closely at randomness
burn out, their emotions drained by the series of pangs they experience.
Regardless of what people claim, a negative pang is not offset by a
positive one (some behavioral economists estimate the negative effect to
be up to 2.5 the magnitude of a positive one); it will lead to an
emotional deficit.
Some so-called wise and rational persons often blame me for
"ignoring" possible valuable information in the daily newspaper and
refusing to discount the details of the noise as "short-term events". Some
of my employers have blamed me for living on a different planet.
My problem is that I am not rational and I am extremely prone to
drown in randomness and to incur emotional torture. I am aware of my
need to ruminate on park benches and in cafes away from information,
but I can only do so if I am somewhat deprived of it. My sole advantage
in life is that I know some of my weaknesses, mostly that I am incapable
of taming my emotions facing news and incapable of seeing a
performance with a clear head. Silence is far better. More on that in
Part III.

FOUR

RANDOMNESS, NONSENSE, AND THE
SCIENTIFIC INTELLECTUAL

On extending the Monte Carlo generator to produce artificial
thinking and compare it with rigorous non-random constructs.
The science wars enter the business world. Why the aesthete in
me loves to be fooled by randomness.

Randomness and the Verb
ur Monte Carlo engine can take us into more literary territory.

O

Increasingly, a distinction is being made between the scientific
intellectual and the literary intellectual - culminating with what is called
the "science wars", plotting factions of literate non-scientists against no
less literate scientists. The distinction between the two approaches
originated in Vienna in the 1930s, with a collection of physicists who
decided that the large gains in science were becoming significant enough
to make claims on the field known to belong to the humanities. In their
view, literary thinking could conceal plenty of well-sounding nonsense.
They wanted to strip thinking from rhetoric (except in literature and
poetry where it properly belonged).

R A N D O M N E S S , N O N S E N S E , AND T H E

SCIENTIFIC

INTELLECTUAL

61

The way they introduced rigor into intellectual life is by declaring
that a statement could fall only into two categories: deductive, like "2 +
2 = 4", i.e., incontrovertibly flowing from a precisely defined axiomatic
framework (here the rules of arithmetic), or inductive, i.e., verifiable in
some manner (experience, statistics, etc.), like "it rains in Spain" or
"New Yorkers are generally rude". Anything else was plain
unadulterated hogwash (music could be a far better replacement to
metaphysics). Needless to say that inductive statements may turn out to
be difficult, even impossible, to verify, as we will see with the black
swan problem - and empiricism can be worse than any other form of
hogwash when it gives someone confidence (it will take me a few
chapters to drill the point). However, it was a good start to make
intellectuals responsible for providing some form of evidence for their
statements. This Vienna Circle was at the origin of the development of
the ideas of Wittgenstein, Popper, Carnap, and flocks of others.
Whatever merit their original ideas may have, the impact on both
philosophy and the practice of science has been significant. Some of
their impact on non-philosophical intellectual life is starting to develop,
albeit considerably more slowly.
One conceivable way to discriminate between a scientific intellectual
and a literary intellectual is by considering that a scientific intellectual can
: usually recognize the writing of another but that the literary intellectual
would not be able to tell the difference between lines jotted down by a
scientist and those by a glib non-scientist. This is even more apparent
when the literary intellectual starts using scientific buzzwords, like
"uncertainty principle", "Godel's theorem", "parallel universe", or
"relativity" either out of context or, as often, in exact opposition to the
scientific meaning. I suggest reading the hilarious Fashionable Nonsense
by Alan Sokal for an illustration of such practice (I was laughing so loudly
and so frequently while reading it on a plane that other passengers kept
whispering things about me). By dumping the kitchen sink of scientific
references in a paper, one can make another literary intellectual believe
that one's material has the stamp of science. Clearly, to a scientist, science
lies in the rigor of the inference, not in random references to such
grandiose concepts as general relativity or quantum indeterminacy. Such
rigor can be spelled out in plain English. Science is method and rigor; it
can be identified in the simplest of prose writing. For instance, what
