
 The McDonnell Douglas helicopter is supposedly known for its silence to those on the outside of it. On the inside, however, it makes a fearsome racket. Whop! Whop! Whop! it goes. I could only just hear the cop as he hooted with glee, “They don’t even know we are up here! None of this whop whop whop crap.” Whop! Whop! Whop! went the helicopter as we fell from the sky. Weekenders glanced skyward in terror. Somehow in the suburban sprawl Clark had found a field of alfalfa, and decided it was time to practice his landings. It was illegal for him to do it, but the cop bowed to the inevitable and said, “By the time they reach us, we’ll be out of here.” Clark set her down, sending alfalfa sprouts blowing every which way. 

 Clark still hadn’t spoken much. From the moment we climbed into the helicopter, he had been perfectly silent, and concentrated on teaching himself how to fly his new machine. Now, for the first time, he turned his head slightly, and I had a glimpse of his face. His mouth was already in full pucker. He shouted over the whop whop whop to the cop, “Were you controlling it?” 

 Clark had one of those faces that virtually screamed what he was feeling. The pucker was its way of letting you know he was irritated. Irritation, for him, was not an ordinary low-level emotional event. Along with its brother, impatience, irritation was the sensation Clark felt most keenly. He was rarely irritated by machines, but he was often irritated by people, especially when they stood between him and what he was after. His face would redden, and his mouth would twist up into a mouth-of-the-volcano pucker as if it were trying to suppress the inevitable lava. The mood in the air once his mouth went into its full pucker was a bit like the feeling you might get when, climbing what you thought was a mountain, you looked up and saw smoke billowing from the top. When you spotted the pucker, you froze, turned, and scrambled back down to safety. You found another place to pass the afternoon. 

 The cop didn’t know about the pucker. He shook his head pleasantly. He attempted to engage the volcano in conversation. The fool. “That was all you, Jim,” he hollered with a big friendly smile. 

 “I felt you controlling it,” shouted Jim, sharply. 

 “No, no,” said the cop, taken aback, “it’s been all you.” It was hard to know if he was telling the truth. Probably not. The whole time Clark had been flying the helicopter, the cop had kept his hands on his own set of controls. From the back seat it was impossible to tell who was in charge. Apparently it wasn’t much easier from the front. 

 “This really pisses me off,” said Clark. 

 It was all I could do not to lean forward and scream, “Of course, he’s been flying it, you idiot! You’ve been pushing buttons just to see what would happen! What, you want us all to be a pile a dust?” Instead, I sat quietly, sweat popping out of all sorts of unlikely holes, waiting for the conflict to reach its inevitable conclusion. I’d seen this too many times already to hold out any hope for the cop. 

 “I think you’ve been flying it,” hollered Clark, unhappily. “I felt it.” His ferocity astonished the cop. He shook his head again, this time not in disagreement but in shock. He was a small furry animal that realizes too late it has wandered into the jaws of doom. With a soundless sigh he removed his hands from the controls and let them lie limply at his side. The veteran of Vietnam helicopter warfare gave the machine over to the man with six hours of flight experience. “Let’s go,” he said. 

 In moments Clark had the helicopter back up at three thousand feet. There he stopped. The human mind—or my mind anyway—has come to associate flight with motion: as long as you’re moving, you can be sure that you’re not dead. There was no denying the fact that we’d stopped moving. We hovered three thousand feet above the earth, perfectly motionless. After a minute or so of just sitting there, drops of sweat ran down the backs of my legs. Then Clark began to twirl the helicopter, around and around. We pirouetted in the sky, like an ice skater at the end of a routine. “Good Jim,” said the cop, a bit uneasily. “Always think of your hands and feet as an extension of your brain. Like a robot.” 

 Immediately the robot pulled the helicopter out of its spin and raced forward to God knew where. Somewhere…anywhere…so long as it was…new. It was pure impulse. The cop resigned himself to letting him go wherever he wanted, since he was going there anyway. We crossed over a highway and into the golden Tuscan hills that rise along the east side of Silicon Valley. The cop sat with his hands in his lap and his eyes on these dimples on the horizon. He had nothing better to do than to enjoy the view—and that is what he did. Then he asked, “What’s that shiny thing down there?” 

 Clark said he couldn’t see anything. Neither could I. The cop pointed, “Take her that direction.” Thirty seconds later we both saw what the cop had spotted, a glaring reflection coming out of a stand of oaks on the side of a nasty gully. “It looks like a plane,” said the cop. 

 It was a plane. More perfectly preserved than any plane that had ever landed upside down in a tree. It jutted from the giant oak as if it had been placed there by a large, sensitive hand. “Take her down,” said the cop. “Take her down low .” Clark circled lower until we were maybe one hundred feet off the ground. The terrain offered no natural landing pad, and we were unable to come close enough to peer inside the plane’s windows. But when it was clear beyond doubt that the shiny metal object was indeed a plane the cop phoned the tower at the San Jose airport. 

 “We have found an aircraft in an oak tree,” he said. His tone suggested that an aircraft in an oak tree was perfectly normal, part of the guided tour. 

 Once that message had been digested, a new voice came over the radio. “You think they could be alive in there?” it asked. 

 “That’s what I’m thinking,” said the cop. “It looks like it could be a survivable crash.” He leaned over to Clark, apologetically. “We’re kind of stuck here,” he said. “We’ve got to save those people down there—if they are still alive.” 

 Clark just nodded. Then he said, “This makes no sense.” 

 “Okay,” said the cop. “Let’s make ourselves safe. Jim, take it up. We’re going to orbit until they arrive.” Clark lifted the helicopter off the gulley, all the while complaining that the plane crash made no sense. There were open fields less than a mile away. “It’s bizarre,” he said. “Why would they have come here to ditch instead of an open area?” It was as if he was unhappy rescuing people until he found how they came to be in need of rescue. “Who knows what people do when they panic,” said the cop. Soon we were high over the crashed plane and carving wide circles over the Valley. “It still doesn’t make any sense,” said Clark. “Well,” said the cop, reaching into the self-help playbook. “Everything happens for a reason. We took off at exactly a certain time. The sun was setting at exactly a certain angle, so that we could see the plane…” 

 The control tower decided that we shouldn’t land, at least not right away, for fear that we too might end up in an oak tree, and that there would be no one to lead the rescue effort. There was nothing to do but to wait for whoever it was who cleaned up after plane crashes, so that we might lead them to the oak tree. “I’ll bet it was people up last night to see the fireworks,” said Clark, after a bit. “They got over here and ran out of fuel. If it was dark and they ran out of fuel that would explain why they came down here.” The cop shrugged and kept one eye on the plane below. It was small and white and fragile; it was hard to see how it hadn’t collapsed on impact. For anyone still alive inside that plane, I thought, there was good news and bad news. The good news was that you’d been spotted. The bad news was that the man flying the helicopter leading rescue units to your aid had six and a half hours of flight experience and a hangover. And he was growing irritated at how little sense you made. 

 For the next hour Clark circled Silicon Valley, and I finally had a good look at the place from the perspective that Clark sought to maintain—the perspective of a man gazing down from a great height. It did not really look very much like a valley. It was more of a broad, watery plain, though if you drove far enough in any direction you eventually encountered some shy, self-effacing mountains. For that matter, it was as difficult to spot the silicon in Silicon Valley as it was to find the valley. The silicon had been Part One of the Valley’s story, and Part One was over. 

 The Valley had a brief but curious commercial past, in which Clark showed no interest whatsoever. It ran something like this: The sunshine, the abundance of U.S. government research grants, the willingness of Stanford University to let its professors walk out the door with their inventions and start companies, the presence of a counterculture intent on arming the masses with new technology—all made the Valley the place to be for people with a knack for building new technology. Added to this was the absence of an Old World snobbery, still present back East, but nearly absent west of the Mississippi. Back East engineering had always been viewed as glorified manual labor. No one thought of Harvard or Princeton or Yale as a place you went to become an engineer. 

 The Valley was at least in part an attempt to reinvent the old social order. Out here engineering did not have the stigma of manual labor. Engineering was respected, maybe more than any other profession, perhaps because the original economic prospectors were mining engineers, and the lawyers and bankers came as an afterthought. In any case, by the mid-1950s technically minded people were aware that the region offered them a chance to do better for themselves than they might back East. “In 1955, I attempted to start a transistor business in California,” a Nobel Prize winner, the co-inventor of the transistor, William Shockley, told a U.S. congressional subcommittee in the late 1960s. “One of my motivations was that I had come to the conclusion that the most creative people were not adequately rewarded as the employees of industry.” The engineers Shockley talked into moving to the Valley and joining his company soon quit in a dispute with Shockley and created Fairchild Semiconductor; from there several moved on to create Intel; and from Intel an industry was born. Intel invented the microprocessor; the microprocessor made possible the boom in personal computing; the personal computer boom led inexorably to the Internet boom; where the Internet boom might lead nobody knew, though if Clark had his way, and history continued its trend, it would be bigger than the Internet. This mind-boggling chain of events had been triggered by the technical man’s desire to find a place where he could take what he felt was rightfully his. 

 It wasn’t until we hovered at three thousand feet over the Valley that I could actually see Clark’s career. Unlike just about everyone else his age—fifty-four—Clark had made the leap from Part One to Part Two of the Silicon Valley Story. Part One had been about engineers building machines, cheaper, faster, and better. They built them so fast and so cheap that, commercially speaking, they made themselves uninteresting. Each new machine they built, sooner or later, became a commodity. Other people—usually foreign people—eventually figured out how to build it more cheaply. The companies that made the machines, such as Hewlett-Packard, remained viable. But they were as dull and plodding and predictable as any other big American company. 

 Part Two of the Valley story was not at all plodding and predictable. At some point in the early 1990s the engineers had figured out that they didn’t need to build new computers to get rich. They just had to cook up new things for the computers to do. The thrill was in the concepts; the concepts were the recipes . The notion of what constituted “useful” work had broadened. All across Silicon Valley you found office buildings crammed with young technogeeks cooking up recipes that they hoped would turn the economy on its ear. The role model for this activity was Jim Clark. This was due not so much to Clark’s success as to his talent for self-reinvention. Most other fifty-four-year-olds in Silicon Valley had long ago been torn down and replaced. Not Clark. Other people grew old, he stayed new. His psyche was a magic show, and this was its favorite trick: no matter how long he’d been around, he could behave as if he’d just arrived. 

 Clark’s ubiquity was reflected in the landscape beneath us; every significant landmark below bordered on his life. Stanford University: he had taught computer science there and was now paying to create a new department within the engineering school, which he wanted to call biocomputing. Xerox PARC, birthplace of the personal computer: Clark had built his Geometry Engine there, and the Geometry Engine had changed computing. The great sprawling campuses of the old work station companies, Silicon Graphics and Sun Microsystems: Clark had created the former; some friends of his had created the latter. The dozens of tiny ski chalets on Sand Hill Road, for which venture capitalists now paid ninety dollars a square foot: they paid that money so that they could be near Clark, and people like Clark, when they announced the new new thing. The companies born on the Internet: Yahoo, Excite, @Home, eBay, and so on: they derived, one way or another, from Netscape, which Clark had founded after he left Silicon Graphics. The Internet service companies now layering themselves over the old Internet software companies: Clark had created the most outlandishly ambitious, Healtheon, with which he hoped essentially to seize control of the $1.5 trillion-a-year U.S. health care industry. It was an extraordinary performance, and it wasn’t over yet. 

 Clark’s lack of nostalgia for the history beneath us was nearly complete. Actually, as we circled overhead, what he said was “They need to tear it all down and start over. It’s a ridiculous waste of space.” He pointed out that offices on Sand Hill Road were going for twice the rents of space in midtown Manhattan. Sand Hill Road had the most expensive commercial real estate in the United States. And they were still putting two-story buildings on it! “One day it’ll all be skyscrapers,” he said. The thought pleased him—he became less irritated by the crashed plane. The impermanence of the place allowed him, and it, to remain suspended in a state of pure possibility. He was fully occupied only by what had not yet happened. The part of his brain that kept him interested in being alive groped for what came next, after Healtheon. 

 We circled the Valley for another hour. The cop remained excited about the possibility that people inside the crashed plane were alive and upside down on top of the oak tree. Clark’s interest in the plane in the oak tree had faded to nothing. Having led us into the excitement, he left us to enjoy it for ourselves. It was as if his job ended when he’d stumbled upon the plane; everything else was a mopping-up operation best left to others. Soon enough a convoy of eight cars, an ambulance, and a fire truck came up a highway in the distance, and we flew out to meet them. They spotted us in the air, and followed our lead down a dirt road. Twenty minutes later another helicopter appeared on the horizon. The voice of its pilot crackled over our intercom. “I tip my hat to you gentlemen,” he said. “Quite a spot these fellows got themselves in.” 

 From above we could just make out the rescue squad climbing the tree. They reached the door of the crashed plane. They opened it. 

 “It’s empty,” crackled the voice on the radio. 

 The cockpit was empty. An airplane upside down at the top of a tall oak tree. Eight, maybe nine, miles from the nearest road or house. And there was no one inside of it. Or, for that matter, anywhere to be seen.

The New New Thing 

 3 

 The Past in a Box 

 I t wasn’t until the next day that we learned what had happened. A few hours before we took off in Clark’s helicopter, two guys had set out in their small white four-seater airplane, looking for goats to chase. Apparently people do this. They chase after goats in airplanes. They find themselves a big herd, come in low behind it, and frighten it into running off a cliff. Or something. Anyway, that morning the pleasure went out of goat chasing almost immediately, when the two men crashed into an oak tree, upside down. By some miracle of injustice neither one of them was killed, or even injured. The two men simply climbed down the oak tree and headed out to the highway to thumb a ride back to San Jose. They had some idea that they might return later with the necessary equipment and extract their airplane from the oak tree, real quiet-like. Unfortunately, almost as soon as they’d hit the ground, we’d shown up. The last thing the two men had wanted was to be saved. Rather than endure the embarrassment of explaining themselves to their would-be rescuers, they hid in the bushes until we left. Once the sky was clear they sneaked away. 

 We learned all that and more the next day. The afternoon after our helicopter ride, we hadn’t the faintest idea what had happened. And we drove back to Clark’s house in Atherton in radically different states of mind. I, for one, thought we had just had an unusual experience. We’d stumbled upon a plane crash, led a rescue effort, and wound up with a postmodern mystery: an empty cockpit. Here was the aviation equivalent of the authorless text. Clark, for his part, had little interest in any of it—not that day or any other. He never mentioned it again. When I said something about how strange it was to see an airplane sticking out of a tree, he said, “Oh, what did it look like?” For a full hour he had circled and dipped and swooped and plummeted over the wreck without once removing his eyes from the controls to glance at the crashed airplane. All of his attention had gone into learning to fly his helicopter. 

 At first I thought it was just coincidence that the most stupendously odd accidents befell Jim Clark. He was so wasteful of them, from a recreational point of view. Experiences from which most people could extract a life philosophy he glanced at once and discarded from his thoughts. He was the guy with a craving for sweets who’d been handed a huge bag of Snickers bars, which he worked his way through in an hour by eating a tiny corner off each one and chucking the rest. Eventually, I saw a kind of logic in his grazing: this was how he left himself open to accident. If nothing surprising or interesting was happening to him, he moved on until the situation corrected itself. This was as true of his work as of his leisure; indeed, it was hard to say where the work stopped and the leisure began. They formed a seamless, disturbing pattern of motion and change. 

 Clark’s inability to live without motion and change had gotten him to where he was. In his world change and motion begat money, which begat even more change and more motion, and so on. “Change” was another word for wealth, and “wealth” was another word for money, and money was what he was after, or said he was after. My own view was that he needed change even more than he needed the money that came from the change. Different people have different words for this need for constant motion and change. “Despair” is one of them. “Impatience” is another. Impatience might be a social vice but, to Clark, it was a commercial virtue. “If everyone was patient,” he’d say, “there’d be no new companies.” The impatient man kept his own life in such a constant state of upheaval that neither his experience nor his immediate surroundings ended up meaning very much to him. He was keen on things only as they happened; after they had happened he lost interest in them altogether. 

 As a result, it sometimes felt that nothing had ever happened to him at all. Oh, every now and then he was seized by a sense that his past should matter, just as people who have lost a leg occasionally wake up thinking they feel it down there kicking. In one such moment he decided that since Netscape obviously had played some role in economic history he should record how it felt to create it. But almost as soon as he’d hired his ghost writer, he lost interest. It bored him to sit around answering questions about what had happened. His little contribution to economic history—called Netscape Time —though not without interest, wound up sounding as if it was written by someone else. Which, of course, it was. 

 As a practical matter, Clark had no past, only a future. That’s when he really came alive: when you got him on the subject of what was going to happen next . Then he was full of ideas, and they would change from one moment to the next. This process bore no relation to the clichéd version of it offered up by more ordinary business people. Clark never used the words and phrases that we all have come to expect from the technology types who pretend to see the future. Vision, the challenge of the next century, the new millennium, the road ahead. That sort of grand talk struck him as perfect bullshit. In all the time I spent with him, I never once heard him refer to his ability to see the future. He couldn’t see it—that’s why he had to grope for it. He would be seized by some overwhelming enthusiasm—say, his ambition to create a new field of study that he wanted to call biocomputing, or his newest idea for snaring more billions in the World Wide Web—and he would be off and running down some long, dark tunnel leading God knew where. With him, enthusiasm was a physical event. He stood six feet three inches tall and weighed maybe two hundred pounds, but when he became excited about something he grew three inches and put on fifty pounds. It was as if someone had injected him with growth hormones. 
