
- 258 -

John Grisham

The Broker

After ten minutes, Efraim called a halt to the break-in. The agents scattered,
then regrouped in one of their safe houses. They had not been able to
determine who Luigi was or who he worked for, but it was obvious he'd
been spying on Backman around the clock.
As the hours passed with no sign of Backman, they began to believe that he
had fled. Could Luigi lead them to him?
In central Milano, at the Piazza del Duomo, Marco gawked at the mammoth
Gothic cathedral that took only three hundred years to complete. He strolled
along the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele, the magnificent glass-domed gallery
that Milano is famous for. Lined with cafes and bookshops, the gallery is the
center of the city's life, its most popular meeting place. With the temperature
approaching sixty degrees, Marco had a sandwich and a cola outdoors where
the pigeons swarmed every wayward crumb. He watched elderly Milanesi
stroll through the gallery, women arm in arm, men stopping to chat as if time
was irrelevant. To be so lucky, he thought.
Should he leave immediately, or should he lay low for a day or two? That
was the new urgent question. In a crowded city of four million people, he
could vanish for as long as he wanted. He'd get a map, learn the streets,
spend hours hiding in his room and hours walking the alleys.
But the bloodhounds behind him would have time to regroup.
Shouldn't he leave now, while they were back there scrambling and
scratching their heads?
Yes he should, he decided. He paid the waiter and glanced down at his
bowling shoes. They were indeed comfortable but he couldn't wait to burn
them. On a city bus he saw an ad for an Internet cafe on Via Verri. Ten
minutes later he entered the place. A sign on the wall gave the rates-ten
euros per hour, minimum of thirty minutes. He ordered an orange juice and
paid for half an hour. The clerk nodded in the general direction of a table
where a bunch of computers were waiting. Three of the eight were being
used by people who obviously knew what they were doing. Marco was
already lost.
But he faked it well. He sat down, grabbed a keyboard, stared at the monitor
and wanted to pray, but plowed ahead as if he'd been hacking for years. It
was surprisingly easy; he went to the KwyteMail

- 259 -

John Grisham

The Broker

site, typed his user name, t'Grinch456," then his pass phrase, "post hoc ergo
propter hoc," waited ten seconds, and there was the message from
Neal:
Marco: Mike/ Van Thiessen is still with Rhineland Bank, now the vice
president of client services. Anything else? Grinch.
At exactly 7:50 EST, Marco typed a message:
Grinch: Marco here-live and in person. Are you there?
He sipped his juice and stared at the screen. Come on, baby, make this thing
work. Another sip. A lady across the table was talking to her monitor. Then
the message:
I'm here, loud and clear. What's up?
Marco typed: They stole myAnkyo 850. There's a good chance the bad guys
have it and they re picking it to pieces. Any chance they can discover you?
Neal: Only if they have the user name and pass phrase. Do they?
Marco: No, I destroyed them. There's no way they can get around a
password?
Neal: Not with KwyteMail. It's totally secure and encrypted. If they have the
PC and nothing more, then they're out of luck.
Marco: And we're completely safe now?
Neal: Yes, absolutely. But what are you using now?
Marco: I'm in an Internet cafe', renting a computer, like a real hacker.
Neal: Do you want another Ankyo smartphone?
Marco: No, not now, maybe later. Here's the deal. Go see Carl Pratt. I know
you don't like him, but at this point I need him. Pratt was very close to
former senator Ira Clay burn from North Carolina. Clay burn ruled the
Senate Intelligence Committee for many years. I need Clayburn now. Go
through Pratt.
Neal: Wheres Clayburn now?
Marco: / don't know-I just hope he's still alive. He came from the Outer
Banks ofNC, some pretty remote place. He retired the year after I went to
federal camp. Pratt can find him.

- 260 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Neal: Sure, I'll do it as soon as I can sneak away. Marco: Please be careful.
Watch your back. Neal: Are you okay?
Marco: I'm on the run. I left Bologna early this morning. I'll try to check in
the same time tomorrow. Okay?
Neal: Keep your head down. Til be here tomorrow.
Marco signed off with a smug look. Mission accomplished. Nothing to it.
Welcome to the age of high-tech wizardry and gadgetry. He made sure his
exit was clean from KwyteMail, then finished his orange juice and left the
cafe. He headed in the direction of the train station, stopping first at a leather
shop where he managed an even swap of Giovanni's fine briefcase for a
black one of patently inferior quality; then at a cheap jewelry store where he
paid eighteen euros for a large round-faced watch with a bright red plastic
band, something else to distract anyone looking for Marco Lazzeri, formerly
of Bologna; then at a used-book shop where he spent two euros on a wellworn hardback containing the poetry of Czeslaw Milosz, all in Polish of
course, anything to confuse the bloodhounds; and, finally, at a secondhand
accessory store where he bought a pair of sunglasses and a wooden cane,
which he began using immediately on the sidewalk.
The cane reminded him of Francesca. It also slowed him down, changed his
gait. With time to spare he shuffled into Milano Centrale and bought a ticket
for Stuttgart.
Whitaker got the urgent message from Langley that Luigi's safe house had
been broken into, but there was absolutely nothing he could do about it. All
the agents from Bologna were now in Milano, scrambling frantically. Two
were at the train station, looking for the needle in the haystack. Two were at
Malpensa airport, twenty-seven miles from downtown. Two were at Linate
airport, which was much closer and handled primarily European flights.
Luigi was at the central bus station, still arguing by cell phone that perhaps
Marco wasn't even in Milano. Just because he took the bus from Bologna to
Modena, and headed in the general direction of northwest, didn't necessarily
mean he was going to Milano. But Luigi's credibility at the mo

- 261 -

John Grisham

The Broker

merit was somewhat diminished, at least in Whitaker's substantial opinion,
so he was banished to the bus station where he watched ten thousand people
come and go.
Krater got closest to the needle.
For sixty euros, Marco purchased a first-class ticket in hopes that he could
avoid the exposure of traveling by coach. For the ride north, the first-class
car was the last one, and Marco climbed aboard at five- thirty, forty-five
minutes before departure. He settled into his seat, hid his face as much as
possible behind the sunglasses and the tan straw hat, opened the book of
Polish poetry, and gazed out at the platform where passengers walked by his
train. Some were barely five feet away, all in a hurry.
Except one. The guy on the bus was back; the face from Caffe Atene;
probably the sticky-fingered thug who'd grabbed his blue Silvio bag; the
same bloodhound who'd been a step too slow off the bus in Modena about
eleven hours ago. He was walking but not going anywhere. His eyes were
squinted, his forehead wrinkled in a deep frown. For a professional, he was
much too obvious, thought Giovanni Ferro, who, unfortunately, now knew
much more than he wanted to know about ducking and hiding and covering
tracks.
Krater had been told that Marco would probably head either south to Rome,
where he had more options, or north to Switzerland, Germany, Francevirtually the entire continent to choose from. For five hours Krater had been
strolling along the twelve platforms, watching as the trains came and went,
mixing with the crowds, not concerned at all with who was getting off but
paying desperate attention to who was getting on. Every blue jacket of any
shade or style got his attention, but he had yet to see one with the worn
elbow patches.
It was in the cheap black briefcase wedged between Marcos feet, in seat
number seventy of the first-class car to Stuttgart. Marco watched Krater
amble along the platform, paying very close attention to the train whose final
destination was Stuttgart. He was holding what appeared to be a ticket, and
as he walked out of sight Marco could swear that he got on the train.
Marco fought the urge to get off. The door to his cabin opened, and Madame
entered.

- 262 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Once it was determined that Backman had disappeared, and
was not finally dead at the hands of someone else, a frenetic five hours
passed before Julia Javier found the information that should've been close
by. It was found in a file that had been locked away in the director's office,
and once guarded by Teddy Maynard himself. If Julia had ever seen the
information, she could not remember. And, in the chaos, she was certainly
not going to admit anything.
The information had come, reluctantly, from the FBI years earlier when
Backman was being investigated. His financial dealings were under great
scrutiny because the rumors were wild that he'd bilked a client and buried a
fortune. So where was the money? In search of it, the FBI had been piecing
together his travel history when he abruptly pled guilty and was sent away.
The guilty plea didn't close the Backman file, but it certainly removed the
pressure. With time, the travel research was completed, and eventually sent
over to Langley.
In the month before Backman was indicted, arrested, and released on a very
restricted bail arrangement, he had made two quick trips to Europe. For the
first one, he'd flown Air France business class with his favorite secretary to
Paris, where they frolicked for a few days and saw the sights. She later told
investigators that Backman had

- 263 -

John Grisham

The Broker

spent one long day dashing off to Berlin for some quick business, but made
it back in time for dinner at Alain Ducasse. She did not accompany him.
There were no records of Backman traveling by a commercial airliner to
Berlin, or anywhere else within Europe, during that week. A passport
would've been required, and the FBI was positive he had not used his. A
passport would not have been required for a train ride. Geneva, Bern,
Lausanne, and Zurich are all within four hours of Paris by train.
The second trip was a seventy-two-hour sprint from Dulles, first class on
Lufthansa to Frankfurt, again for business, though no business contacts had
been discovered there. Backman had paid for two nights in a luxury hotel in
Frankfurt, and there was no evidence that he had slept elsewhere. Like Paris,
the banking centers of Switzerland are within a few hours' train ride from
Frankfurt.
When Julia Javier finally found the file and read the report, she immediately
called Whitaker and said, "He's headed for Switzerland."
Madame had enough luggage for an affluent family of five. A harried porter
helped her haul the heavy suitcases on board and into the first-class car,
which she consumed with herself, her belongings, and her perfume. The
cabin had six seats, at least four of which she laid claim to. She sat in one
across from Marco and wiggled her ample rear as if to make it expand. She
glanced at him, cowering against the window, and gushed over a sultry
"Bonsoir." French, he thought, and since it didn't seem right to respond in
Italian, he relied on old faithful. "Hello."
"Ah, American."
With languages, identities, names, cultures, backgrounds, lies, lies, and more
lies all swirling around, he managed to say with no conviction whatsoever,
"No, Canadian."
"Ah, yes," she said, still arranging bags and settling in. Evidently American
would've been more welcome than Canadian. Madame was a robust woman
of sixty, with a tight red dress, thick calves, and stout black pumps that had
traveled a million miles. Her heavily decorated eyes were puffy, and the
reason was soon evident. Long before the train moved, she pulled out a large
flask, unscrewed its top which became a

- 264 -

John Grisham

The Broker

cup, and knocked back a shot of something strong. She swallowed hard, then
smiled at Marco and said, "Would you like a drink?"
"No thanks."
"It's a very good brandy."
"No thanks."
"Very well." She poured another one, drained it, then put away the flask.
A long train ride just got longer.
"Where are you going?" she asked in very good English.
"Stuttgart. And you?"
"Stuttgart, then on to Strasbourg. Can't stay too long in Stuttgart, you know."
Her nose wrinkled as if the entire city was swimming in raw sewage.
"I love Stuttgart," Marco said, just to watch it unwrinkle.
"Oh, well.1' Her shoes caught her attention. She kicked them off with little
regard as to where they might land. Marco braced for a jolt of foot odor but
then realized it had little chance of competing with the cheap perfume.
In self-defense, he pretended to nod off. She ignored him for a few minutes,
then said loudly, "You speak Polish?" She was looking at his book of poetry.
He jerked his head as if he'd just been awakened. "No, not exactly. I'm trying
to learn it, though. My family is Polish." He held his breath as he finished,
half expecting her to unleash a torrent of proper Polish and bury him with it.
"I see," she said, not really approving.
At exactly 6:15, an unseen conductor blew a whistle and the train started to
move. Fortunately, there were no other passengers assigned to Madame's
car. Several had walked down the aisle and stopped, glanced in, seen the
congestion, then moved on to another cabin where there was more room.
Marco watched the platform intensely as they began moving. The man from
the bus was nowhere to be seen.
Madame worked the brandy until she began snoring. She was awakened by
the conductor who punched their tickets. A porter came through with a
pushcart loaded with drinks. Marco bought a beer and offered one to his
cabinmate. His offer was greeted with another mammoth wrinkle of the
nose, as if she'd rather drink urine.

- 265 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Their first stop was Como/San Giovanni, a two-minute break during which
no one got on. Five minutes later they stopped at Chiasso. It was almost dark
now, and Marco was pondering a quick exit. He studied the itinerary; there
were four more stops before Zurich, one in Italy and three in Switzerland.
Which country would work best?
He couldn't risk being followed now. If they were on the train, then they had
stuck to him from Bologna, through Modena and Milano, through various
disguises. They were professionals, and he was no match for them. Sipping
his beer, Marco felt like a miserable amateur.
Madame was staring at the butchered hems of his slacks. Then he caught her
glancing down at the modified bowling shoes, and for that he didn't blame
her at all. Then the bright red watchband caught her attention. Her face
conveyed the obvious-she did not approve of his low sense of fashion.
Typical American, or Canadian, or whatever he was.
He caught a glimpse of lights shimmering off Lake Lugano. They were
snaking through the lake region, gaining altitude. Switzerland was not far
away.
An occasional drifter moved down the darkened aisle outside their cabin.
They would look in, through the glass door, then move along toward the
rear, where there was a restroom. Madame had plopped her large feet in the
seat opposite her, not too far from Marco. An hour into the trip, and she had
managed to spread her boxes and magazines and clothing throughout the
entire cabin. Marco was afraid to leave his seat.
Fatigue finally set in, and Marco fell asleep. He was awakened by the racket
at the Bellinzona station, the first stop in Switzerland. A passenger entered
the first-class car and couldn't find the right seat. He opened the door to
Madame's cabin, looked around, didn't like what he saw, then went off to
yell at the conductor. They found him a spot elsewhere. Madame hardly
looked up from her fashion magazines.
The next stretch was an hour and forty minutes, and when Madame went
back to her flask Marco said, "I'll try some of that." She smiled for the first
time in hours. Though she certainly didn't mind drinking alone, it was
always more pleasant with a friend. A couple of shots, though, and Marco
was nodding off again.

- 266 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The train jerked as it slowed for the stop at ArthGoldau. Marco's head jerked
too, and his hat fell off. Madame was watching him closely. When he
opened his eyes for good, she said, "A strange man has been looking at you."
"Where?''
"Where? Here, of course, on this train. He's been by at least three times. He
stops at the door, looks closely at you, then sneaks away."
Maybe it's my shoes, thought Marco. Or my slacks. Watchband? He rubbed
his eyes and tried to act as though it happened all the time.
"What does he look like?"
"Blond hair, about thirty-five, cute, brown jacket. Do you know him?"
"No, I have no idea." The man on the bus at Modena had neither blond hair
nor a brown jacket, but those minor points were irrelevant now. Marco was
frightened enough to switch plans.
Zug was twenty-five minutes away, the last stop before Zurich. He could not
run the risk of leading them to Zurich. Ten minutes out, he announced he
needed to use the restroom. Between his seat and the door was Madame's
obstacle course. As he began stepping through it, he placed his briefcase and
cane in his seat.
He walked past four cabins, each with at least three passengers, none of
whom looked suspicious. He went to the restroom, locked the door, and
waited until the train began to slow. Then it stopped. Zug was a two-minute
layover, and the train so far had been ridiculously on time. He waited one
minute, then walked quickly back to his cabin, opened the door, said nothing
to Madame, grabbed his briefcase and his cane, which he was perfectly
prepared to use as a weapon, and raced to the rear of the train where he
jumped onto the platform.
It was a small station, elevated with a street below. Marco flew down the
steps to the sidewalk where a lone taxi sat with a driver unconscious behind
the wheel. "Hotel, please," he said, startling the driver, who instinctively
grabbed the ignition key. He asked something in German and Marco tried
Italian. "I need a small hotel. I don't have a reservation."
"No problem," the driver said. As they pulled away, Marco

- 267 -

John Grisham

The Broker

looked up and saw the train moving. He looked behind him, and saw no one
giving chase.
The ride took all of four blocks, and when they stopped in front of an Aframe building on a quiet side street the driver said in Italian, "This hotel is
very good."
"Looks fine. Thanks. How far away is Zurich by car?"
"Two hours, more or less. Depends on the traffic."
"Tomorrow morning, I need to be in downtown Zurich at nine o'clock. Can
you drive me there?"
The driver hesitated for a second, his mind thinking of cold cash. "Perhaps,"
he said.
"How much will it cost?"
The driver rubbed his chin, then shrugged and said, "Two hundred euros."
"Good. Let's leave here at six."
"Six, yes, I'll be here."
Marco thanked him again and watched as he drove away. A bell rang when
he entered the front door of the hotel. The small counter was deserted, but a
television was chattering away somewhere close by. A sleepy-eyed teenager
finally appeared and offered a smile. "Guten abend," he said.
"Park inglese?" Marco asked.
He shook his head, no.
"Italiano?"
"A little."
"I speak a little too," Marco said in Italian. "I'd like a room for one night."
The clerk pushed over a registration form, and from memory Marco filled in
the name on his passport, and its number. He scribbled in a fictional address
in Bologna, and a bogus phone number as well. The passport was in his coat
pocket, close to his heart, and he was prepared to reluctantly pull it out.
But it was late and the clerk was missing his television show. With atypical
Swiss inefficiency, he said, also in Italian, "Forty-two euros," and didn't
mention the passport.
Giovanni laid the cash on the counter, and the clerk gave him a key to room
number 26. In surprisingly good Italian, he arranged a

- 268 -

John Grisham

The Broker

wake-up call for 5:00 a.m. Almost as an afterthought, he said, "I lost my
toothbrush. Would you have an extra?"
The clerk reached into a drawer and pulled out a box full of assorted
necessities-toothbrushes, toothpaste, disposable razors, shaving cream,
aspirin, tampons, hand cream, combs, even condoms. Giovanni selected a
few items and handed over ten euros.
A luxury suite at the Ritz could not have been more welcome than room 26.
Small, clean, warm, with a firm mattress, and a door that bolted twice to
keep away the faces that had been haunting him since early morning. He
took a long, hot shower, then shaved and brushed his teeth forever.
Much to his relief, he found a minibar in a cabinet under the television. He
ate a packet of cookies, washed them down with two small bottles of
whiskey, and when he crawled under the covers he was mentally drained and
physically exhausted. The cane was on the bed, nearby. Silly, but he couldn't
help it.

- 269 -

John Grisham

The Broker

In the depths of prison he'd dreamed of Zurich, with its
blue rivers and clean shaded streets and modern shops and handsome people,
all proud to be Swiss, all going about their business with a pleasant
seriousness. In another life he'd ridden the quiet electric streetcars with them
as they headed into the financial district. Back then he'd been too busy to
travel much, too important to leave the fragile workings of Washington, but
Zurich was one of the few places he'd seen. It was his kind of city:
unburdened by tourists and traffic, unwilling to spend its time gawking at
cathedrals and museums and worshiping the last two thousand years. Not at
all. Zurich was about money, the refined management of it as opposed to the
naked cash grab Backman had once perfected.
He was on a streetcar again, one hed caught near the train station, and was
now moving steadily along Bahnhofstrasse, the main avenue of downtown
Zurich, if in fact it had one. It was almost 9:00 a.m. He was among the last
wave of the sharply dressed young bankers headed for UBS and Credit
Suisse and a thousand lesser-known but equally rich institutions. Dark suits,
shirts of various colors but not many white ones, expensive ties with thicker
knots and fewer designs, dark brown shoes with laces, never tassels. The
styles had changed

- 270 -

John Grisham

The Broker

slightly in the past six years. Always conservative, but with some dash. Not
quite as stylish as the young professionals in his native Bologna, but quite
attractive.
Everyone was reading something as they moved along. Streetcars passed
from the other direction. Marco pretended to be engrossed in a copy
ofNewsweek, but he was really watching everyone else.
No one was watching him. No one seemed offended by his bowling shoes.
In fact, he'd seen another pair on a casually dressed young man near the train
station. His straw hat was getting no attention. The hems of his slacks had
been repaired slightly after he'd purchased a cheap sewing kit from the hotel
desk, then spent half an hour trying to tailor his pants without drawing
blood. His outfit cost a fraction of those around him, but what did he care?
He'd made it to Zurich without Luigi and all those others, and with a little
more luck he'd make it out.
At Paradeplatz the streetcars wheeled in from east and west and stopped.
They emptied quickly as the young bankers scattered in droves and headed
for the buildings. Marco moved with the crowd, his hat now left behind
under the seat in the streetcar.
Nothing had changed in seven years. The Paradeplatz was still the same-an
open plaza lined with small shops and cafes. The banks around it had been
there for a hundred years; some announced their names from neon signs,
others were hidden so well they couldn't be found. From behind his
sunglasses he soaked in as much of the surroundings as he could while
sticking close to three young men with gym bags slung over their shoulders.
They appeared to be headed for Rhineland Bank, on the east side. He
followed them inside, into the lobby, where the fun began.
The information desk hadn't moved in seven years; in fact, the well-groomed
lady sitting behind it looked vaguely familiar. "I'd like to see Mr. Mikel Van
Thiessen," he said as softly as possible.
'And your name?"
"Marco Lazzeri." He would use "Joel Backman" later, upstairs, but he was
hesitant to use it here. Hopefully, Neal's e-mails to Van Thiessen had alerted
him to the alias. The banker had been asked to remain in town, if at all
possible, for the next week or so.
She was on the phone and also pecking at a keyboard. "It will be just a
moment, Mr. Lazzeri," she said. "Would you mind waiting?"
