
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

104

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

execute a buy. If the score from the technical indicators was bearish, I
would execute a sell.
The tool worked sometimes. It didn’t work other times. So I refined the
tool and found the same thing occurred—sometimes it worked, sometimes
it did not. It was the equivalent of halving a number and continuing the
process until you get to zero. You never get to zero. I was constantly trying
to find that perfect indicator.
I soon realized that I was trying to tell the market when it was time to
go up or down. I learned that the market does not care what I think. I cannot tell the market what to do. In fact, the market did not follow my trading
system. The market had no idea what my tool was saying. Individually, I am
insignificant, as are the vast majority of currency traders who make up the
market. I like to say, “As individuals, we all don’t matter.”
As a result, I realized I had to think like the market. I also found to be
true that the market is simple. It looks for clues that others can see easily.
For example, if a trend line is broken, the market can see that the trend
line is broken, and I can too. This visual is available to everyone and is contrary to my misguided attempts to find the perfect proprietary indicator
that no one but myself could see. Instead I learned to buy when the market is buying and sell when the market is selling. I learned to follow the
trends.
All the influences in the market are reflected in the price. With that
price, it becomes as simple as listening to what the price is telling you
as a trader. If you use the right tools—the tools that the majority of the
market use—they will tell you what the bias is and which way the market
price should move. Moreover, they will also give you clues for anticipating
trends.
The first rule to follow is to keep it simple. Making trading complicated
is not the path to success. Trying to not think like the market is not the path
to success. Instead, understand that the market is simpler than you think,
and the trick is to follow it, not try to lead it.

Success Is Important
Traders not only should strive to keep it simple, but they should also strive
to be positive in their trading. So although the main focus of Rule 1 is to
keep it simple, traders should not lose sight of the importance of the SUCCESS we all strive for in our trading. Being positive is important because
it helps to keep fear down. So focus on success. Don’t focus on failing or
being stupid or other negative thoughts when trading.
If you keep positive, you will be more successful not only in trading but
in everything you do. Like Joseph told me, think “success,” not “stupid.”

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Rules for Attacking the Trend

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

105

RULE 2: HAVE A REASON
TO PLACE A TRADE
In Chapter 3, I touched on this rule as it relates to the game plan. Having
a reason to trade instills confidence in a trader and makes it possible to
quantify risk.
The reason to place a trade often acts as a reason to get out of a trade
as well. For example, traders will buy because the price moved above a
trend line. However, if the price goes above the line by 20 pips and then
reverses back below the trend line, the reason to trade is no longer valid.
By having the reason to trade, the specific risk for the trade is known.
As long as the trader is comfortable with that maximum loss, a trade should
be executed with little fear. With limited risk and little fear, the trader is
more likely to stay confident about the trade and keep the door open for a
potential trend-type profit that can be a multiple of the initial risk.
A simple example outlines the importance of having a reason to trade.
The simple moving average (throughout this book I will use the abbreviation MA to designate the simple moving average) takes the closing level of
a time period (say five minutes or one hour or one day) and accumulates
a series of the closes—say for 100 periods—then finds an average closing
level over those 100 periods. This has the effect of smoothing out the price
fluctuations. I find that the market tends to watch the 100 bar MA. The price
either finds support or resistance against this MA level. Alternatively, it can
move through the level and in doing so, switch the trading bias from bullish
to bearish or bearish to bullish.
For example, if the price of a currency pair moves below the 100 bar
MA, it should lead to further selling pressure as the bias switches from
bullish to bearish. A price move below the moving average becomes the
reason to execute a trade.
In Figure 5.2 the price of the EURUSD falls and closes below the 100
bar MA at the 1.2298 area. This is the first sell option for a risk-conscious
trader who looks for a reason to trade. What is the risk? The risk is of the
price moving back above the moving average plus a volatility cushion.
After falling to a low price near 1.2250, the market price rebounds to
the 1.2292 area. This gives a second selling level for the opportunistic bearish trader. Why? The price remains below the 100 bar MA. As long as the
price is below the moving average line, the bias is negative or bearish.
What is the risk? The risk to the trader is if the price moves above the
moving average line plus a small cushion. If this happened, it would shift
the bias back to bullish. In the example, a stop loss level of say 1.2308 could
be set for each of the trade options. If set at that level, the total risk is 16
pips (from 1.2292 to 1.2308).

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

106

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

FIGURE 5.2 Finding Reasons to Trade

By defining risk and knowing the risk, the trader has a reason to trade.
As long as the 16-pip risk is acceptable, fear should be dispersed and the
trader need only let the market price dictate success or failure.
If the trader is correct and the market price stays below the 100 bar
MA, he should remain short until that time when the bias turns from bearish to bullish. In our simple example, the trader remains short until the
price moves back above the 100 bar MA at 1.2190 (see Figure 5.2). At that
point, the trade bias turns from bearish to bullish and the position should
be closed. The risk on the trade was 16 pips, while the gain totaled just over
100 pips.
Did the trader have a reason to do the trade? You bet. Did the trader
know the market was going to continue lower? He had a reason to believe
it would, but he also understood the reason to enter the trade and that
became his risk if the market did not trend lower. As long as the risk at the
inception of the trade is within the trader’s comfort zone, the trade makes
sense, fear is dispersed, and the market is in charge.
Traders who don’t have a reason to trade—the ones who just buy or
sell because they feel the price is going up or going down—do not have a
clear picture or understanding of the risk on the trade. As a result, any corrective moves against the position tend to increase uncertainty and cause
additional fear. It is not likely that the trader will be able to sit through the
corrective phases without booking a loss or taking profit too soon. Also, the

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Rules for Attacking the Trend

Printer: Yet to come

107

FIGURE 5.3 A Blank Canvas Gives No Reason to Trade

trader is more likely to think that the trend will reverse and go the other
direction without tools that say otherwise.
Comparing Figure 5.2 with the simple downward sloping trend line and
moving average to Figure 5.3, a simple price chart, illustrates the importance of tools to aid in formulating a reason to execute a trade. In Figure 5.2 the price is trending below the trend line and moving average. In
Figure 5.3, there are no clues from the price other than that the price direction is to the downside. The road map is clearer with the tools that
define the trend and provide the direction for following the trend to its
conclusion.
Successful traders always have a reason to do a trade. Being able to
identify that reason will increase profit potential, limit risk, and decrease
fear. The next rule will outline the requirements of the tools I use. Later, in
the second half of the book, I will further develop the use of the tools and
outline how they can be used to anticipate a trend, stay on the trend, and
attack the trend.

RULE 3: BE PICKY ABOUT YOUR TOOLS
We touched on the use of the 100 bar MA as a technical tool in what I call
the trader’s toolbox. The tools in a trader’s toolbox need to be specific for

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

108

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

the mission statement and game plan. The game plan—trading trends and
keeping fear to a minimum—sets the requirements for the tools that I will
use. If a tool does not conform to my requirements, it will not be used. As
a result, I will not use some of the more popular trading tools that others
may use every day. I am not being stubborn. I am also not suffering by not
using them (in fact, I benefit). I simply have standards that my tools must
conform to. I will go through some of those nonconforming tools later in
this chapter.
I have three requirements for the technical tools I use. They must be
trend defining, risk defining, and unambiguous.

Trend Defining
The first part of game plan is to trade trends. So it makes sense to use tools
that will help define trends. Most trend-defining tools use slope of a line
to define the direction of the trend. We already spoke of the 100 bar MA.
If the slope of the moving average line is positive and the current price
is above the moving average, the trend is bullish. Conversely, if the slope
of the moving average line is negative and the current price is below the
moving average, the trend is bearish. Another possibility is that the slope is
sideways. When this happens, there is no trend. Can a nontrending market
help a trader define a bullish or bearish trend? Not immediately, but later I
will discuss how a nontrending slope can be a key clue for traders looking
to trade trends. Needless to say, the simple moving average is one of the
trading tools I use that helps define trends.
The other tools I will use, and explain later in the book, will also need
to define trends. If they do not, they are not worthy of use. They will do
more harm than good. They will break Rule 3.

Risk Defining
The second part of the mission statement is to use the least amount of risk.
The only way to use the least amount of risk is to know or define the risk.
As a result, the technical tools I use need to help define risk. By knowing the risk, the trader is able to decide if the potential loss on the trade
is acceptable or not. If the risk is too great, the trader should not do the
trade. If, on the other hand, the risk is acceptable, then the trade can be
done with little or no fear. If fear can be dispersed, the trader can focus on
trading and attacking the trend.
Retail traders tend not to focus enough on defining risk. Not doing so
often leads to unlimited risk and oversized loss potential. This ultimately
destroys a trader’s account equity. Successful traders cannot tolerate a
trade or trades that destroy account equity. The tools used need to define

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

Rules for Attacking the Trend

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

109

risk so that large losses can be avoided and the focus can be on attacking
the currency trends. You need the combination to succeed as a currency
trader.

Unambiguous
The first two requirements are pretty straightforward. If we are looking to
trade trends, our tool should help define trends. Also, if we want to use the
least amount of risk and keep fear to a minimum, then using technical tools
that define risk makes perfect sense.
The third requirement—that the tool needs to be an unambiguous
tool—needs a further explanation.
What I define as an unambiguous tool is one that gives a clear bullish or
bearish bias. The tool should not give an oversold or overbought condition.
It should not give an 80-percent correlation clue. It should not be a tool that
is not fully committed to being either bullish or bearish.
I like to say that the ideal tool gives a green or red trade signal, not a
yellow one. It is yes or no, not maybe. It is white or black, not gray. The
tool used gives a cut-and-dried bullish or bearish bias.
An unambiguous tool defines risk and lowers fear in the process. The
reason is that successful traders tend to use the price levels from the unambiguous tool to trade against. As a result, the risk is defined, and as long
as the trader is accepting of the risk, fear should also be dispersed and
lessened.
Using our simple moving average example from earlier in the chapter,
the trader sells on a break of the 100 bar MA, an unambiguous trading tool.
It is unambiguous because below the line means bearish, above the line
means bullish. Therefore, using an unambiguous trading tool like a simple
moving average helps define risk, and with it fear can be minimized. The
requirements of the game plan and mission statement are achieved.
If unambiguous tools are what we want, what does an ambiguous tool
look like? The best way to describe an ambiguous trading tool is to say
it is one that does not give a bullish or bearish bias. In trading, the main
ambiguous trading tools are the technical tools that give overbought and
oversold conditions. Saying something is overbought or oversold means
that the market should go down, if overbought, or should go up, if oversold.
It does not say it is unequivocally bearish or bullish.
More importantly, it does not define risk. If a market is said to be overbought, there is nothing to say that the price cannot get even more overbought. If this can happen, where is the stop loss? Where is the position
closed out? There is no price for the stop. It is more of a guess. Guesses
tend to increase fear over time. Successful traders look to steer clear of
fear, not increase it.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

110

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

In addition, if a market is overbought and the price continues to rise,
what does that say about the higher price? It should be overbought as well.
As a result, traders will add to their position by selling as the market trends
higher.
If the market is trending higher, the trader is now trading against the
trend. In other words, the game plan to trade trends and keep fear to a
minimum is being ignored. It is ignored because the ambiguous trading tool
said the price was overbought. Needless to say, it was not fully overbought.
More account equity is destroyed by using ambiguous tools that predict overbought and oversold conditions and lead to traders’ positioning
against a strong and directional trend. As the trend continues, fear eventually increases and the trade is eventually closed with a large loss.
The RSI and Stochastic Have No Place in My Game Plan The
most widely used overbought and oversold indicators used are the Relative
Strength Index (RSI) and the Stochastic Oscillator. These two are oscillating indicators—that is, the index that is derived for each oscillates up and
down with the market movements. As they oscillate, they give oversold and
overbought conditions. The problem is that these indicators do not work
well in trending markets, and that is where the most money can be made
with the least amount of risk. If they do not work well in a trending market
and they add to risk, they do not conform to the game plan.
An example will clearly outline the problems with using an ambiguous
tool like the RSI.
The RSI is thought to be oversold when the oscillator goes below the
30 level. The EURUSD in Figure 5.4 first had the RSI dip below the 30 level
when the price moved below 1.3127. This signaled the price was oversold
and due for a correction. A trader who follows the RSI might be inclined to
buy or close out a position at this level.
The market continued to sell off and moved toward 1.2930, where a
modest rebound occurred. The RSI moved back higher and peaked when
the price reached the 1.3005 level. This is well below the 1.3127 level where
the market was first oversold. There is no reason from the RSI to get out at
that level. The RSI barely got above the 30 level on the correction.
The market moved lower and became oversold (below 30 RSI) again
at 1.2919. The market price did not rebound, but continued to sell off. The
highest close came in at 1.2795 when again the RSI peaked not far above
the 30 level. The market then sold off again and moved all the way down
to 1.2521—all the while with the RSI moving above and below the oversold
30 levels.
A trader who focused on the ambiguous RSI would have bought the
market looking for the oversold bounce as high as 1.3127. The market never

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

Rules for Attacking the Trend

111

FIGURE 5.4 Using RSI Can Cause a Trader to Trade Against the Trend

closed above that level. The bounce never came. What is the stop level
for the trader who is looking for the oversold market to bounce? There is
none. What is the profit level for the trader who focuses on the RSI? There
is none. Traders who use the RSI are likely looking for dips to buy during the entire trend down. If they are able to avoid the first oversold area,
they are not likely to miss the subsequent oversold levels along the way. Instead of riding the trend, the trader is fighting the trend and trading against
the trend.
When it is over, if the trader has not lost a large portion of the account
(the EURUSD did move from 1.3300 to 1.2500), he or she would have likely
missed the trend opportunity of the year. Eight hundred pips in four trading
days do not come along very often. As mentioned earlier, you have to make
hay when the sun is shining. Traders who focus on the RSI likely do not
make hay. Like the RSI, the stochastic oscillator will often give the same
oversold/overbought signals that could cause the trader to trade against
the trend. That is simply not the game plan.
Does it make sense to use these ambiguous trading tools? For me, it
flies in the face of what successful traders try to accomplish—trade trends
and control risk and fear.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

112

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

FIGURE 5.5 Using Unambiguous Tools to Uncover Oversold Markets

Can Other Tools Give Oversold or Overbought Hints? The tools
I will introduce allow for the trader to look for plenty of clues that indicate
the market is likely to be overbought or oversold. Those levels can also be
fairly close to the tops and bottoms, but the difference is risk is defined.
For example, in Figure 5.5, the EURUSD bottom in June 2010 had a
number of clues the market was oversold and ready for a move back higher.
First, the price was a good distance away from the 100 hour MA line. The
100 hour MA was at 1.2180, the price was at 1.1880. When the price is too
far away, there tends to be a period of consolidation and/or a correction.
Does it give a buy or sell decision? No. However, the trader has a basis to
think the bottom is in place and can use the low as a stop-loss level.
Second, once the bottom was established, the market price kept making higher lows and a trend line support level was developed. The trend
line defined another risk level. If the price is above the trend line, the bias
is bullish. If the price moves below, the bias is bearish. Since risk is defined,
traders can buy against the trend line with little fear. If the price moves below the trend line, the trend down continues and the long position is sold.
It did not. Instead, the market used the line as support on a number of
different occasions.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

Rules for Attacking the Trend

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

113

Three, the market price eventually moved above the 100 hour MA on
June 9. This is also a bullish trigger. Although on June 10, the price did dip
back below the 100 hour MA, that dip was temporary. In fact, the price dip
lower tested and held the bullish trend line, keeping a bullish bias versus
that tool. When the price reversed back above the 100 hour MA, the bullish
bias was reestablished, and the price surged higher.
The final clue was the test of the support at the 1.2006 level. When this
floor level held, it paved the way for the trend move higher. At the trend
line, at the MA line, at the floor, risk was defined. If the price remained
above each line, the bias was bullish. If the price dipped below the lines,
the bias was bearish. The longer-term trend was down, but there were clues
the market was oversold and ready for a corrective move higher. The unambiguous tools used defined the risk and paved the way for the subsequent
trend move higher, without risking a lot of equity in the process.
Using an RSI or Stochastic does not define risk so well. It simply says
the market is oversold and it may rally. There is no certainty. There is no
stop loss. There is no defined risk. With the increased uncertainty, trader
fear is increased.
I know what I suggest may be shocking. I know plenty of traders who
use tools like the RSI and Stochastic to detect oversold and overbought
conditions. However, there are unambiguous tools that are better and that
will keep from trading against the trend and keep traders on the trend. So
heed my advice or warning.

More Rules for Tools
If you need more help choosing the best technical indicators for your trading, there are two more rules to consider:

1. Stick to using three tools. I have already spoken about how retail

traders like to overwhelm their charts with a whole myriad of technical tools and indicators. Perhaps it makes them feel smarter. Perhaps
it is part of the 10-step plan that will guarantee perfection, just like it
did in other jobs or disciplines. In trading, “the more the merrier” does
not work. Just because a chart has a bunch of lines and colors does not
mean it is infallible.
So what is the perfect number of tools to use? I like three. Two
is too little. Four is too much. Three for me is just right. Most traders
can focus on using three tools without too much stress, confusion, or
uncertainty. There also is just enough for you as a trader to be able to
handle when one may be bullish while another is bearish.
