JWBK100-FM.qxd 2/26/08 12:19 PM Page iii epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

Getting Started in

CANDLESTICK
CHARTING

Tina Logan

JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.

JWBK100-FM.qxd

2/26/08

12:19 PM

Page x epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

JWBK100-FM.qxd

2/26/08

12:19 PM

Page i epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWBK

Getting Started in

CANDLESTICK
CHARTING

JWBK100-FM.qxd 2/26/08 12:19 PM Page ii epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

The Getting Started in Series
Getting Started in Online Day Trading by Kassandra Bentley
Getting Started in Asset Allocation by Bill Bresnan and Eric P. Gelb
Getting Started in Online Investing by David L. Brown and Kassandra Bentley
Getting Started in Investment Clubs by Marsha Bertrand
Getting Started in Internet Auctions by Alan Elliott
Getting Started in Stocks by Alvin D. Hall
Getting Started in Mutual Funds by Alvin D. Hall
Getting Started in Estate Planning by Kerry Hannon
Getting Started in Online Personal Finance by Brad Hill
Getting Started in 401(k) Investing by Paul Katzeff
Getting Started in Internet Investing by Paul Katzeff
Getting Started in Security Analysis by Peter J. Klein
Getting Started in Global Investing by Robert P. Kreitler
Getting Started in Futures, Fifth Edition, by Todd Lofton
Getting Started in Financial Information by Daniel Moreau
and Tracey Longo
Getting Started in Emerging Markets by Christopher Poillon
Getting Started in Technical Analysis by Jack D. Schwager
Getting Started in Real Estate Investing by Michael C. Thomsett
and Jean Freestone Thomsett
Getting Started in Tax-Savvy Investing by Andrew Westham and Don Korn
Getting Started in Annuities by Gordon M. Williamson
Getting Started in Bonds, Second Edition, by Sharon Saltzgiver Wright
Getting Started in Retirement Planning by Ronald M. Yolles and Murray Yolles
Getting Started in Online Brokers by Kristine DeForge
Getting Started in Project Management by Paula Martin and Karen Tate
Getting Started in Six Sigma by Michael C. Thomsett
Getting Started in Currency Trading by Michael D. Archer
and James L. Bickford
Getting Started in Rental Income by Michael C. Thomsett
Getting Started in REITs by Richard Imperiale
Getting Started in Property Flipping by Michael C. Thomsett
Getting Started in Fundamental Analysis by Michael C. Thomsett
Getting Started in Hedge Funds, Second Edition by Daniel A. Strachman
Getting Started in Chart Patterns by Thomas N. Bulkowski
Getting Started in ETFs by Todd K. Lofton
Getting Started in Swing Trading by Michael C. Thomsett
Getting Started in Options, Seventh Edition by Michael C. Thomsett
Getting Started in A Financially Secure Retirement by Henry Hebeler
Getting Started in Candlestick Charting by Tina Logan

JWBK100-FM.qxd 2/26/08 12:19 PM Page iii epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

Getting Started in

CANDLESTICK
CHARTING

Tina Logan

JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.

JWBK100-FM.qxd

2/26/08

12:19 PM

Page iv epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

Copyright © 2008 by Tina Logan. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978)750-8400, fax (978)
646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness
of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our Web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Logan, Tina.
Getting started in candlestick charting / Tina Logan.
p. cm. — (The getting started in series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-18200-0 (pbk.)
1. Stocks—Charts, diagrams, etc. 2. Stocks—Prices—Forecasting.
3. Investment analysis. I. Title.
HG4638.L64 2008
332.63’2042—dc22
2008002758
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

ftoc.qxd 3/5/08 7:09 PM Page v Wiley 2 Wiley 2:Users:wiley:Desktop:JWBK100-FM:

Contents

Preface

vii

Acknowledgments

xi
PART I

CANDLESTICK CHARTING
Chapter 1
Introduction to Candlestick Charting

3

Chapter 2
Constructing Candlestick Lines

11

Chapter 3
Candlestick Reversal Patterns

27

Chapter 4
More on Reversal Patterns

79

Chapter 5
Tails

91
PART II

EAST MEETS WEST
Chapter 6
Price, Volume, and Volatility

99

v

ftoc.qxd 3/5/08 7:09 PM Page vi Wiley 2 Wiley 2:Users:wiley:Desktop:JWBK100-FM:

vi

CONTENTS

Chapter 7
Trend Analysis

115

Chapter 8
Gaps

151

Chapter 9
Support and Resistance

175

Chapter 10
Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

199

Chapter 11
Practice Sets

217

Conclusion

233

Appendix A

235

Appendix B

239

Glossary

243

Bibliography

249

About the Author

251

Index

253

JWBK100-FM.qxd 2/26/08 12:19 PM Page vii epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Preface

f the markets moved in a logical fashion, anyone could learn a few basics
and make money trading. But that is not the case. It is the emotional crowd
that moves markets. Traders’ and investors’ greed and fear, imprinted on
charts, are like a road map to the markets. Those who learn to read and decipher the underlying messages of that price movement can gain a much-needed
edge in a competitive environment.
That’s where Getting Started in Candlestick Charting comes in. This book
will provide you with a solid foundation from which to begin using candlestick
charts. You’ll learn to recognize candlestick reversal patterns and embed them
in your mind through an understanding of how they reflect the messages of
crowd sentiment. Candlesticks will help you gauge the strength of price moves
and spot potential reversals early, before the crowd reacts.
If you have steered clear of candlestick charting until now because it
seems like there is a mind-numbing number of patterns to learn, you can put
that concern to rest. It is not necessary to learn dozens of candlestick patterns.
This book narrows the focus to several commonly formed candlestick reversal
patterns that you can learn to recognize in short order. You can start right away
utilizing candlesticks to improve your chart analysis skills, and, of course, to increase your profitability.
You will find this book very helpful if you desire to:

I

• Learn candlestick charting but don’t want to get overwhelmed.
• Learn to recognize high probability trade setups.
• Improve your swing trading techniques. Candlestick charting is a stellar tool for fine-tuning swing trading strategies.
• Learn how to improve the timing of your entries and exits.
• Develop a knowledge base in classic Western technical analysis and understand the role of candlesticks within that broader framework.
Every effort was made to produce this important learning resource in a
user-friendly format. The chapters are organized in a manner in which they build
one upon the other. The content is written in layman’s terms with a level of
detail that ensures understanding by beginning and intermediate-level traders.

vii

JWBK100-FM.qxd 2/26/08 12:19 PM Page viii epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

viii

PREFACE

I make no apologies for defining technical terms and describing concepts that
advanced level chartists might consider to be familiar territory. However, even
advanced chartists who choose this book with the intent of adding candlesticks
to their technical skill set will find that it suits their purpose. Since a picture is
worth a thousand words, there are numerous illustrations and real-world charting examples included throughout the chapters. Through careful dissection of
the charts, and the commentary and analysis included with them, you’ll already
be recognizing the key Japanese candlestick patterns and Western technical
events before you finish the last page of this book.
In Part I of the book you’ll learn about candlestick charting. Chapter 2
demonstrates how the candlestick lines are constructed. In Chapter 3 you’ll be
introduced to several common candlestick reversal patterns. You’ll learn their
definitions and the psychology behind each formation. The patterns are well illustrated to help you train your eye to recognize them when analyzing charts. A
summary of the candlestick patterns presented is included in Appendix A.
Once you have thoroughly studied the details of each pattern in Chapter 3, use
this guide for quick reference until you are so familiar with the patterns that
you no longer need it. Chapter 4 will solidify your understanding of how the
reversal patterns are formed and factors that may impact their signals. Chapter
5 wraps up Part I with a discussion of “tails” and how their presence sends a
message about the current market sentiment.
Part II of the book shows you how to put candlestick charting to work.
You’ll learn how to blend Eastern candlestick charting with classic Western
technical analysis. Candlesticks are not a complete trading system. In order to
recognize their full potential you must understand how they fit into the broader
picture. It is crucial to realize the important roles played by volume, volatility,
trends, gaps, support, and resistance. These topics are covered in Chapters 6
through 9. If you are new to chart analysis in general, you’ll find these chapters
to be invaluable. Even if you are already well versed in Western technical analysis, you’ll learn how to merge candlestick charting with Western techniques to
gauge market movement and locate high probability setups. Chapter 10 shows
you how to find the reversal signals and how to put them to work in your trading strategies.
After gaining new knowledge, it is imperative that you immediately practice applying what you have learned. To assess your newfound skills, several
practice sets are included in Chapter 11. There is an old proverb that states: “I
hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand.” You’ll test your
ability to recognize the candlestick patterns and Western technical occurrences
introduced throughout the book. It will be time well spent. The answer keys
and author’s commentary are provided for you to check your work.
As its title suggests, Getting Started in Candlestick Charting will provide
you enough detailed instruction to get right to work using candlestick charting

JWBK100-FM.qxd

2/26/08

12:19 PM

Page ix epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

Preface

ix

techniques. Once you have mastered the common reversal signals, if you wish
to learn more patterns there are several resources listed in the bibliography at
the back of this book. Getting Started in Candlestick Charting will also help you
start to build your foundation of knowledge of Western technical analysis. If
you wish to add to that foundation with more advanced analysis, trade management techniques and implementing trading strategies, I offer additional training in these areas. Feel free to contact me by e-mail at tina@tinalogan.com or
visit my website at www.Tinalogan.com.
I sincerely wish you the best of luck with your trading.
TINA LOGAN
San Diego, CA
2007

JWBK100-FM.qxd

2/26/08

12:19 PM

Page x epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

JWBK100-FM.qxd

2/26/08

12:19 PM

Page xi epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JWB

Acknowledgments

irst I wish to thank Steve Nison for his perseverance in bringing candlestick charting to the Western hemisphere. His groundbreaking books
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques and Beyond Candlesticks convinced me to add candlestick charting to my repertoire of technical analysis
skills. I’ve never looked at a chart the same since. Stephen Bigalow was also instrumental in my candlestick journey. His candlestick books are written based
on his experience using the candlesticks in the trading trenches. Mr. Bigalow
generously invited me to contribute a chapter to his second book High Profit
Candlestick Patterns. Thanks also to authors Gregory Morris and John Person
for their fine contributions on the subject of candlestick charting.
Special recognition goes to two traders who, thankfully, arrived just at the
right times in my trading career. First, Chris Manning who is responsible for
getting me hooked on technical analysis. He had a knack for taking a tough,
and sometimes dry, subject and making it come alive. His teachings were instrumental in encouraging me to develop a strong knowledge base in Western
technical analysis. Later I was introduced to Herbert Otto, a nearly 40-year veteran of the markets. I continue to marvel at, and appreciate, how he generously
shares his vast knowledge of both fundamental and technical analysis.
Without the support of my dear friends Michele Furlong and Jelaine
Whipple, who believe in me and constantly encourage me, I may not have
survived the writing of this book! Pat Johnson and Donna Love deserve praise for
all they have done in assisting me in so many ways. They have a genuine interest
in helping people and it does not go unnoticed. And thanks to my friends and
colleagues at the Anthony Robbins Companies. I am certain that I would not be
trading today had I not made that critical stop in my life’s journey.
Thanks to my family for not complaining as I indulge my obsession with
the markets. Although they may not share my enthusiasm for analyzing stock
charts for countless hours each week, they seem to have accepted that I will
continue to do so.
I would like to recognize three amazing women who were mentors at pivotal times in my life: Mrs. Muriel Gamble, Mrs. Roberta Cave, and Dr. Deborah
Ballard-Reisch. They all contributed greatly to pushing me forward and
upward.

F

xi

JWBK100-FM.qxd 2/26/08 12:19 PM Page xii epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

xii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thank you to Jennifer MacDonald and the John Wiley & Sons team,
who were willing to give me this opportunity to make a contribution to their
Getting Started in series of books. I am amazed at all that goes into writing a
book and how organized they are at getting the final product to the presses.
And last but not least, thanks to my many special clients. Their loyalty
and encouragement has allowed me to continue to indulge my passion for
training and trading.

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 1 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

1
Part

Candlestick Charting

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 2 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 3 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

1
Chapter

Introduction to
Candlestick Charting
hen I first began using technical analysis years ago, I used the standard bar chart. Eventually, though, I discovered the candlestick chart
with its unique display of price action. Just switching from bar charts
to candlestick lines alone helped my chart analysis tremendously. Candlesticks
light up the chart’s canvas, making it very quick and easy to see price trends
and changes in the sentiment of market participants.
The next step was to learn the candlestick patterns with their unusual yet
interesting names. After I understood the psychology behind the various patterns,
I never went back to using bar charts. Once you learn to put this powerful charting tool to work, I am confident that you, too, will get hooked on candlesticks.
As valuable as candlesticks are as a chart analysis tool, they are simply
that—one tool. They should not be viewed in isolation, but instead in the context of the surrounding chart landscape. Japanese candlestick charting should
be blended with classic Western technical analysis methods rather than replacing them. It is the synergy of the two methods—Eastern merged with Western—that provides the means for superior technical analysis.
Getting Started in Candlestick Charting will not only provide you with an
introduction to candlesticks, but will show you how to analyze them with the
aid of Western techniques. It will guide you down the path toward advancing
your charting skills and improving profitability.

W

Evolution of Candlesticks
Japanese candlestick charting is a centuries old methodology that was a secret
of the Far East for generations. Candlestick charting took root in Japan, where

3

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

4

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 4 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

the first rice exchange was set up in the 1600s. Eventually the exchange was institutionalized and the Dojima Rice Exchange in Osaka, Japan opened for business. Initially, the merchants dealt only in the exchange of the actual product:
rice. In the early 1700s, the exchange shifted to the use of rice coupons. Rice
coupons were sold against future rice deliveries resulting in the creation of futures contracts. The Dojima Rice Exchange was Japan’s largest rice exchange,
and the world’s first futures market.
The legendary Japanese businessman Munehisa Homma made a considerable contribution to the early development of what we know today as candlestick charting. In 1750, Homma was granted control of his family’s business,
which included a large rice farming estate. He began trading at the local rice exchange in Sakata, Japan, a busy port for the collection and distribution of rice,
and still an important port city today.
Homma accumulated a great fortune trading in the local and regional rice
exchanges. It was said that he set up a network that stretched from Sakata to
Osaka (a few hundred miles), which consisted of men using flags to communicate from rooftops. Homma kept records of his observations of the psychology
of rice traders, as well as a historical record of weather conditions and rice
prices. The trading rules and principles that Homma developed were instrumental to the evolution of candlestick analysis.
It wasn’t until a few centuries later that candlestick charting was introduced in the United States. Candlestick charts have become extremely popular
since first being introduced in the West in 1989 by author Steve Nison. The
first edition of his groundbreaking book Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques was released in 1991 (New York Institute of Finance). Before that time,
candlesticks were virtually unknown in America. If not for Mr. Nison’s perseverance and passion for the subject matter, the Western hemisphere may have
continued to be unaware of this remarkable analysis tool.
Fortunately for us, Mr. Nison spent an immense amount of time and effort researching this charting methodology. This was no easy task. He began his
research and study of candlesticks before the advent of mainstream charting
programs, and as such, initially had to create the charts by hand. In addition, it
also involved the tedious and difficult translation from Japanese to English. Add
to that the challenge of interpretation, and some subjectivity that is an inherent
part of technical analysis, and you can see the magnitude of this undertaking.
As with most great endeavors, he accomplished those tasks with the help of key
contacts he developed in the United States and abroad.
Traders who are new to candlestick charting will enjoy the benefits of
Nison’s persistent efforts, as well as the contributions by other authors who
followed his lead. As candlesticks took hold in America, traders embraced
them and helped integrate this technology into the realm of Western technical analysis.

JWBK100-ch01.qxd

2/26/08

12:18 PM

Page 5 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Introduction to Candlestick Charting

5

The use of candlestick charts has now become so common that nearly all
charting programs include them. With the widespread use of computerized
chart analysis, the candlestick chart has become as well known as the bar chart.
In fact, almost every trader that I know uses candlesticks; so I’d surmise that the
candlestick chart has caught up with the bar chart in popularity, and perhaps
even surpassed it.
If a technology is not effective it will not last. Experienced traders will
eventually abandon a methodology if it does not prove worthy as an analysis
tool, which, directly or indirectly, enhances their profits. The fact that candlestick charting has been around for centuries is a testament to its effectiveness.

Strengths of Candlesticks
Candlestick charts are superior to bar charts. That is only my opinion, of
course, but it is one that is shared by many skilled chartists. Compare a bar
chart (Figure 1.1) to a candlestick chart (Figure 1.2) and you’ll see that they include the same price data: the open, high, low and closing prices. The candlestick line, however, provides insight into the current psychology of the investing
crowd, which is not as easily identified in a bar chart. Once you become comfortable with the candlesticks, and understand their implications, you may find
that a standard bar chart looks incomplete.
Since the candlesticks include the same price data as bar charts, you can
utilize any of the popular technical analysis tools and techniques that can be
used with bar charts, such as moving averages and trendlines.
