
Market Capitalization

Large cap

$15 billion or higher

Mid cap

Between $1 billion and $15 billion

Small cap

Between $300 million and $1 billion

Micro cap

Below $300 million

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
Micro cap companies tend to have low liquidity. Moreover, they’re susceptible
to market manipulation. For example, a trader may start a rumor in online
chat rooms or via e-mail that a particular company has a cancer drug breakthrough. That kind of unsubstantiated rumor won’t cause a large cap’s shares
to blink, but it may send a micro cap’s stocks through the roof (or the floor, if
the rumor isn’t true or isn’t good!). Although swing traders trade all these
securities, you’re best off avoiding micro cap stocks whenever possible.

Avoiding low-priced shares:
As simple as it sounds
Low-priced shares reflect higher risk than high-priced securities. As a swing
trader, you want to ride quick and strong trends up or down (whether you’re
buying or shorting). Low-price stocks can interfere with that plan because
they introduce new risks.
Cheap stocks are generally defined as those that trade below $5 per share.
Many institutional asset managers can’t even purchase stocks below $5
because they’re widely seen as high-risk gambles. Stocks that trade below $5
often have low liquidity, which means one trade can heavily influence the
price action in one day. So buying the breakout of a stock priced at $3 may
turn out to be nothing more than a flash in the pan.
To stay ahead of the game, avoid stocks below $5 per share that trade
fewer than 250,000 shares per day and have market capitalizations below
$300 million.

Limiting Losses at the Individual
Stock Level
When you know how to determine how risky a stock is, you can use that
information to guide how you manage its risk in the context of your portfolio.
Managing risk at the individual stock level means making sure that no single
position destroys your portfolio. Managing risk at the portfolio level means
preventing several small losses from destroying your portfolio.
The way you manage risk at the individual stock level is through position
sizing. And to set your position size, you have to know how much you’re willing to lose. That loss potential is directly related to the purpose of a stop loss
order, which ensures that should you be wrong — and you will be, many
times — you can exit the position with (ideally) just a small loss.

209

210 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Manipulation can even happen
in large company stocks
Larger companies generally aren’t subject to
wild swings resulting from rumors. However, in
August 2000, an elaborate hoax sent one large
company’s stock plummeting. In the evening of
August 24, a press release from Emulex
Corporation was issued with the following
headline: “Emulex Announces Revised Earnings;
SEC Launches Investigation into Accounting
Practices. Paul Folino Steps Down as CEO.”
Good grief! You don’t need to be a stock wizard
to realize that’s one piece of bad news.
The next morning, Emulex’s stock, predictably,
tanked. Within the first hour of trading, the stock
was off 62 percent from its previous close.
During that horrific decline, traders and investors scrambled to get comments from the company on why the CEO was stepping down, what
caused the earnings miss, and why the SEC
was investigating the firm’s accounting practices. But poor Emulex: It’s based on the West
Coast, and 10:30 a.m. on the East Coast meant it
was 7:30 a.m. on the West Coast.
Emulex eventually opened for business and
quickly shot off press releases stating that the
CEO had no intention of leaving, earnings

weren’t being restated, and the SEC wasn’t conducting an investigation. So where did the press
release come from? Turns out a former employee
of a small Internet wire service sent the false
press release to his former employer. He held a
short position in the stock and drove its price
down to make a tidy profit — $250,000 or so.
Bloomberg, Marketwatch, and other reputable
news services picked up the story without
checking its accuracy. And before long, all of
Wall Street thought the press release was genuine. The perpetrator of this elaborate scheme
was later caught and prosecuted criminally.
The story of Emulex is a major exception to the
rule that large company stocks generally aren’t
manipulated by news items. What occurred in
Emulex is far more likely to occur in penny
stocks (U.S. stocks that trade below $5) than in
other companies’ stocks. In the case of penny
stocks, a market newsletter recommendation or
a posting on a message board, rather than a
false press release, may cause a spike or fall in
price. Yet Emulex’s story does reveal how costly
trading can be when a stock — be it penny or
large cap — is manipulated.

Figuring out how much
you’re willing to lose
Most professional swing traders limit the amount of loss they’ll tolerate from
a single position to 0.25 percent to 2 percent of total capital. Remember:
Your loss will be affected by commissions, slippage, and market impact (the
possibility of your trade moving the stock price up or down). Therefore, it
may be best to stick to a yardstick of 0.75 percent of your capital, anticipating
that these other costs will likely push your total loss to 1.25 percent or so of
your capital.

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
Before you even determine how much to invest in a security, you must first
determine how much you’re willing to lose. If you agree with the 0.75 percent
loss threshold that I recommend, simply take out a handy dandy calculator
and compute:
0.75% × Your capital = Tolerable loss
If your portfolio is $50,000, the most you should be willing to lose on a single
position is $375.
The amount you risk on a single position is different than the amount you buy
or sell of that security. You may risk 1 percent or $1,000 (if your account value
is $100,000) on a single position but end up buying $8,000 worth of that security. To achieve the risk of 1 percent, you must exit the position if the loss on
the $8,000 reaches $1,000.

Setting your position size
You can position size either by applying a percent of capital approach (a constant rate of capital, say 5 percent) or by allocating new positions by a risk
level you identify. Regardless of which strategy you pursue, make sure you
include some discussion in your trading plan on how you determine the risk
level.

By percent of capital
Setting your position size based on a percent of capital is the simplest way to
allocate capital to new positions. For example, if you have an account worth
$50,000 and select a 3 percent level of capital to invest in each security, you
allocate $1,500 to each trade.
Many position traders (individuals with time horizons measured in months)
invest an equal percentage of capital to each of their investments. As their
capital base grows, they can invest more in each position. Conversely, as
their capital base shrinks, they invest less in each position.
Ultimately, you should invest in ways you feel most comfortable with.
However, I strongly advise against varying the percent of capital invested in
new securities instead of using a constant percent of capital approach,
because setting different percentages can result in random performance.
Having a higher conviction in one trade (and thus allocating a higher percentage to it) may interfere with the success of your strategy if you’re a poor predictor of your own success. Trading doesn’t have to be complicated to be fun
and profitable. Adding complexity where none is needed can lead to sub-par
returns. If you want to vary your position size based on the attractiveness of
the risk/reward present in the trading opportunity, skip to the next section.

211

212 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
You won’t find a hard and fast rule when it comes to selecting a specific
percentage level to use in setting position size. Choose a percentage level
that’s too small (such as 0.5 percent), and hitting a home run won’t do much
to boost your bottom line. But select a level that’s too large (such as 10
percent), and you could lose your shirt if the stock gaps down hard. Your stop
loss levels can only limit risk so much, and a security that gaps down will
result in a loss larger than the 0.25 percent to 2 percent limit described earlier.
Use the following rules to help you set your percent of capital position sizing
level if you decide to use this method (as opposed to the risk level approach
described in the next section).
 Set a small percent of capital level (2 percent to 4 percent) if you trade
securities that exhibit
• Illiquidity (remember, what’s liquid to you may not be liquid to a
$1 billion hedge fund; in other words, size matters)
• Low share prices ($10 or less is low)
• High betas (anything above 2.0)
• Small capitalization size (below $300 million)
 Set a large percent of capital level (4 percent to 8 percent) if you trade
securities that exhibit
• Liquidity
• High share prices
• Low betas
• Mid and large capitalization sizes
After setting the percent of capital you want to allocate to your trades, you
have to set your stop loss level. This part is easy given that you’ve already
calculated your threshold of tolerable loss (refer to the earlier section
“Figuring out how much you’re willing to lose”). Set your stop loss level at
the price that would cause the loss on your position to equal 0.75 percent of
your total capital.
Here’s an example of this process at work: Assuming an account value of
$50,000 and a loss threshold level of 0.75 percent, the maximum loss you can
tolerate on any one position is $375. You determine the time is right to buy
shares in Dummies Corporation at $40 per share. You also decide to use a 6
percent of capital allocation approach to your swing trading. Where do you
place your stop loss?
Your stop loss should be set at a price that yields a loss of $375. Investing 6
percent of your assets in Dummies Corporation means you’ll buy 75 shares:
6% × $50,000 = $3,000 ÷ $40 per share = 75 shares

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
To arrive at your stop loss level, divide your loss threshold by the number
of shares you buy; then subtract the result from your purchase price to get
your stop loss level:
$375 ÷ 75 shares = $5
$40 – $5 = $35 stop loss level

By risk level
Setting your position size using a percent of capital method may seem
arbitrary. After all, isn’t that saying that you have no idea which trade will be
profitable and which one won’t be?
Technically, the answer to your astute question is yes; in effect, you’re
saying that you have no idea which trade will be profitable. But then again,
you wouldn’t be trading in the first place if you knew the trade wouldn’t be
profitable.
A smarter method of setting your position size is varying it according to your
desired exit level. In the example that I set up in the previous section, you
compute an exit level strictly based on the price that would produce a loss of
0.75 percent of your capital. Alternatively, you can determine a key level at
which you want to exit and then determine a position size based on that level.
This is how most professionals swing trade. An arbitrary price may have no
meaning ($35 in the previous example), whereas a specific price level may
signal the end or beginning of a trend. I use a chart to illustrate how a specific
level can help you determine a position size.
Figure 10-1 shows a chart of Google (symbol: GOOG), the search engine
giant. Google’s shares have been consolidating and look ready to break out.
In your infinite wisdom (hey, why not build yourself up?), you decide to
purchase shares.

Figure 10-1:
Assessing
a chart can
help you
calculate
how large a
position to
take.

213

214 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Before you calculate how large a position to take, assess the chart. This
daily chart shows Google’s stock price from early April 2007 through midSeptember 2007. Google’s stock rose strongly from mid-May 2007 through
late July 2007 — up 22 percent in two months. However, a poor earnings
report sent Google’s stock sharply down (and serves as a reminder that
trading around earnings reports can be hazardous).
Pretend today is September 18, 2007, and you’ve decided Google is worth
a swing trade. How much of your capital should you invest?
Setting your position size based on a risk level requires you to determine a
price that, if reached, indicates that the trade has gone sour. Obviously, if
shares fall to $460, you have a hint that something isn’t right. But that’s far
too late — you need a more immediate warning sign.
Try using a previous swing low as a line in the sand for your stop loss level.
In this example, assume that the recent swing low highlighted in the chart is
the level that, if reached, indicates that you’re wrong about the trade. That
level is $505.
Google’s stock is trading at $545, and you’re willing to risk 0.75 percent of
your capital on each trade. (Remember: 0.75 percent represents the loss
you’re willing to tolerate from a position, not the maximum amount you’re
willing to allocate to a single position.) To calculate how many shares of
Google to buy, use this formula and plug in your numbers:
Amount of capital at risk ÷ (Entry price – Stop loss level)
$375 (or 0.75% of $50,000) ÷ ($545 – $505) = 9.375 shares, or 9 shares
Thus, setting your position size based on your risk level means purchasing 9
shares of Google. (Round down when you have a fraction. Rounding up may
mean adding more risk, whereas rounding down always keeps you below
your specified loss threshold.)
This example brings to light one weakness of this approach: The closer the
exit price is to your entry price, the larger the implied position. In fact, if
your exit price is $1 or less than your entry price, the preceding formula may
tell you to invest more than your total capital in one stock, which makes
no sense!
The solution to this weakness is to put a ceiling on the amount you invest
in any security. Colin Nicholson, a popular trader from Australia, places
a 6 percent ceiling on his trades. In the example, if you purchase 9 shares
of Google at $545, you’re investing 9.81 percent of your total capital in
one stock.

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
Although technically only 0.75 percent of your capital is at risk (if you place
your stop loss), there’s always a chance that the stock will gap down or up
and cause your loss to be much greater than your limit. Stop loss orders
don’t guarantee an exit at the price specified because there’s always the
chance a security may gap lower or higher, depending on whether you’re
long or short.

Building a Portfolio with Minimal Risk
When you know the maximum amount of capital you want to allocate to a
single position — based on the percent of capital approach or the risk level
approach, covered in the previous sections — you’re ready to take a step
back and see the forest for the trees.
The risk of focusing on individual securities at the expense of your portfolio
is a simultaneous breakdown of several positions. If you have 25 positions
in your portfolio, for example, and the amount at risk for each position is
1 percent, it’s conceivable (and almost anything can happen in financial markets) that all 25 positions will go against you at the same time and cause a
major loss of 25 percent of your portfolio.
Don’t believe it can happen? Consider that the markets dropped 22.6 percent
on October 19, 1987. Few believed a move of that magnitude could happen in
a single day. That loss actually exceeded any single-day loss experienced
during the Great Depression.
External factors beyond anyone’s control can impact markets day to day. And
it’s possible for a short position you hold to get bought out (sending its stock
price through the roof) at the same time that the markets tumble, sending
your long positions through the floor. To combat this risk, you should monitor
the risk not only at the individual stock level but also at the total portfolio
level. This idea is no more complicated than others covered in this chapter.
It just requires good record-keeping to execute fully.

Limit all position losses to 7 percent
The prudent approach to limit the losses from all your positions is to place
a ceiling on the amount of capital you risk at any one time. Determine how
much to risk on any single position — I recommend between 0.25 percent
and 2 percent of total capital. The cumulative total of the amount at risk for
each position is considered your total capital at risk.

215

216 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
I recommend limiting your total capital at risk to 7 percent. Doing so means
that the most you could lose in a single day if everything were to go wrong is
7 percent. Of course, you shouldn’t set stop losses so close to your entry
prices that they’re triggered frequently; that may be a sign you aren’t giving
your stock room to fluctuate. A 7 percent level should rarely (if ever) be triggered because it would require all position stop losses to be executed on the
same day.
The maximum amount you should risk in a single position, in my opinion, is
0.5 percent. This amount allows you to have at least 14 positions (0.5% × 14 =
7%). The larger the amount you risk on a single position, the fewer positions
you can hold. And the fewer positions you hold, the higher the risk of your
portfolio and the greater chance of a major account value swing that may be
difficult to recover from.
To help you understand how this 7 percent rule works, consider an example:
Trader Bob has constructed a portfolio of seven different positions that’s
worth $50,609. Figure 10-2 shows, from left to right, the symbol of each of his
positions, the current stock price for each of his positions, his entry price,
the number of shares he owns, his stop loss level (exit level), and his total
amount at risk based on the specified exit level.

Symbol

Figure 10-2:
Information
from Trader
Bob’s hypothetical
portfolio.

Shares

Exit Level

Amount at Risk

GOOG

$545.30

$535.27

7

$499.12

0.50%

AAPL

$152.25

$140.92

28

$140.92

0.00%

PTR

$149.50

$154.12

26

$139.52

0.75%

PBR

$65.78

$70.60

56

$61.56

1.00%

KMB

$73.85

$69.40

57

$62.74

0.75%

MRK

$59.65

$50.57

79

$44.16

1.00%

KO

$48.25

$56.41

71

$47.50

1.25%

Total At Risk

5.25%

Cash
Total Portfolio value

Current Price Entry Price

$1.00

$23,000
$50,609.31

The total amount of capital that Trader Bob has at risk based on this portfolio is 5.25 percent, found by summing up the Amount at Risk column. So
Trader Bob can risk an additional 1.75 percent of his portfolio on new
positions before he hits the 7 percent ceiling that I recommend. That 1.75
percent may be spread across five or more positions.
If you enjoy finding Waldo, you may have noticed that the amount of risk
listed for shares of AAPL, or Apple Inc., is 0.00 percent. What gives? As a
position moves in your favor, you can adjust the stop loss price higher or
lower, depending on the direction you’re trading. In this case, shares of AAPL
were purchased at $140.92 and promptly began rising. After a nice gain,

Chapter 10: Strengthening Your Defense: Managing Risk
Trader Bob decided to raise his stop loss level to his entry price level. Doing
so meant he could risk more capital in other positions he owns. The assumed
worse outcome from his position in AAPL is to break even (barring the stock
price gapping down).
The amount at risk can never be a negative value, so don’t use negative risk
amounts when you can raise your stop loss order to a price that locks in a
profit. If Trader Bob raises his stop loss to $150 in the future, his amount at
risk isn’t –0.5 percent. Raising your stop loss order ensures your portfolio
doesn’t swing trade too aggressively and compensates for the inherent limits
of stop loss orders. After all, you may or may not get executed at your stop
loss price. So if a security gaps down below your stop loss price (assuming
you’re trading on the long side), your stop loss order will be executed at a
much lower price than you anticipated.

Diversify your allocations
Another method of limiting losses on a portfolio level is diversification. No
doubt you’ve heard the term thrown around on financial news networks. It
seems every expert often recommends avoiding “putting your eggs in one
basket.” Fortunately for you, this section gives you a bit more to go on than
a farm analogy.
Diversification is one of the shining gems mined from academia. In a nutshell,
investing in more than one security, sector, or trading vehicle helps protect
you in the event that a problem befalls one or more of those securities.
The aim is to have a portfolio in which some securities’ gains offset other
securities’ losses. The best scenario is simply a portfolio with all gainers,
but in reality, some positions make money while others lose money.
At its simplest level, diversification can be seen as a tool of avoiding the
problems of a single company. For example, you may buy shares in General
Motors and Ford so that, if Ford takes a tumble, your shares in General Motors
can offset your losses.
But what happens if an autoworkers strike brings down both General Motors
and Ford? In that scenario, owning securities not in the auto business may be
prudent. So you pick up shares of Nike and Dell Computer. But when the
United States goes into recessions, shares of all your U.S.-based companies
are likely to fall. That means you may want to be investing in Asia or Europe
as well.
These examples give you an idea of the benefits of diversification. The simplest form of diversification is investing in several securities, but you also
can diversify according to industry exposure and asset class. I cover all three
of these options in the following sections.

217

218 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
By number of securities
The most elementary way of diversifying your portfolio is simply to spread
your assets across several securities. The more, the better — the thinking
goes. But how many securities constitute a diversified portfolio?
The benefits of diversification can be realized with 10 to 20 securities, but I
should warn you: This number assumes the companies are in different industries and countries. Investing in 10 semiconductor manufacturers doesn’t
expose a portfolio to businesses outside of a small niche of the market.
Your trading plan should indicate a target number of positions you trade. The
more positions you have, the less time you’ll have to devote to each single one
and the more likely your returns will mirror the market. So keep your number
below 20 or 25.
Following the position sizing guidelines outlined earlier in this chapter (see
“Setting your position size”) largely takes care of this first point of diversification by number because the risk guidelines ensure that you have several
positions. But if you’re going to brave the market without these guidelines,
try to construct a portfolio of at least ten different positions and securities in
different industries (see the following section for tips).
