
persuaded Gutfreund to lend a touch of credibility to the ruse. Matty
had rejected a priori the possibility that such an unlikely prankster as
John Gutfreund would play such tricks. "One of the greatest goofs of all
time!" one mortgage trader shouted. It was once again proved that the
credulity of trainees knew no bounds. Think of it: the SEC busting people
in the cafeteria!
Matty failed to seethe humor. His face assumed the short-circuited look
of someone who has been made to endure a mock execution, and he began
to cry. He then bolted from the trading floor and down an elevator. He
planned never to come back. Yet no one stopped him. Traders were
convulsed with laughter. Gutfreund and Mortara roared together in
Gutfreund's office. Finally, more out of duty than compassion, a senior
mortgage trader named Andy Stone left to find Matty. He felt
responsible because Matty was his assigned slave. Stone had always been
one of the more humane traders anyway. Stone bought Matty a beer in
the lobby of One New York Plaza and tried to persuade him that what
had happened was a sign people liked him; you had to command a certain
amount of respect before you were goofed on. After several hours
pacing the streets, Matty decided to return.
1 can only imagine what went through Matty's mind as he steamed around
southern Manhattan. Once he had calmed down, it must have occurred to
him that there was no other place to go. He was bound by golden
handcuffs to the Salomon Brothers mortgage trading department. The
handful of traders who made life miserable for graduates of Harvard
completely dominated a third of the bond market. They were perhaps
the most profitable corporate employees in America. They alone
could teach Matty how he, too, could dominate a market. It wasn't true,
as Stone had said, that the traders bothered to be cruel only to the
people they liked. They were cruel to everyone. Some of the cruelty,
however, wasn't personal but ceremonial. Goofs were a rite of initiation.
Anyway, after a year Matty would be on the other side of the goof. He'd
be the trader snickering behind the Quotron while some other slavetrainee wept. No, there was no finer place to be in January 1985 than
with Michael Mortara's righteous few, that rich band of brothers, the
mortgage traders of Salomon Brothers.
1978-1981
Wall Street brings together borrowers of money with lenders. Until the

spring of 1978, when Salomon Brothers formed Wall Street's first
mortgage security department, the term borrower referred to large
corporations and to federal, state, and local governments. It did not
include homeowners. A Salomon Brothers partner named Robert Dall
thought this strange. The fastest-growing group of borrowers was
neither governments nor corporations but homeowners. From the early
1930s legislators had created a portfolio of incentives for Americans to
borrow money to buy their homes. The most obvious of these was the tax
deductibility of mortgage interest payments. The next most obvious was
the savings and loan industry.
The savings and loan industry made the majority of home loans to
average Americans and received layers of government support and
protection. The breaks given savings and loans, such as deposit insurance
and tax loopholes, indirectly lowered the interest cost on mortgages, by
lowering the cost of funds to the savings and loans. The savings and loan
lobbyists in Washington invoked democracy, the flag, and apple pie when
shepherding one of these breaks through Congress. They stood for
homeownership, they'd say, and homeownership was the American way.
To stand up in Congress and speak against homeownership would have
been as politically astute as to campaign against motherhood. Nudged by
a friendly public policy, savings and loans grew, and the volume of
outstanding mortgages loans swelled from $55 billion in 1950 to $700
billion in 1976. In January 1980 that figure became $1.2 trillion, and the
mortgage market surpassed the combined United States stock markets
as the largest capital market in the world.
Nevertheless, in 1978 on Wall Street it was flaky to think that home
mortgages could be big business. Everything about them seemed small
and insignificant, at least to people who routinely advised CEOs and
heads of state. The CEOs of home mortgages were savings and loan
presidents. The typical savings and loan president was a leader in a tiny
community. He was the sort of fellow who sponsored a float in the town
parade; that said it all, didn't it? He wore polyester suits, made a fivefigure income, and worked one-figure hours. He belonged to the Lions or
Rotary Club and also to a less formal group known within the thrift
industry as the 3-6-3 Club: He borrowed money at 3 percent, lent money
at 6 percent, and arrived on the golf course by three in the afternoon.
Each year four salesmen who sold bonds to Texas thrifts* performed a

skit before the Salomon training class. Two played Salomon salesmen;
two played the managers of a thrift. The plot ran as follows: The
Salomon salesmen enter the thrift just as the thrift managers are
leaving, tennis racket in one hand and a bag of golf clubs in the other.
The thrift men wear absurd combinations of checkered pants and
checkered polyester jackets with wide lapels. The Salomon salesmen
fawn over the thrift men. They go so far as to admire the lapels on the
jacket of one thrift manager. At this, the second thrift manager gets
huffy. "You call those doodads lapels? Those tany thangs?" he says in a
broad Lone Star accent. "Lapels ain' t lapels unless you can see them
from the back." Then he turns around, and sure enough, the lapels jut
like wings from his shoulders.
The Salomon salesmen, having schmoozed their client, move in to finish
him off. They recommend that the thrift managers buy a billion dollars'
worth of interest rate swaps. The thrift managers clearly don't know
what an interest rate swap is; they look at each other and shrug. One of
the Salomon salesmen tries to explain. The thrift men don't want to
hear; they want to play golf. But the Salomon salesmen have them by the
short hairs and won't let go. "Just give us a billion of them interest rate
swaps, so we can be off," the thrift managers finally say. End of skit.
That was the sort of person who dealt in home mortgages, a mere sheep
rancher next to the hotshot cowboys on Wall Street. The cowboys
traded bonds, corporate and government bonds. And when a cowboy
*In the interest of variety, thrift will be used interchangeably with
savings and loans throughout the text, as it is on Wall Street
traded bonds, he whipped 'em and drove 'em. He stood up and shouted
across the trading floor, "I got ten million IBM eight and a halfs [8.5
percent bonds] to go [for sale] at one-oh-one, and I want these fuckers
moved out the door now." Never in a million years could he imagine
himself shouting, "I got the sixty-two-thousand-dollar home mortgage of
Mervin K. Finkleberger at one-oh-one. It has twenty years left on it; he's
paying a nine percent interest; and it's a nice little three-bedroom affair
just outside Norwalk. Good buy, too." A trader couldn't whip and drive a
homeowner.
The problem was more fundamental than a disdain for Middle America.
Mortgages were not tradable pieces of paper; they were not bonds. They
were loans made by savings banks that were never supposed to leave the

savings banks. A single home mortgage was a messy investment for Wall
Street, which was used to dealing in bigger numbers. No trader or
investor wanted to poke around suburbs to find out whether the
homeowner to whom he had just lent money was creditworthy. For the
home mortgage to become a bond, it had to be depersonalized.
At the very least, a mortgage had to be pooled with other mortgages of
other homeowners. Traders and investors would trust statistics and buy
into a pool of several thousand mortgage loans made by a savings and
loan, of which, by the laws of probability, only a small fraction should
default. Pieces of paper could be issued that entitled the bearer to a pro
rata share of the cash flows from the pool, a guaranteed slice of a fixed
pie. There could be millions of pools, each of which held mortgages with
particular characteristics, each pool in itself homogeneous. It would hold,
for example, home mortgages of less than $110,000 paying an interest
rate of 12 percent. The holder of the piece of paper from the pool would
earn 12 percent a year on his money plus his share of the prepayments of
principal from the homeowners.
Thus standardized, the pieces of paper could be sold to an American
pension fund, to a Tokyo trust company, to a Swiss bank, to a tax-evading
Greek shipping tycoon living in a yacht in the harbor of Monte Carlo, to
anyone with money to invest. Thus standardized, the pieces of paper
could be traded. All the trader would see was the bond. All the trader
wanted to see was the bond. A bond he could whip and drive. A line which
would never be crossed could be drawn down the center of the market.
On one side would be the homeowner; on the other, investors and traders. The two groups would never meet; this is curious in
view of how personal it seems to lend a fellowman the money to buy his
home. The homeowner would see only his local savings and loan manager,
from whom the money came and to whom it was, over time, returned.
Investors and traders would see paper.
Bob Dall first became curious about mortgages while working for a
Salomon partner named William Simon, who later became secretary of
the U.S. Treasury under Gerald Ford (and even later made a billion
dollars buying savings and loans cheaply from the U.S. government).
Simon was supposed to monitor developments in the mortgage market,
but as Dall says, "He could not have cared less." In the early 1970s
Simon traded United States treasury bonds for Salomon Brothers. He

liked to do this on his feet, drinking jug after jug of ice water. Shouting
bids and offers for bonds was not then a fashionable occupation outside
Salomon Brothers. "When I first came into the business, trading was not
a respectable profession," he later told the writer L. J. Davis. "I never
hired a B-school guy on my desk in my life. I used to tell my traders, 'If
you guys weren't trading bonds, you'd be driving a truck. Don't try to get
intellectual in the marketplace. Just trade.' "
Simon was not a Harvard graduate but a Lafayette College dropout who
had elbowed his way to the top. He didn 't attract crowds of aspiring
traders on his visits to college or business school campuses because
there weren't any crowds of aspiring traders. What he said or did was of
no interest to The New York Times or the Wall Street Journal. Who in
the 1970s cared about treasury bonds? Still, he felt and acted big.
Salomon was where opinion mattered, and inside Salomon the treasury
trader was king. U.S. treasuries were the benchmark for all bonds; the
man who could whip and drive them was the benchmark for all traders.
Simon's distaste for the home mortgage market stemmed from a dispute
he had with the Government National Mortgage Association (known as
Ginnie Mae) in 1970. Ginnie Mae guaranteed the home mortgages of less
affluent citizens, thereby imbuing them with the full faith and credit of
the U.S. Treasury. Any homeowner who qualified for a Federal Housing
and Veterans Administration (FHA / YA) mortgage (about 15 percent of
home buyers in America) received a Ginnie Mae stamp. Ginnie Mae sought
to pool its loans and sell them as bonds. Here is where Simon came in. As
the adviser to the U.S. government
most knowledgeable about bonds, he was the natural man to nurture the
mortgage market.
Like most mortgages, Ginnie Mae-backed loans required a gradual
repayment of principal over time. Also like most mortgages, the loan
could be prepaid in full at any time. This was the crippling flaw of the
proposed Ginnie Mae mortgage bonds as Simon saw them. Whoever
bought the bonds was, in one crucial respect, worse off than buyers of
corporate and government bonds: He couldn't be certain how long the
loan lasted. If an entire neighborhood moved (paying off its mortgages),
the bondholder, who had thought he owned a thirty-year mortgage bond,
found himself sitting on a pile of cash instead.
More likely, interest rates fell, and the entire neighborhood refinanced

its thirty-year fixed rate mortgages at the lower rates. This left the
mortgage bondholder holding cash. Cash was no problem if the investor
could reinvest it at the same rate of interest as the original loan, or at a
higher rate. But if interest rates had fallen, the investor lost out, for his
money would not earn the same rate of return as before. Not
surprisingly, homeowners prefer to prepay their mortgages when
interest rates fall, for then they may refinance the house at the lower
rate of interest. In other words, money invested in mortgage bonds is
normally returned at the worst possible time for the lender.
Bill Simon tried to persuade Ginnie Mae to protect the buyer of
mortgage bonds (the lender). Instead of simply passing whatever cash
came from the homeowners through to the bondholders, he argued, the
pool should be made to simulate a normal bond with a definite maturity.
Otherwise, he asked, who'd buy the bonds? Who wanted to own a bond
of unknown maturity? Who wanted to live with the uncertainty of not
knowing when he'd get their money back? When Ginnie Mae ignored the
objection, Bill Simon ignored Ginnie Mae. He assigned what is known at
Salomon Brothers as a grunt—an analyst in the corporate finance
department—to lead the charge on the new mortgage securities markets.
Grunts don't lead charges. In other words, there would be no charge.
Bob Dall spent his day borrowing money to finance Bill Simon's bets in
the U.S. government bond market. Dall was effectively trading money; he
sought to borrow each day at the cheapest rates and lend at the highest.
But he was borrowing and lending for only that one day.
He'd come in the next day and start all over again. Trading money, unlike
trading bonds, was never fashionable, even within Salomon Brothers.
Money was the least volatile commodity traded by Salomon Brothers and
therefore the least risky.
Trading money was nonetheless trading. It required at least one iron
testicle and the same peculiar logic as bond trading. Witness: One day
earlier in his career Dall was in the market to buy (borrow) fifty million
dollars. He checked around and found the money market was 4 to 4.25
percent, which meant he could buy (borrow) at 4.25 percent or sell (lend)
at 4 percent. When he actually tried to buy fifty million dollars at 4.25
percent, however, the market moved to 4.25 to 4.5 percent. The sellers
were scared off by a large buyer. Dall bid 4.5. The market moved again,
to 4.5 to 4.75 percent. He raised his bid several more times with the

same result, then went to Bill Simon's office to tell him he couldn't buy
money. All the sellers were running like chickens.
"Then you be the seller," said Simon.
So Dall became the seller, although he actually needed to buy. He sold
fifty million dollars at 5.5 percent. He sold another fifty million dollars
at 5.5 percent. Then, as Simon had guessed, the market collapsed.
Everyone wan ted to sell. There were no buyers. "Buy them back now,"
said Simon when the market reached 4 percent. So Dall not only got his
fifty million dollars at 4 percent but took a profit on the money he had
sold at higher rates. That was how a Salomon bond trader thought: He
forgot whatever it was that he wanted to do for a minute and put his
finger on the pulse of the market. If the market felt fidgety, if people
were scared or desperate, he herded them like sheep into a corner, then
made them pay for their uncertainty. He sat on the market until it puked
gold coins. Then he worried about what he wanted to do.
Bob Dall loved to trade. And though he did not have official
responsibility for Ginnie Macs, he began to trade them. Someone had to.
Dall established himself as the Salomon Brothers authority on mortgage
securities in September 1977. Together with Stephen Joseph, the
brother of Drexel CEO Fred Joseph, he created the first private issue
of mortgage securities. They persuaded the Bank of America to sell the
home loans it had made—in the form of bonds. They persuaded investors,
such as insurance companies, to buy the new mortgage bonds. When they
did, the Bank of America received the cash it had originally lent the
homeowners, which it could thenrelend. The homeowner continued
to write his mortgage payment checks to the Bank of America, but the
money was passed on to the Salomon Brothers clients who had purchased
the Bank of America bonds.
Dall felt sure this was the wave of the future. He thought the boom > in
demand for housing would outstretch the sources of funding. The
population was aging. Fewer Americans occupied each house. The nation
was wealthier, and more people wanted to purchase second homes.
Savings and loans could not grow fast enough to make the required loans.
He also saw an imbalance in the system caused by the steady drift of
people from the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt. Thrifts in the Sun Belt had
small deposits and a lot of demand for money from home buyers. Thrifts
in the Rust Belt held massive deposits for which they had no demand.

Dall saw a solution. Rust Belt thrifts could effectively lend to Sun Belt
homeowners by buying the mortgage bonds of Sun Belt thrifts.
At the request of the Salomon Brothers executive committee Dall
produced a three-page memo summarizing his belief in the market, which
convinced John Gutfreund to remove the trading of Ginnie Macs from
the government bond trading department and establish a mortgage
department. It was the spring of 1978, and Gutfreund had just been
appointed chairman of the firm by his predecessor, William Salomon, the
son of one of the firm's three founding fathers. Dall stopped trading
money, moved to a seat a few feet away from his old desk, and began to
think thoughts years into the future. He realized he needed a financier
to negotiate with banks and thrifts, to persuade them to sell their loans
as the Bank of America had done. These loans would be transformed into
mortgage bonds. The obvious choice for the job was Steve Joseph since
Joseph had worked closely with Dall on the Bank of America deal.
Dall also needed a trader to make markets in the bonds that Joseph
created, and that was a bigger problem. The trader was absolutely
crucial. The trader bought and sold the bonds. A big-name trader
inspired confidence in investors, and his presence alone could make a
market grow. The trader also made the money for Salomon Brothers.
Because of this, the trader was the person whom people admired,
watched, and attended. Dall had always been the mortgage trader. Now
he would be the manager. He had to borrow a proven winner from either
the corporate or the government bond-trading desks. It presented a
problem. At Salomon, if a department allowed someone to leave, it was
for the good reason that it wanted to get rid of him; when you took
people
from other departments, you got only the ones you didn't want.
But with the help of John Gutfreund Dall got his first choice: Lewis
Ranieri, a thirty-year-old utility bond trader (a utility bond trader is not,
like a utility infielder, a trader who steps in when the first stringers are
injured; a utility bond trader trades the bonds of public utilities, such as
Louisiana Power & Light). Ranieri's move to the mortgage department was
a seminal event on the eve of the golden age of the bond trader. With
his appointment in mid-1978, the story of the mortgage market as it is
conventionally told within Salomon Brothers commences.
Dall knows precisely why he selected Ranieri. "I needed a good strong

trader. Lewie was not just a trader, though: He had the mentality and
the will to create a market. He was tough-minded. He didn't mind hiding
a million-dollar loss from a manager, if that's what it took. He didn't let
morality get in the way. Well, morality is not the right word, but you
know what I mean. I have never seen anyone, educated or uneducated,
with a quicker mind. And best of all, he was a dreamer."
When John Gutfreund told him he would join Dall as head trader in the
embryonic mortgage security department, Lewie panicked. "I was the
hottest talent in the corporate department," he says. "I didn't
understand." The move plucked him from the fray. Utility bonds were
making big money. And while it was true a person didn't get paid on
commission, one nevertheless climbed through the ranks at Salomon
Brothers by pointing to a chunk of money at the end of each year and
saying, "That's mine, I did that." Revenues meant power. In Lewie's view,
there would be no chunk of money at the end of the year in the mortgage
department. There would be no more climbing through the ranks. In
retrospect, his fears look laughably absurd. Six years later, in 1984, on
the back of an envelope, Ranieri would argue, plausibly, that his mortgage
trading department made more money that year than the rest of Wall
Street combined in all their businesses. He would swell with pride as he
discussed his department's achievements. He would be named vicechairman of Salomon Brothers, second only to Gutfreund. Gut-fruend
would regularly mention Ranieri as a possible successor. Yet Ranieri
envisioned none of it in 1978. At the time of his appointment he felt
cheated.
"I felt like they were saying, 'Congratulations, we want to exile you to
Siberia.' I didn't try to foil the move because that wasn't my style. I
just kept asking John, 'Why do you want me to do this?' Even after the
move friends came up to ask what I had done to piss off John: Had I lost
money or broken the law or what?" Like Bill Simon, Ranieri thought
mortgages an ugly stepchild of the bond market. Who'd buv the bonds?
Who wanted to lend money to a homeowner who could repay at any time?
Besides, there wasn't much to trade. "There were nothing but a few
Ginnie Maes (and one Bank of America deal), and nobody cared about
those; 1 tried to figure out what else there was to do."
Ranieri's boyhood ambition had been to become a chef in an Italian
kitchen. That ended when a head-on automobile accident on Brooklyn's

Snake Hill rekindled an asthmatic condition that didn't tolerate kitchen
fumes. He was a sophomore English major at St. John's College when he
took a part-time job on the night shift in the Salomon Brothers mailroom
in 1968. The Salomon paycheck was seventy dollars a week. Several
months into his new job he ran into money problems. He had no financial
support from his parents (his father had died when he was thirteen). His
wife lay ill in the hospital, and the bills simply accumulated. Ranieri
needed ten thousand dollars. He was nineteen years old, and all he had to
his name was his weekly paycheck.
He was finally forced to request a loan from the one Salomon Brothers
partner he knew vaguely. "You gotta remember," he says now, "I was
convinced, really convinced, he was going to fire me." Instead the partner
told Ranieri that the hospital bill would be taken care of. Ranieri thought
that meant it would be deducted from his weekly paycheck, which he
couldn't afford, and he began to protest. "It will be taken care of," the
partner repeated. Salomon Brothers paid the ten-thousand-dollar bill
racked up by the wife of its mailroom clerk with three months' tenure.
There was no committee meeting to discuss whether this was
appropriate. The partner to whom Ranieri had addressed his request
hadn't even paused before giving his answer. It was understood that the
bill would be paid, for no reason other than it was the right thing to do.
One cannot be certain of the exact words spoken by a Salomon Brothers
partner long since gone, but it is clear what Ranieri heard: Lewie Ranieri
would always be taken care of. The act moved Ranieri deeply. When he
speaks of loyalty, of the "covenant" between Salomon Brothers and the
people who worked for Salomon Brothers, it is that single act of
generosity he remembers. "From that point on," says one of his mortgage
traders, "Lewie loved the firm. He couldn't understand
it was only a business." "The firm took care of its people," says Ranieri.
"There used to be all these expressions, like 'It's more important to be
a good man than a good manager.' And people really meant them. We
were a band of brothers. There was, as the people say, a covenant."
It sounds sweeter than it was. A man does not get to where Ranieri was
simply by being a cuddly bundle of trust and loyalty. "I believe in God,
but I'll never be nominated for saint," Ranieri once told a reporter from
Esquire magazine. It was not that he lacked values, but he had a keen
sense that at times the ends justified the means and an equally keen
