
35

36

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
 Arbitrageurs keep prices in check. Another important reason fundamental analysis works is that arbitrageurs are looking for riskless profits. For example, suppose a security is trading at $25 per share, and the
company is valued at $1 billion. If the firm had $2 billion in cash on its
books and no debt, an arbitrageur would step in to take advantage of the
mispricing. The arbitrageur could buy the company for $1 billion and
then pay for the purchase using the cash the company has on its books.
So fundamental analysis works because firms, governments, and individuals are constantly looking for riskless profits.
Okay, you’re convinced that fundamental analysis has merit, but can you
benefit from it in your swing trading? The answer is yes. But you should be
aware of its limitations and how you can address them:
 Unlike technical analysis, you can’t uniformly apply fundamental
analysis to securities. A swing trader who understands how to interpret
chart patterns and technical indicators goes through the same process
whether he or she is trading corn, cotton, gold, oil, stocks, exchange
traded funds, or mutual funds. The chart analysis is the same, and resistance and support both apply because market participants behave in
similar ways regardless of what they’re trading.
Master the fundamental analysis of cotton, however, and you aren’t
much better off when you come to trading oil. Master the fundamental analysis of telecom shares, and you’ll face a new ballgame when it
comes to banks. Differences persist between market fundamentals and
how you analyze them. For this reason, swing traders who rely on fundamental analysis often must specialize in one or two markets.
 Fundamentals change less often than chart prices. A company reports
its earnings and sales figures once every three months. Swing trading
based on a report that’s two months old can be hazardous because
whatever value the report contained was likely incorporated in the
company’s price during the first few days after the report was released.
This fact doesn’t mean you should ignore news of a company that isn’t
recent. But it does mean that you don’t want to buy a security based on
a news report issued two months ago that sales are raging. The reason
for the purchase has to be a recent catalyst or the convergence of good
technicals (a chart) and good fundamentals.

Surveying the fundamental advantages
and disadvantages
Fundamental analysis has its pluses and minuses. Some aspects, such as its
emphasis on industry dynamics and competition, make it well suited for the
swing trader; other aspects, such as its focus on value realization over the
long term, make it a poor swing trading tool.

Chapter 2: Understanding the Swing Trader’s Two Main Strategies

The role of psychology in fundamental analysis
You can see how psychology comes into play
with fundamental analysis when analysts
under- or overestimate a firm’s potential through
earnings surprise data. Earnings surprise figures show how positively or negatively a company’s earnings come in versus Wall Street’s
consensus expectations. Wall Street analysts
consistently underestimate great growth firms’
potential, and that underestimation is revealed
when those firms post positive earnings surprises. Similarly, Wall Street analysts often
overestimate the difficulties at troubled firms,
and that overestimation is revealed when those
firms post negative earnings surprises.
So how does psychology play a role in these
surprises? It turns out that many Wall Street
analysts project future events based on information known today that may or may not have

any bearing on those future events. Called
anchoring, it’s a trait we all suffer from. If you
bought shares of a security at $15, for example,
and watched them fall to $10, you may decide
to sell when your shares trade at $15 again.
But this may not be the right course of action.
You’ve anchored your expectations of exiting to
a past price ($15) that may no longer represent
the security’s true value. In other words, you
may be waiting a long time to break even —
just ask shareholders in Nortel Networks, who
saw prices fall from more than $800 to $11 in a
few years.
I often talk about Wall Street’s biases. Just
remember that those biases are inherent in you
and me, too. So try to guard against falling in
love with positions or waiting to break even.

The advantages of fundamentals are centered on the focus on value — what a
firm is actually worth. Fundamental analysis
 Estimates a firm’s intrinsic value regardless of where the market trades
 Incorporates industry and market effects, which can drive security
prices in tandem
 Wins out over the long term — fundamentals drive the prices of securities
 Assumes the market is wrong at times
Of course, fundamental analysis also has its shortcomings because it
 Can be incorrect in the short term when you most need it
 Is more subjective than technical analysis
 Relies heavily on your skill to interpret relevant market information
 Doesn’t provide reference points on exits should your assumptions be
incorrect

37

38

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things

A fundamentals-based swing trading success story
If you frequently get your business and financial
news from the television station CNBC, you’ve
no doubt seen the colorful character known
as Jim Cramer, host of the show Mad Money.
He greets callers on his show with a big “BooYah!” and takes questions on most any company in the market.
Cramer’s rise to stardom was predicated on
his success at a hedge fund he founded in
1987. Cramer reportedly generated returns
of 24 percent per year for a decade after the
launch of his firm (he was holding cash during
the October crash in 1987) before cashing in
during 2001. Though Cramer extols the virtues of
buy-and-hold investing on his show, he traded
so frequently during his hedge fund years that
he likely would’ve been classified as a swing
trader or day trader (his firm often generated
the most in commissions among major Wall
Street hedge funds). Cramer’s books aren’t filled
with charts and technical indicators. Rather, he
talks fundamentals. He was a short-term trader
— very short term.

Cramer was a contrarian who took long positions
(bought) in stocks that had fallen a significant
amount, or took short positions in stocks that had
risen a significant amount. He traded securities
whose price was affected by corporate news,
such as an upgrade or downgrade by a Wall
Street firm. Sometimes he traded securities
before they reported earnings if he felt he knew
which way the reports would go. His trading was
fundamentals-based — if Home Depot announced
poor earnings, it may signal that Lowes’s earnings would also disappoint. However, he diverged
from the traditional day or swing trader in his use
of the media to get his opinions out on securities
he owned or was short.
I highlight Cramer as an example of a
fundamentals-based short-term trader. He
didn’t rely on charts or technical indicators. He
has even disparaged technical analysis on his
TV broadcasts. But his style is instructive in the
ways a trader can swing trade on news events
that the market gets wrong or that the market
reacts too strongly to.

I don’t recommend exiting based on a company’s fundamentals. All too often,
a security’s shares make their move before the reasons for that move are fully
known. As a swing trader, you’re better off basing exits on the strength or
weakness in the price chart (depending on whether you’re short or long the
security). Stock prices fall faster than they rise, and commodities tend to rise
faster than they fall. If you’re long stocks, you want to exit quickly because
of this characteristic. Fundamentals change too slowly to react in a timely
manner on an exit. Use stop loss orders in any case to protect your downside.

Looking at catalysts and the
great growth/value divide
Fundamental analysis is principally concerned with a company’s value (or
perhaps more accurately, what a company’s value appears to be). But even
a company that is undervalued may stay undervalued unless some catalyst
occurs to cause other investors to revalue shares higher.

Chapter 2: Understanding the Swing Trader’s Two Main Strategies
Watching for catalysts
To help make up for the main weakness of fundamental analysis — the issue
of timing — swing traders rely on catalysts. Catalysts are fundamental events
like mergers, acquisitions, new products, and earnings release dates that
affect short-term price movement and spur the market to correctly value
a company’s shares. They can be internal or external, and you should pay
attention to both.
 Internal catalysts: Events that a company has direct control over are
internal catalysts. They come in the form of new services or products
(consider the splash that Apple’s iPhone made when it debuted) or new
management (a change in the CEO position at Hewlett-Packard helped
propel shares higher).
 External catalysts: External catalysts include such events as consolidation
in an industry (when a company is bought out, its competitors are often
assigned higher valuations because they’re seen as potential targets) or
changes in commodity prices (for example, oil or natural gas prices).
As a swing trader, you should look for opportunities to trade when a firm’s
fundamentals change because of one of these events — or when the perception of a firm’s fundamentals changes (such as when a company surprises Wall
Street with its earnings report). Consider a real-life example: Homebuilders’
shares were overvalued for much of 2005. If you shorted shares of some of the
top homebuilders then, you would’ve had your head handed to you. But if you
used fundamental analysis, you may’ve waited for a catalyst — an event that
would cause repricing of homebuilder shares. That event came in August 2005
when, for the first time in many months, the growth rate of contracts for new
homes slowed. (Security prices of fast-growing firms often peak when growth
rates begin to decline, not when growth turns negative.)

Classifying a company according to growth or value
Fundamental analysts usually classify companies as either growth firms
or value firms (though many ardent investors argue that growth and value
investing are two sides of the same coin). Even though growth investing and
value investing are associated with long-term investing, swing traders need to
be aware of the differences, because growth stocks and value stocks outperform each other at different times.
 Growth stocks: Companies that typically trade at premiums to the overall market (as defined by price to book ratios or price to earnings ratios)
are growth stocks. They tend to be in industries that experience high
growth rates, like technology and healthcare.
 Value stocks: Companies that typically trade at discounts to the overall
market (as defined by price to book ratios or price to earnings ratios)
are value stocks. They tend to be in the financial sector and the consumer staples sector (for example, companies in the beverage or food
industries are considered to be part of the consumer staples industry).

39

40

Part I: Getting into the Swing of Things
During some years, value is in the lead; during other years, growth is out
front. Trading growth stocks when value is in favor, or vice versa, can be like
fighting a schoolyard bully with one hand tied behind your back. If you’re a
great fighter, you can pull it off. But it’s not easy.
The reason that value and growth stocks exchange leadership roles lies in
investor perception. At times, investors favor companies that pay dividends
(such as when the Bush administration cut taxes on dividend payments) or
companies that have steady cash flow streams. Value stocks shine during
these periods. Other times, investors favor strong earnings growth without as
much regard to price. Growth stocks shine at these times.
Is it enough to simply know which horse is in the lead? After all, if you could predict with reasonable accuracy whether growth or value would lead, you could
rely on your forecasting abilities rather than historical performance — which, as
I’m sure you’re well aware, isn’t a guarantee of future returns. Forecasting, however, has a problem.
Even if you’re right about which style of investing should be in the lead based
on all known evidence, that doesn’t mean that style will actually lead. In other
words, the market isn’t rational.
I remember meeting with investment consultants in 2005 who quizzed me on
whether value stocks would outperform growth stocks in the coming year.
In truth, I had no idea. I knew that it was growth’s turn to lead because value
had been in the driver’s seat for several years, and the valuations were compelling on the growth side of the divide. But the market doesn’t always agree
with my analysis. The only reliable way I know to trade the growth/value
divide is by using technical analysis.
Long-term investors care little about who’s in the lead because they can afford
to wait for the time when their style is in favor and their stocks reflect that
value. Fortunately, as a swing trader, you don’t have to analyze the economic
situation and determine what lies ahead for growth and value stocks. Rather,
you can simply analyze recent history and bet with the trend. If matters
change, move your chips to the other side of the table.

Chapter 3

Getting Started with
Administrative Tasks
In This Chapter
 Finding a broker and opening an account
 Getting the scoop on those with the scoop — service providers
 Tracking your trades with a trading journal
 Staying positive to achieve positive results

S

wing traders use brokers like any other market participant. But a swing
trader needs a different kind of broker than an investor or day trader.
What type of broker you choose depends on a number of factors. I break
down those factors in this chapter, and I also give you details on how to open
a brokerage account.
After you have your account up and running, you need to think about subscribing to certain services to help carry out your analysis. Some services are helpful for conducting screens of the market. Other services chart securities. Still
other services help you locate the cream of the crop by focusing on industry
group rotation. I recommend some key services in the pages that follow.
I also cover trading journals in this chapter. To be a keen swing trader, I
recommend that you keep a journal (not to be confused with a personal
diary) of your trades because a journal helps you refine your tactics and
improve your trading by allowing you to review what works and what
doesn’t.
This chapter assumes you have a working knowledge of the financial markets.
You should also know how to use the Internet so you can try out some of the
brokerage options and service providers that I mention.

42

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things

Hooking Up with a Broker
Why is the firm that executes all your trades called a broker? Not exactly an
enticing name, is it?
Despite the name, brokers are necessary for swing trading — or any kind of
trading, for that matter. But not all brokers are created equal. Some specialize
in offering custom advice and wealth-management services for the high net
worth individuals out there. They charge outrageous fees to execute trades
because, well, they can. Of course, they’d argue that those outrageous fees
simply reflect the cost of their advice.
Swing traders don’t use such plush services. Their brokers have more of a
no-frills approach. But the nice thing about competition is that even the nofrills brokers are increasingly offering premium services like check-writing
privileges and ATM card access to brokerage accounts.
So how do you pick a broker who suits your needs? Read on.

Choosing a broker
When choosing a broker, traders all too often focus on a single factor —
commissions — to the exclusion of everything else. Commissions get the
limelight because they used to be the main impediment to frequent trading.
Not too long ago, swing trading wasn’t possible for the masses due to high
commissions. By law, brokers charged fixed trade commissions. But on May
1, 1975 (it’s okay if you forget this date after three seconds), securities laws in
the United States changed, allowing brokers to charge negotiated trade commissions. Commissions didn’t immediately fall to the levels they’re at today,
but they did fall over time. Today, you may pay a flat $5 to $12 per trade,
which may be equal to about a penny or less per share, depending on how
many shares you trade.
But not all brokers offer such competitive rates, nor do they all provide
the same services, so you must carefully consider the factors that are most
important to you when settling on a broker. Some of those factors include the
broker’s charting system, customer service, the ease of placing orders, and
the ease of depositing and withdrawing money.

Understanding the different types of brokers
What broker you choose depends on which services you want and how much
you’re willing to spend on commissions. Here are two classes of brokers to
consider:

Chapter 3: Get ting Started with Administrative Tasks
 Discount brokers: Discount brokers offer fewer services to their clients
than full service brokers do. Instead, they focus on trade execution. You
tell them what to buy and sell, and they do it. Of course, trades are usually made electronically today instead of over the phone. You can always
speak to a living human being on the phone, but that will cost you more
for your trade. Discount brokers may provide some services for free, such
as research services or banking services.
 Direct access firms: Direct access firms allow you to bypass a broker
and trade with an exchange or market maker directly. The advantage to
this approach is that you have more control because you can see who’s
offering or bidding for shares of a security and choose with whom you
want to trade. Direct access brokers often require you to download software to your computer that provides faster streaming data than you’d
receive through a Web site. Some discount brokers are beginning to
offer direct access trading.
You may also encounter full service brokers, such as Merrill Lynch, who hold
their clients’ hands, offer a suite of services, and charge enormous commissions. Obviously, full service brokers aren’t the choice of swing traders. A
swing trader who needs someone else’s advice on what to trade shouldn’t be
in the business of swing trading. Swing trading is about independence, not
dependence.

Searching for broker prospects
As a swing trader, you must use either a discount broker or a direct access
firm (see the preceding section for details on both). I’m not going to recommend
a particular broker for the simple reason that broker rankings change over time,
and a broker that provides great service today may not necessarily provide such
service in the future.
The major discount brokers you may want to consider include:
 TD Ameritrade (www.tdameritrade.com)
 E*Trade Financial (www.etrade.com)
 Scottrade (www.scottrade.com)
 Fidelity Active Trader (www.fidelity.com)
The major direct access trading firms you may want to consider include:
 TradeStation (www.tradestation.com)
 Interactive Brokers (www.interactivebrokers.com)
 thinkorswim (www.thinkorswim.com)
 Open E Cry (www.openecry.com)

43

44

Par t I: Get ting into the Swing of Things
Evaluating a potential broker
You need to consider a number of factors before choosing a broker:
 Commission rate: Don’t pay more than a $10 flat fee, or more than one
to two cents per share for your trades. Trading with commission rates
higher than this amount isn’t necessary given what you can get from existing brokers. And, more important, the higher the commission rate, the
higher your returns have to be to cover the cost of those commissions.
Although I recommend specific rates in the preceding paragraph, traders tend to put too much emphasis on the commission rate and sometimes neglect other details when choosing a broker. Don’t fall into that
trap. The commission rate is important, but it’s not the sole factor you
should consider.
 Trading other asset classes: A broker’s ability to offer you other markets
is becoming increasingly important. Ask your broker whether he or she
can arrange for you to trade international securities, futures contracts,
currencies, and so on. Expect to pay a premium for these additional
trading options.
 Banking services: Some discount brokers offer banking services
like check-writing from your brokerage account or an ATM card that
accesses your portfolio. Most brokers allow electronic transfer of assets
so you can send and receive money from another bank account. These
types of services may or may not be important to you.
 Usability: Usability refers to how user-friendly a broker’s trading interface is. Some brokers allow swing traders to execute orders through
their Web sites; others require traders to download software onto their
computers. This factor can really only be addressed by taking a test
drive of a broker’s trading platform (be it a Web site or trading software). Is it easy to enter orders? Is it easy to watch the market (if you
rely on your broker for market data)? I can tell you from experience that
TradeStation and TD Ameritrade have easy-to-use interfaces, but I recommend you try out the brokerage options as you’re weighing this point
(some brokers allow you to use demo versions of their trading software
before opening an account).
 Amenities: Amenities include research services and charting programs.
For example, a discount broker may offer you Level II quotes — which
enable you to see the order book for Nasdaq stocks; see Chapter 11 for
the scoop on using Level II quotes — or stock reports from Wall Street
firms for free or for a discounted fee. But I strongly discourage you from
relying on research reports. Besides the fact that almost everyone on
Wall Street sees them before you do, research reports aren’t very useful
because they’re rarely focused on short-term trading opportunities.
 Customer service: You want to know that you can get someone on the
phone — and fast — when you have a trade or problem. How responsive
a company is to your complaints is next to impossible to determine

Chapter 3: Get ting Started with Administrative Tasks
without opening an account — unless you use media rankings. I recommend relying in part on such rankings because they can be instructive — the writers share their experiences with a broker’s customer
service and other issues. Barron’s and Technical Analysis of Stocks &
Commodities are two publications that print broker rankings.
 Portfolio analysis and reports: How much has your portfolio returned
year-to-date versus some major index? You can calculate this total on
your own (see Chapter 13), but it’s nice to have a broker who can run
the report for you. And when tax time comes, a broker with extensive
tax services can be a lifesaver.
