
364

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.58 The initial breakout above the neckline for this stock was weak,
and it took a second, more earnest attempt to truly break above the pattern
formation.

upside for the H&S pattern and to the downside for the inverted version)
for the break in the pattern to have much potential.
The stock for C. R. Bard (Figure 13.59) provides an example of both
these properties. The stock had gone through a long, grinding descent in
price during the infamous 1973–1974 bear market. It then spent the entire rest of the decade churning between a split-adjusted price of 45 cents
and 90 cents. In the course of doing so, it produced a very potent IHS pattern. The neckline has been drawn horizontally across the chart for clarity,
and although the pattern isn’t perfect in all respects, you should be able to
clearly make out the components of the pattern.
When the price broke above the neckline, the results were profound.
For literally decades following the break, the stock moved up in price by
thousands and thousands of percent (Figure 13.60). A $15,000 investment
at the breakout would have grown to over $1 million by 2005, since the
stock made a powerful and reliable series of higher highs and higher lows
all through the 1980s and 1990s.
Volume plays a more important role in the inverted H&S pattern than
it does with the H&S. The reason is that a stock needs power to rise, but it

Head and Shoulders

365

FIGURE 13.59 This massive inverted H&S pattern hammered out a critical bottom for this stock after a long descent.

FIGURE 13.60 This pattern spans years, and its eﬀects were felt for decades to
come.

366

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.61 The volume of this stock dried up near the bottom, as the selling
pressure exhausted itself. A surge came during the initial breakout.

can fall of its own weight to the downside. Ideally, you will want to see a
surge in volume at the breakout, and if there is a retracement back to the
neckline, you should probably see a tapering off in price before it begins
its rise anew.
The broker optionsXpress (Figure 13.61) gives us a nice example of
volume in the context of an IHS pattern. During the formation of the left
shoulder and head, the volume dried up, indicating that the selling pressure
was diminishing. During the creation of the right shoulder, volume started
to rise, which was a good sign for the bulls since it indicated more buying
interest at a slightly higher price point. The real surge in volume came when
the stock broke out above its neckline.
As the stock proceeded to triple in price, the volume continued growing, indicating a widening base of interest in the stock (Figure 13.62). The
simple monitoring of a neckline was all that was required to get in on this
stock early enough to enjoy virtually the entire upside of this move.
The stock for RosTelecom (Figure 13.63) gives another illustration
of volume versus price action. There are two big bursts of volume here.
The first is during the completion of the head part of the pattern, which

Head and Shoulders

367

FIGURE 13.62 Surging volume during an upturn is an indication of strength.

FIGURE 13.63 The surge in volume here comes at the right time, which is when
the stock is pushing oﬀ its lows and moving toward the neckline.

368

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.64 Patterns aren’t always perfectly clean, so it is important to work
on your analysis skills to help ﬁlter out the random noise built within a chart and still
see the valid pattern clearly.

indicates a surge of buying interest after the stock has bottomed out.
The next surge is during an attempted (but failed) breakout above the
neckline.
The aftermath of this inverted H&S was a terrific upside for bulls
(Figure 13.64). This pattern is a little unusual since there are two right
shoulders (or one large right shoulder with a false breakout in the middle),
but the neckline drawn makes plain the pattern’s shape and location.
With the normal H&S pattern, it is a good sign when the right shoulder
is lower than the left shoulder, since that suggests waning strength in
the stock’s price. The inverted H&S pattern has a corollary—it is a better
pattern if the right shoulder is higher than the left shoulder (Figure 13.65).
In other words, the prices on the right shoulder should not dip as far down
as the prices on the left shoulder, since a higher right shoulder suggests
more strength.
The result of this pattern was a nearly fivefold increase in price for AES
Corporation (Figure 13.66). All the elements were in place for a positive
outcome: a substantial decrease in price prior to the pattern, a clean IHS, a
high right shoulder, and a good breakout above the neckline.

Head and Shoulders

369

FIGURE 13.65 The right shoulder being shallower than the left shoulder is an
indication of strength, which enhances the power of the inverted H&S.

FIGURE 13.66 The inverted H&S marked the end of a substantial decline for this
stock.

370

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.67 This stock shows an almost perfect inverted H&S pattern: a shoulder, a head, a somewhat higher right shoulder, a breakout, and then a retracement.

Perhaps one of the cleanest IHS patterns in recent history was for the
stock of Asyst Technologies (Figure 13.67). The neckline is at $5.50, and
the pattern below it is perfectly formed. After the price breaks above the
neckline, a retracement precisely down to the neckline takes place.
Following the formation of this pattern, Asyst Technologies (ASYT)
swiftly doubled in price (Figure 13.68), in spite of the fact that it had recently been in a severe downturn. This pattern was easy to recognize and
profitable to trade.
The importance of a volume surge during a price breakout is difficult
to overstate. A volume surge confirms that there is a strong interest in the
stock, and volume often begets more volume. When a stock explodes in volume, it appears on “Most Active” lists and other scans that traders follow.
Figure 13.69 shows a particularly strong explosion in volume following a
breakout.
For an inverted H&S pattern to have two right shoulders isn’t uncommon, since there will still be hesitation and skepticism surrounding a stock
that has spent so much time going down in price. Those waiting on the sidelines will want the stock to prove it is capable of sustained upward price
movement before they are willing to commit to purchasing it, so it may

Head and Shoulders

371

FIGURE 13.68 ASYT doubled in price after its breakout, in spite of a relatively
recent severe decline in price.

FIGURE 13.69 Notice the exceptional surge in volume following the breakout.

372

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.70 This could be interpreted as two patterns in one: an inverted H&S
as well as a cup with handle, since the inverted H&S makes up the cup portion of the
pattern.

take a couple of earnest attempts to pierce the neckline before the pattern
completes (Figure 13.70).
The follow-up to Figure 13.70 is shown in Figure 13.71, which illustrates the fourfold increase in price of the stock for Fred’s, Inc. (FRED).
You can plainly see the retracement return the price to its neckline level
several months after the breakout, followed by a virtually uninterrupted
increase in equity value.
The exchange-traded fund for the Russell 1000 index (symbol IWD) is
illustrated in Figure 13.72. In this instance, you would be faced with the
decision about where to draw the neckline, since the price doesn’t quite
come up as high in January as it did the prior August. In cases like this, you
should place the neckline at the highest point, since that is the resistance
level. A breakout cannot really occur until all the recent high prices have
been bested.
The effects of an inverted H&S breakout can last for years, or even
decades. For symbol IWD, the price moved higher for several years following the breakout (Figure 13.73).

Head and Shoulders

373

FIGURE 13.71 FRED increased in value fourfold once it broke above its neckline.

FIGURE 13.72 Here we see an extremely well-formed inverted H&S with the neckline at $47.50.

374

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.73 The price progress following the breakout was steady and consistent for years.

Knowing where to place the neckline isn’t as obvious as the earlier examples in this chapter would suggest. Of course, if figuring out the placement of the neckline is too hard, perhaps the pattern is not well-defined in
the first place. Figure 13.74 shows a chart whose neckline could be placed
at either $22.75 or $26. Either would be appropriate, although the more
conservative approach is to assume a higher neckline, which generates a
more difficult-to-achieve breakout for the stock.
Sometimes a pattern can take on such a shape that it is actually two
patterns combined into one. Examine Figure 13.75 closely, for instance.
There is a very well-formed IHS pattern spanning the leftmost third of this
chart. Yet if you look at the portion of the chart beneath the horizontal line,
it also resembles a cup-with-handle formation. The inverted H&S pattern
constitutes the cup, and a handle is formed to its immediate right. These
are complementary patterns—both bullish—and their prediction played
out nicely as the stock doubled in price.
You may wonder if the width (that is, the amount of time) of the shoulders and head need to be similar. It makes for an easier-to-find pattern
when their widths are relatively close, but it is not a necessity of the pattern. Even a very narrow element of the pattern is acceptable, such as the

Head and Shoulders

375

FIGURE 13.74 Finding the right place to place the neckline is something you will
get better at with experience.

FIGURE 13.75 The owners of KMG enjoyed more than a doubling of price following this breakout above the neckline.

376

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.76 The right shoulder of this pattern is very narrow, but it qualiﬁes
nonetheless.

chart shown in Figure 13.76. In this case, the right shoulder is just a fraction
of the width of the head and left shoulder, but because the basic rules of
the pattern are still intact, this is a perfectly legitimate bullish shape.
The follow-through to the chart shown in Figure 13.76 is illustrated in
Figure 13.77. After a picture-perfect retracement to the neckline, the price
moved solidly higher. It is more common for a retracement to take place
with an inverted H&S pattern, simply because there is a built-in caution
in the market about pushing a stock higher that has been depressed for a
while. Whereas a stock in an H&S pattern can quickly fall based on fear
and panic, a stock shaping up for a solid breakout higher has to fight the
traditional wall of worry, thus often providing a second chance to get in
with the form of a retracement.
One extremely well-known stock that provided perhaps the most ideal
inverted H&S pattern in years was that of Qwest Communications (symbol
Q), shown in Figure 13.78. Two horizontal lines have been drawn here—the
lower one to emphasize the lower bounds of the shoulders, and the upper
one to show the location of the neckline. On the extreme right of the graph,
you can see a very clean retracement that was executed very soon after the
first breakout.

Head and Shoulders

377

FIGURE 13.77 Symbol LVLT had a perfect retracement to its neckline at approximately $2.70.

FIGURE 13.78 The stock for Qwest, symbol Q, had about the most perfect inverted H&S example you could want.

378

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.79 Following its breakout, Q moved much higher and never violated
its neckline to the downside.

With such an exceptional pattern, it is no surprise that Q performed
marvelously after the retracement (Figure 13.79). The pattern was twoand-a-half years in the making, but during that time the psychology of the
holders of the stock gradually shifted to one of optimism, which was fed
by more new buyers into the stock.
Most charts aren’t nearly as perfect as that of Q. The neckline, for example, doesn’t have to touch every element of each IHS component to the
penny. You need to use your own judgment and experience to assess if a
pattern is acceptably clean and clear enough to warrant making a trade. In
Figure 13.80, the pattern is otherwise clean, but the left shoulder doesn’t
quite make it up to the neckline on both sides. That is all right, however,
since it is more important that the stock build strength later in time, as it
did on the right shoulder.
Just as the earlier example shows two patterns in one chart simultaneously, you also may sometimes see two IHS patterns within one another.
Having a pattern with two necklines—one lower, one higher—usually

Head and Shoulders

379

FIGURE 13.80 The left shoulder in this pattern isn’t quite perfect, because it
doesn’t touch the neckline entirely, but that didn’t make the breakout any less predictive.

means the pattern is that much more powerful, since the larger pattern is affirming and strengthening the smaller one. Redback Networks
(RBAK), in Figure 13.81, has an exceptionally good inverted H&S pattern,
and the lower horizontal line clearly shows the neckline of the smaller
pattern.
In a longer-term view (Figure 13.82), two necklines can be seen. The
behavior of the price above each neckline was similar—a breakout, a partial retracement, and then continued strength. An observer of this stock
need not have waited for the formation and penetration of the higher
neckline. The second, higher neckline simply confirms the strength of the
chart, as can be seen with the steady upward direction following both
breakouts.
Let’s round out our examination of head and shoulders patterns with
Figures 13.83 through 13.90, which will be captioned with the length (in
time) and strength (in percentage) of their respective breakouts, from the
neckline to the point of maximum change.

380

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.81 Here is the initial breakout of RBAK from its inverted H&S pattern.

FIGURE 13.82 There are two necklines in this stock, which is somewhat unusual.

Head and Shoulders

381

FIGURE 13.83 Allied Capital—length of move 70 days; strength of move +69
percent.

FIGURE 13.84 Melco Crown—length of move 348 days; strength of move −87
percent.

382

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.85 Isle of Capri Casinos—length of move 364 days; strength of move
−88 percent.

FIGURE 13.86 Hutchinson Technology—length of move 397 days; strength of
move −69 percent.

Head and Shoulders

383

FIGURE 13.87 Hovnanian Enterprises—length of move 639 days; strength of
move −98 percent.

384

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 13.88 Russell 2000 index—length of move 157 days; strength of move
−47 percent.

Head and Shoulders

385

FIGURE 13.89 Allegheny Energy—length of move 188 days; strength of move
−55 percent.

FIGURE 13.90 Prologis—length of move 129 days; strength of move −95 percent.

386

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

SUMMARY
Both the Head and Shoulders and the Inverted Head and Shoulders patterns are easy to recognize and profitable tools in your trading arsenal. You
have seen dozens of real-life examples of how powerful these patterns can
be with both bearish and bullish moves. We now will turn our attention to
the final set of drawing tools available to you, the Fibonacci objects—the
retracement, time series, arcs, and fans.

CHAPTER 14

Pattern
Recognition

he basis of a large portion of technical analysis is pattern
recognition—that is, the ability to spot one of the classic technical
patterns (such as a wedge, a head and shoulders, or a triple bottom)
and estimate in what direction and by what amount the price is likely to
move.
There are a couple of disadvantages to looking for patterns manually.
First, it takes a lot of experience. Getting the ability to look at a chart and
accurately discern what pattern, if any, is present, takes years of experience as a technical analyst. Second, it takes a lot of time. Going through
hundreds of charts to look for a handful of high-probability patterns could
easily consume hours of your time, and even if you decided to make a serious time commitment, you could not as a practical matter go through all
the stocks that trade on the major exchanges.
Fortunately, ProphetCharts has a couple of tools that automatically
find patterns in stock charts. One tool locates the classic technical analysis
patterns over the course of many years of stock data, and the other tool
finds short-term candlestick patterns. This chapter will introduce you to
both of these tools and their effective use.

T

HOW TO FIND PATTERNS
The ProphetCharts historical price database automatically keeps track of
patterns as they emerge. Getting to this information is simply a matter of
387

388

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.1 You can access up-to-date patterns results by clicking Find
Patterns.

establishing the parameters of your search so the qualifying symbols can
be delivered to your copy of ProphetCharts.
The first thing you do is choose Find Patterns from the Patterns menu,
as shown in Figure 14.1.
The Find Patterns dialog box comes up, and within that box there are
five different tabs: General, Patterns, Ratings, Watch Lists, and Filters. You
can choose any of these five tabs to fine-tune the nature of your pattern
search. We will go through each of these tabs individually.
The first tab, General, is the one that shows up when you first bring
up the Find Patterns dialog box (Figure 14.2). It has a variety of checkboxes, dropdown menus, and radio buttons. As with the vast majority of
the choices available in Find Patterns, you don’t have to make selections
in every single one of these parameters. They are mostly there to give you
the ability to customize your search.
The General tab has the following parameters:

r Find Symbols with Patterns: You need to check this box to activate
the search function. As the description indicates, the resulting symbols
will show up in the Patterns module.
r Order results by: There is a dropdown menu here with eight different
choices for you to establish the basis of sorting the results. The default,
sorting by Symbol, is usually best.
r Show Patterns on Charted Symbol: If you check this box,
ProphetCharts will automatically draw the lines that constitute the basis for the symbols found. It is very likely you’ll want to check this box,
since the whole point of the pattern recognition engine is to see the
patterns.
r Limit Search Result: You can restrict the quantity of symbols that are
displayed here. If you enter a number that is smaller than the resulting
list, the excess symbols will not be displayed.

Pattern Recognition

389

FIGURE 14.2 Of the ﬁve tabs, General has the most important parameters.

r Length: There are two fields here—Min and Max Bars—that let you
state the number of price bars that will make up your search. For instance, if you were searching daily charts for patterns, and you wanted
to see only patterns between 50 and 200 days in length, you would enter 50 in the Min box and 200 in the Max box. It is a pretty good idea to
set a Min value, because the longer the price pattern, the stronger and
more reliable it tends to be.
r Direction: Here are three radio buttons: Bullish, Bearish, and Both.
You must choose one of these to state whether you want to seek bullish
patterns, bearish patterns, or both.
r Trend: There are also three radio buttons here: Continuation, Reversal, and Both. Trend is an important distinction when seeking patterns.
If you want to seek patterns that are echoing their general trend (for
instance, if you want to seek bullish patterns that are in stocks that are
already behaving bullishly), choose Continuation; if you are looking
for changes in direction (such as bearish patterns in bullish stocks),
choose Reversal; if it doesn’t matter, choose Both.
r Breakout: The pattern recognition engine is always monitoring prices,
including patterns that are in development but may not necessarily
complete. You can choose to seek only patterns that have completed

390

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

(Breakout), those that are in the process of being formed (Emerging),
or Both.
r Timeframe: This dropdown menu gives you a series of choices of time
frames to search, ranging from just the previous day all the way up to
the past five years. Choose the range of data of interest to you: if you
are a very short-term trader, you might want to look for patterns over
just the past couple of days; if you are a longer-term trader or a swing
trader, you probably want to use a much longer time frame.
You don’t have to go to any of the other tabs to execute a search.
Whether you use any of the other tabs or not, the way to execute the search
is the same: click either the Apply button (to populate the Patterns module
with the resulting symbols but remain in the dialog box) or the OK button
(to execute the search). You can also click Reset to change all the parameters to their default settings or click Cancel to get out of the Find Patterns
dialog box altogether.
The Patterns tab, shown in Figure 14.3, lets you choose which of the 16
available patterns you’d like to seek. You can choose anywhere from 1 to
all 16 of the checkboxes; the Select All and Clear All buttons will save you
time by checking all (or unchecking all) the boxes. If you are just looking

FIGURE 14.3 There are 16 patterns available in the recognition engine.

Pattern Recognition

391

FIGURE 14.4 Most of the time, you probably will want to just keep the default
settings.

for interesting patterns, you might as well leave all of them checked, but if
you are homing in on a favorite (such as the inverse head and shoulders),
just check the specific patterns you want.
The third tab, Ratings (Figure 14.4), lets you establish a minimum and
maximum value for the quality of patterns you are seeking. These figures
range from 0 (lowest quality) to 5 (highest quality), and the default is 0 for
minimum and 5 for maximum for all six parameters (which means nothing
is filtered out).
The six parameters dictate how clean the patterns are in several respects: Overall is the general quality of the pattern; Initial Trend is how
clean the price action was leading up to the pattern; Breakout Strength is
how much power the price has when moving out of the pattern; Volume
Increase is how strong the volume increase was during the breakout; Uniformity is how well shaped the pattern is, compared with the ideal; and
clarity indicates the confidence level that the price will move to the target.
Generally speaking, you should just keep these settings as they are, but
if you’d like to tighten up the search to look for higher-quality patterns, you
can change the Min value in the Overall parameter to 4 (or even 5), which
will greatly limit the results.
