
:~
, Oil Futures Support

,
IT.-n.~,com_ <$>,.

FIGURE 8.3 Oil Before
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

137

Replacing Traditional Options with Synthetic Options

FIGURE 8.4

Oil After

Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

neither the 9-day nor the 20-day MA is showing any signs of turning around.
Third, the 50-day MA, while fairly tight, is at least five bars away as indicated by the last time the market failed to break the 50-day MA.
By taking advantage of the indicators early, a synthetic call makes the
most sense just in case the market drops like a stone.
In Figure 8.4 our early assessment is rewarded. The market turns
around and in three days breaks through the 50-day MA and doesn't look
back. It makes a beeline from $85 per barrel to $110 per barrel. This time
the synthetic call costs us money. Whereas in the gold example the protective put became an asset when the market collapsed, the put we used for
the oil synthetic option turned into a liability immediately.
In Table 8.2 we can see that the capital that was committed to the synthetic call came out to about $7,700; while less than the actual futures margin of $9,788, it is more expensive than a call option by $3,310.
This is an example of the greeks rearing their ugly heads. Since
the market was moving downward when the original synthetic call was
TABLE 8.2

Premium
Margin

Comparison of Choices
Synthetic Call

Long Futures

Call Option

$5,200 (put)
$2,500

$0
$9,788

$4,390
$0

138

BASIC STRATEGIES

initiated, the put option turned out to be more expensive than the call
option. By the time the market moves up to the 50-day MA at $90 per barrel
the put option should have dropped in value by $5,000 (every $1 move is
equal to $1,000). The delta, intrinsic value, and time value will each playa
role in how much and how fast the put will lose value. Nevertheless, it is
important to note how quickly an at-the-money option can lose value once
the market begins to move in the direction of the primary trade.
Had a call or an outright futures contract been purchased at the time,
none of the standard option problems could have become an issue. Nor
would the profits from the primary position been eroded by the losses of
the put. This is the trade-off for operating with a synthetic position. It is
there for the just-in-case scenario. The loss on the option is a cost of doing
business. That is why set rules of when and why you will get out of the
losing side of your synthetic option become paramount to your 10ng-tern1
success.

S)llthetic Puts
Synthetic puts face the same challenges that synthetic calls face. In this
instance a synthetic put is comprised of buying a call and shorting the market. When the market moves in the direction that the trader wants, the
protective call option will be afflicted by loss. When the market moves in
the direction that the trader doesn't want, the protective option will gain.
This is the nature of the synthetic option. Exiting the losing trade quickly
will test the prowess of any trader.
Failure to Break Out In Figure 8.5 we take a different approach. The
primary trade is a spot euro transaction. We use a futures call option to
protect against any sudden moves to the upside. The futures options, as of
this writing, are more liquid than the spot euro options and ultimately more
reliable.
The top half of the figure is the spot euro contract. The market has
penetrated the 50-day MA, confirming weakness.
In Figure 8.6 the euro currency finds support at $1.34 and begins to tum
around. Eventually it hits the 50-day MA on the way up. This is definitely
the cue to exit the spot euro position. A small loss is accumulated while the
market moves sideways. The call option gains value from $1.36 to $1.40,
netting 4 cents on the option position and bringing in approximately $5,000
in profits.
This example is simply meant to show you that the synthetic call can
be implemented in any forn1at. Even if there are no benefits to be gained on
a decreased margin rate, it does not mean that a protective option cannot
pick up the slack if the market moves against your primary position.

139

Replacing Traditional Options with Synthe tic Options

FIGURE 8.5 Euro Before
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

.~

...

........

..

~

.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.......

.........

~

~ wi:wF;"~~"''''--~t'"''''''"::=-~F'''::---:CMW''-,."..,.- D&i0F:~-0iiif.MT'-''''-i1102101 '
~SpotEll1o

, ," '''''aftfti7 ~'

FIGURE 8.6 Euro After
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . A ll rights reserved.

'SlI( ,r,T)

;;:;::::~ ~

... . =. . . . . .. . . . . )

~

f

M,,4IOiw""~-<"'"iWiiWr'""'~:--'-wli/iil"""""_J 0

140

BASIC STRATEGIES

Trading Resistance
The S&P 500 in Figure 8.7 is coming off of a triple top. The RSI is turning
down, indicating a collapse from the market being overbought. The 50-day
MA is fast approaching the price. Everything is indicating a possible breakthrough to the short side.
This market can be attacked either as a full-size contract or as an Emini
contract. However it is tackled, the mechanics are the same. A call option
is purchased at 1570 and the market is shorted at 1572. A two-point gap
dictated by the option pricing puts you as close to an at-the-money option
as you can possibly get.
With this market our profit target is obvious: the point of support at
1526. This would give the trade 46 points in profit on the short position. For
a full-size contract, that translates into a profit of $11,500, minus whatever
we could potentially lose on the call position. An Emini S&P 500 contract
would net $2,300 for the same 46 points.
The spread margin for a full-size contract can be as low as a few thousand dollars compared to a full margin of $22,500. In order to get the
maximum profit, it may be worthwhile to trade the full-size contract as a
synthetic call and tap into the spread margin rates instead of the Emini S&P
500. The ability to implement this type of strategy is 100 percent dependent
on how flexible your brokerage will be. It would also mean that you may
not be able to unmarry the option and the contract, even if the option is

SP.()67: S&P500"'dex(PH)Cacijuq(O.IIy ....)

~z::::.: •.• •• .• • .•. • • •.• . . . . . . . . .. . . . ..~~J
:

....-'\

-

~~" "''''i';o~~. v_-~

-Wi;m---·~;--~-O'2tim--'·~~.lJUI~~u··6~---·~;·-..·o;.n;;o;..-·m-.;'---~dU!!!!:_--~ . ----~~---..,~
S&PSOO RMilstMee

FIGURE 8.7 S&P 500 Before
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

141

Replacing Traditional Options with Synthetic Options

~
IS&P 500 Market Drop

l.!--~""'!!"Y_T

_

,......,.-.--,...~~

~

_

~ __

~_______ ~
'--_~.

. . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . : .· · :.:. ::::::~2t
~--..."...~.. -"''''''·.....c... ''..._

_ _ __ _ _- \

"t"~;__~,. ~1II1ll!t.:; •.-.~.'?~ ..,~~ ;;a.;,-.-;,.;;;;~~:.~II,l!U!Jl•...~:.....iW.~
•••

S&P 5Oj;I~~-P!9P

"

",

...

-

••

- ',

-

-- -

,

-

,

••••;;;;;; ••••

b

...,E

FIGURE 8.8 S&P 500 After
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

losing money, without getting slapped with a margin call to hold on to the
position.
In Figure 8.8 the S&P 500 not only hits the first target of 1526, it drops
even further to a low of 1475. This is a perfect example of the type of windfall that can occur when the rules of a trading system are adhered to. The
complete drop from 1572 to 1475 represents almost a doubling in the profit
opportunity.

CONCLUSION
There are benefits to using synthetic options for both swing and position
traders. There is the flexibility of the trade, the superiority over volatility,
and the elimination of the strike price. Synthetic options simply have a way
of outshining their traditional option counterparts, particularly when there
are clear signs that the market is about to break out, either into a rally or
into a collapse.
Synthetic options have overcome the limitations of time decay and intrinsic value as well. They leave the nasty greek calculations that pertain to
these elements in the dust. The synthetic option has the power to liberate
and protect your trading both at the same time. This is an unprecedented
leap in the world of risk management. The trade is protected from downside risk, margins are cheaper for the futures traders, and the synthetic

142

BASIC STRATEGIES

options still preserve the limited loss function and the unlimited profit potential of standard options.
No matter what the drawbacks to synthetic options are, they have the
ability to even the playing field between retail and professional traders in
one fell swoop. How a trader handles this newfound footing is entirely dependent on what his midterm and long-term goals are. The more realistic
his expectations are in understanding what profit and loss truly mean, the
easier it will be for him to adapt his style of trading to the hedged trading
that synthetic options represent.

c .. '\ P 'I' F, It 9

Everything in

Its Season

f it can be said that one concept in this book has most influenced every seasoned trader's idea of what risk management can be like, that
concept would be spread trading. The idea of seasonal spread trading
has been around since the inception of the commodities exchanges in the
United States. Based on the dual impact of storage and planting, seasonal
spread trading has greatly influenced the way all types of traders, retail and
commercial, interact with various commodities. The concept is very well
promoted, and had I not discovered the concepts behind seasonal spread
trading this book would not have been written.
There is a dark side to seasonal trading. Companies run radio advertisements and late night infomercials touting seasonal trading opportunities, without the spread component. These advertisements hyping up
seasonal opportunities are intended to create a sense of urgency.
AB harvest season approaches, you will see ads focusing on droughts
or floods that could affect com crop yields. AB summer approaches, there
will be ads that are intended to make us believe that American summer
drive-time behavior is a new phenomenon, although it is well known that
gasoline prices historically have increased during summer months. Commercials also promote natural gas prices when winter storms hit the northeastern United States. Other naturally occurring trading phenomena are
promoted but rarely understood. While all of these occurrences are based
on historical, well-known facts, the actual seasonal opportunities rarely
materialize the way they are promoted.
Seasonal trading has gotten such a bad rap that licensed NFA brokers
are legally required to tell their clients that seasonal trades cannot be relied

I

143

144

BASIC STRATEGIES

upon when making decisions. The clever statement used is "Past results are
not indicative of future returns. " Therefore, if you decide to take advantage of a seasonal trade, caveat emptor, buyer beware! Many traders, both
hedgers and speculators, have attempted to take advantage of any seasonal
trade or common market discrepancy by using spread trading. This simple
strategy requires the willingness to do two things-have a market bias and
be willing to both buy and sell contracts of a particular commodity in different months.
Spread trading is designed to simulate hedging, which forces clearing
firms to offer deep margin discounts to spread traders. Clearing firms do
this because the act of selling in one month and buying in another month is
assumed to be a protective trading activity-in other words, that one contract will protect the other from loss. By their very nature spread trades
are considered to be low-risk, high-profit transactions. Despite all the positives, though, they are still flawed. It is always possible that a spread will
narrow when you want it to widen and widen when you want it to narrow. In either instance you will find that not one but both trades are losing
money simultaneously.
In this chapter we first explore the long and the short spreads. Next
we look at various spread opportunities. While seasonal trades are great
opportunities to put spreads on, you can take advantage of other spread
opportunities that are based on what counts most: current market conditions. A retail trader who takes advantage of these additional spread opportunities moves out of the realm of fundamental guesswork into the realm
of financial arbitrage.

SPREAD OPPORTUNITIES
Spread opportunities can take multiple forms. Whether based on substitute
goods, differing time frames, or predictable supply and demand chains,
spread trading opportunities exist everywhere in some form or fashion.
Detailing all of them is a subject for another book. Therefore, I have narrowed down the spread opportunities to a few that are easily recognizable
and easily researchable and I provide some basic information that will take
you far in your spread trading, seasonal or otherwise.
First, there are two ways to trade the spread, long the spread or short
the spread. If you are long the spread the front month is expected to move
up greater in price than the further out month of the market that you may
be trading. If you are short the spread you expect the front month to fall
greater in price than the further out month of the market that you are
trading.

Everything in Its Season

145

Second, spreads operate in pairs and the difference in the price of a
pair over time is what is being calculated. As the spread pair increases
or decreases in value the joint value of their movement determines their
success. For those new to spread trading it can be shocking when a trade
appears to be successful until the difference between the two spread components is calculated and you discover that the actual difference between
the two contracts has decreased-which means you are losing money on
a long spread, or increased, which means you are losing money on a short
spread.
Finally, spread trades are affected by supply and demand. Since a
spread trade involves the same type of commodity with contracts spread
out over differing time frames , it is necessary to understand the life cycle
of the commodity that you are spread trading. If it's grains, you have to
understand the planting and harvest seasons; if it's natural gas you have
to know how natural gas is used both in the winter and the summer; or if
it's a currency then you need to know the policies of the central bank that
influences that currency.
Differing supply and demand needs at different times of the year can
have different effects on the contracts being held in the spread. One side of
a spread can end up moving quicker than another. These same contracts, if
you are spreading the futures contracts, can end up not converging with
their underlying asset counterparts. Shortages in crops can also impact
further-out months in a spread pair in unexpected ways. So while non-pair
traded contracts only have the influence of one set of supply and demand
factors a spread pair has to take into account the influences on each contract and how those influences relate to one another.
With these three factors in mind four different types of spread
opportunities are explored in this chapter. Professional traders have a
tendency to incorporate anyone, if not all four, of these spread opportunities into their trading programs. What makes these great is that they
are 100 percent accessible to everyday retail traders. No special software
is needed, no fancy mathematical algorithms, no neural networks. Good
old-fashioned price feeds are all you need to get started using these spread
opportunities.
These four different types of spread opportunities- the old crop/new
crop spread, the interest rate yield curve, futures price backwardation, and
price convergence of cash and futures-are all accessible. While I have
focused on only one type of commodity or exchange for each spread opportunity, keep in mind that all of the ideas are applicable to commodities with a similar profile to that of anyone of these opportunities. What
also makes these contracts exciting is that each one of these spread opportunities can be quickly spotted on a chart and then be acted upon
quickly.

146

BAS IC STRATEGIES

To get the most out of anyone of these different types of spread
trades a solid understanding behind their underlying principles is important. Knowing the "why" of what is happening is just as important as knowing the "what to do" when these scenarios arise. All of these spread trading opportunities have been around for quite some time. It's a good idea
to research past examples regarding these four types of spreads on the
Internet or in various books. In fact the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
has great tutorials on their web site regarding spread trading grains and
the yield curve. You also have to be willing to demo trade or paper trade
these spread trades before committing capital. If you have robust charting
software, these spreads can be back-tested for their effectiveness. However, your approach to these different spread trading opportunities will
entirely depend on your risk/reward levels and your trading plan. If their
risk/reward levels don't match up with your goals, move on to another set
of risk management tools.

