
Figure 4.16 Using MACD for Buy and Sell Signals

c04.indd 94

11/2/07 12:17:48 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

95

a bad idea to not only close the short trade but reverse the position
and buy additional stock for a new long position.
A good question to consider regarding managing the long position that we took at point B is this: Should we wait for the bearish
crossover, or do we sell the position earlier? Look at the price at the
right side of the chart. Even though the MACD didn’t actually drop
below the signal line until the last trading day shown, there are two
flags that should cause us to consider selling the position before the
bearish crossover. First, the histogram rises much more steeply about
a week after point B than what we’ve observed previously on this
chart. Second, the price rapidly rises to the resistance level and then
starts to show us potential reversal candle patterns. Given the nice
profit we realized in about two weeks, it would be prudent to exit the
position or at least bring your trailing stop up tighter.

Bollinger Bands
Overview

Bollinger Bands are moving average envelopes that surround the
price and become wider or narrower as the price volatility increases
or decreases. There are two bands, referred to as the upper Bollinger
Band and lower Bollinger Band, respectively. Because the bands
change with volatility, the price doesn’t often break through the
bands, although it will on occasion. Bollinger Bands must be compared directly to the stock price; therefore, the bands are overlaid
into the price window and not in a separate window.
Calculation

Although there are only two bands shown, the first calculation is actually a simple moving average of the price. The most common SMA
used in the construction of the Bollinger Bands is the 20-period.
While the 20-period SMA isn’t drawn, the upper Bollinger Band and
the lower Bollinger Band are then drawn a specified distance above
and below the 20-period SMA. The distance from the 20-period SMA
from which the bands are drawn is based on a standard deviation of
the data. A standard deviation is a statistical measure of volatility, or
data scatter. The equation for the sample standard deviation, used in
the calculation of the Bollinger Bands, is as follows:
Standard deviation  Square root (Sum (Xi  Xavg)2/n))

c04.indd 95

11/2/07 12:17:48 PM

96

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Where
Xi  closing price of period i
Xavg  average of n closing prices
n  number of periods
Most calculations use (n) in the denominator of the standard
deviation while others may use (n – 1). The reason for the difference
is that (n – 1) subtracts one (degree of freedom, in statistical terms)
to account for sampling error when the average is an estimate. This
point is included only for statistical accuracy for those who might
otherwise take us to task for this minor item. From a trading standpoint, this is a nonissue.
Given the standard deviation, the upper Bollinger Band is then
drawn at two standard deviations above the 20-period SMA. Likewise,
the lower Bollinger Band is drawn at two standard deviations below the
20-period SMA. Of course, two standard deviations is a common distance but, once again, this value may be adjusted. If the bands are
tightened to one standard deviation, for example, the bands will be
very narrow and will tend to generate buy and sell signals that won’t
be very useful. However, widening the bands by using three or four
standard deviations will capture almost all of the price data but won’t
generate signals very often. This is a balance between too tight and
too wide, which you’ll refine with practice.
Application

There are a number of ways to use the Bollinger Bands, including
identifying trend continuation when the price presses a band and as
a reversal indicator when price oscillates within the band. We’ll focus
this discussion on one of our favorites—as a breakout indicator following a period of consolidation.
As we’ve discussed, the Bollinger Bands will alternate between
wide and narrow as the price volatility changes. Occasionally, the
bands will tighten much more than normal based on the stock’s
historical behavior. When this happens, we see a squeeze occurring
because neither the buyers nor the sellers are taking control. Often,
this squeeze is accompanied by a decrease in volume. Think of this
situation as a pressure cooker. When the lid is placed on the buyers
and sellers, there is an increasing anticipation of who will ultimately
win the battle. Once the victor is identified, traders start moving in

c04.indd 96

11/2/07 12:17:48 PM

The Trader’s Toolbox

97

the direction of the winner. A squeeze, then, is often followed by a
strong breakout with increasing volume. The big question for you
as the trader is this: Which direction will the breakout go? Don’t
try to predict the future because if you get caught on the wrong
side of the breakout, your loss could be fast and furious. Rather, wait
until there is a clear indication of the move and then join the trade.
Often, the long and narrow squeezes generate the sharpest breakouts. Use whatever memory jogger you want, but here’s one of ours:
“The longer the fight, the sharper the flight.”
Example

Figure 4.17 clearly illustrates the Bollinger Band squeeze. Look at
how the bands narrow dramatically in the center of the chart. What
we look for is not a subtle narrowing that may or may not be considered a squeeze. The ideal tightening is one that jumps out at you
when you glance at the chart. In this example, it is possible that
you may have been fooled into taking a short position when the stock
started to push at the lower band. Without a trailing stop, you may
have then been stopped out for a small loss when the price moved
back into the band. That’s not a problem; that’s exactly why we use
stops. However, the true breakout is seen a short time later, and the
profit generated from your long position on the breakout more than
paid for the initial loss from the false start.

Figure 4.17 Trading a Breakout from a Bollinger Band Squeeze

c04.indd 97

11/2/07 12:17:49 PM

98

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Don’t Plow a Field with Your Mercedes
Hopefully, we’ve opened the horizon for you in understanding how
many technical tools there are available to the trader. While we’ve
spent a few pages on the technical aspect of these tools, we want to
emphasize two important points as we wrap up this chapter.
First, make sure the tool matches the task. When your stock is
trending, don’t use an oscillating indicator. As much as you enjoy
seeing where the Fibonacci lines fall, don’t use them in isolation
without confirming your trade with price and volume. We’ve given
you tips and ideas throughout this discussion but we don’t claim to
have laid out a comprehensive list for these indicators. If you find a
couple of indicators that you like to use, take a look at some of the
many great technical analysis references that are available and learn
more about each indicator’s strengths and limitations.
Second, always make sure you follow The Market Guys’ Keep It
Super Simple rule. After you do your study and decide which indicators to use, don’t get mired in adjusting the various parameters.
Certainly, find the level of sensitivity in each indicator that works
for your trading style. Just remember, though, that trading doesn’t
lend itself to a black box approach. That is, you’ll never have a program that lets you input market data and it will spew forth profitable trades so that you can lie on the beach and collect checks from
your broker. Reading charts is a language. Take the time to learn
the nuances of the language, and you’ll find the conversation much
more profitable.

c04.indd 98

11/2/07 12:17:49 PM

5

C H A P T E R

10 Common Mistakes Made by
Traders (And How to Avoid Them!)
“Nobody is worthless. Anyone can serve as a bad example.”

I

t’s interesting how our ingrained behavior repeats itself in many
areas of our life. Trading the markets is no exception. There are
behaviors and habits that we have developed ourselves or copied
from others. However they may have been acquired, we perpetuate
these habits because we’ve been using them for so long. We may
recognize that our habits and behavior aren’t helpful to our trading success, but they’ve become a comfortable part of our routine.
Thomas Jefferson recognized this propensity in individuals when he
authored the following phrase from the American Declaration of
Independence in 1776:
. . . all experience hath shewn, that mankind are more disposed
to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed.

In the following pages, we want to walk you through 10 of the
most common mistakes that we’ve observed in many thousands of
traders. While this is by no means a comprehensive list, we hope to
give you an advantage through the Pareto principle. If you recall
from high school statistics, Pareto taught us about the 80/20 rule.
99

c05.indd 99

11/2/07 12:18:58 PM

100

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

That is, most of the results come from fixing the significant few
problems. If you apply yourself toward understanding and avoiding
these 10 mistakes, you’ll reap the benefits of the experiences of the
thousands of traders walking the path in front of you.

Mistake 1: Marrying Your Stock and Finding Trades
that Aren’t There
As much as you may like trading your favorite stock, never lose
sight of the fact that it is a fickle partner to build a trading business around. Just about the time you think that the two of you have
an agreement whereby you place the trade and the stock gives you
the profit, an event will strike that brings reality to your agreement.
Sometimes the event will give you advance warning; other times, it
will strike with the swiftness and surprise of a rattlesnake. Either way,
if you haven’t taken the necessary steps to manage risk, you’ll pay a
handsome price for your fidelity.
There are many reasons why traders gravitate toward one or several stocks and trade them repeatedly. From our observation, probably the most common reason is that the trader has spent her career
with that company or within that industry and there is a comfort level
that comes from understanding the fundamentals. We often travel to
the beautiful country to our north, Canada, and speak to many traders at various seminars and expositions. Canada has a rich industry
in mining and energy, and many of our trading friends have worked
some portion of their careers in those fields. So we’re not surprised
when we start talking about uranium mining, for example, when we’re
presenting at a seminar. Often, a trader will ask us for our opinion on
how to manage a position that they have open. Upon reviewing the
charts, we see warning signs that the technical situation is pretty weak.
The stock may be in a downtrend, with various indicators signaling
her to sell. We start to get concerned when this same trader explains
the various fundamental reasons why the stock should be going
up. The comments take some form of “I know this company and
they’re overdue for a break,” “The industry has been stagnant for a
while and this is the season for good news,” or “This company has
never been in a downtrend this long before—they’ll rally.”
All of these comments reflect a belief in the company or industry that stems from familiarity. Of course, as we’ve seen many times

c05.indd 100

11/2/07 12:18:58 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

101

in the markets, the stock price does not always move in tandem with
the company performance. Good companies have weak stocks and
lousy companies have high-flying stocks. If you try to justify a stock
price in the face of technical evidence to the contrary, you might
still find yourself liquidating your position to cover a maintenance
call. Markets in general and stocks in particular have no requirement to behave rationally. The economist John Maynard Keynes is
said to have warned investors that although markets do tend toward
rational positions in the long run, “the market can stay irrational
longer than you can stay solvent.”
Besides coming up with great fundamental arguments about why
a stock price should move in the direction you think is right, a trader
who is married to a stock can just as easily construct a technical argument. Chart reading, as we’ve described throughout, is subjective. If
it were completely objective, then with enough time and effort, we
would be able to program a black box trading system that takes the
market data and gives us our lineup of high-profit trades. We know
that the reality is much different. Ten traders may see 10 different
signs in the exact same chart. We would certainly expect all 10 to
identify key features such as the overall price trend and volume trend.
But there will always be a little variation in where these traders identify support and resistance (unless they’re all using the same moving
averages) or which candlestick pattern is the prevailing signal.
In our example, we’re assuming that each trader is reading the
same chart. The fact is, charts almost become like trader fingerprints.
Each trader has a unique layout that they’ve tailored to their liking.
I prefer to analyze daily candlestick charts with a 20-day SMA and a
50-day SMA. You like the daily bar chart with the 50-day EMA and
the 200-day EMA. Neither of us is right or wrong and the difference
in our charts will result in differences in our interpretation, however
great or slight. It’s like the story of the blind men and the elephant.
One grabbed the elephant’s tail and proclaimed the beast to be like
a rope. Another grabbed the elephant’s trunk and said the animal
was a great snake. A third reached for the leg and declared that the
creature was most like a tree. By this point, I’m thinking that one
more grab and they’ll collectively figure the elephant to be a giant
waffle iron.
The mistake that the loyal trader makes here is that a chart can
be tweaked enough to tell the story that you want to hear. If you
think a stock should go higher, you can almost always find a chart

c05.indd 101

11/2/07 12:18:58 PM

102

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

style, time horizon, and technical indicator combination to bolster
your belief. An unbiased observer may recognize the machinations
that you went through to “prove” your claim, but you’ll be blind to
it yourself. As we covered in Chapter 1, a trading plan will help you
remain as objective as possible. If you need to pull out the Chaikin
volatility indicator to support your bias when you’ve never used that
indicator before, your trading plan should help to highlight the deviation. At that point, evaluate whether you’re analyzing your chart or
looking for the warm fuzzies for a conclusion that you’ve already
reached.
Figure 5.1 shows a chart with three separate trends identified. Is
this stock in a downtrend, an uptrend, or channeling? The short-term
trend is upward, but it’s reaching a resistance level marked by the
downtrend and channel lines. You can start to see how you can make
a good case for whatever decision you reach in advance. The goal of
chart reading should be to create the chart and let the data speak to
you. You should be doing the listening here, not the talking.
Finally, and this is where the marriage analogy strays from a true
marriage, why would you want to hold yourself to a few stocks when
there’s a world of opportunity out there? Simply put, you can have a
lot more fun and reap greater rewards if you don’t limit yourself to
the one or two stocks that you’ve always traded. Sometimes even the
best stocks go flat or become highly volatile (we guess this is where

Figure 5.1 Using a Chart to Support a Bias

c05.indd 102

11/2/07 12:18:59 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

103

the marriage analogy comes back to real life!) and you’d do well
to just leave them alone. In the U.S. markets alone, there are over
10,000 stocks to trade. Add to that the options markets and international markets and the choices are practically endless. In down
markets, there are stocks making new highs and vice versa. Our
experience has taught us that most traders find it difficult to sit on
their hands for extended periods without placing a trade. Without
the buffet of stocks that the full market offers, these traders will find
a trade in their favorite stock, even if it’s not there.

Mistake 2: Failing to Accept a Loss
One of the key differences between a seasoned trader and a novice
is their attitude toward a loss. A seasoned trader doesn’t hesitate to
take a loss when the trade starts to move against him. In fact, we
would go so far as to say that the sign of a mature trader is an attitude
of welcoming a loss. We suggest celebrating a loss if the loss is small
and within the defined risk plan. As a trader, logging small losses into
your trading diary is the surest evidence that you have a plan that is
working to protect your positions. It is far better to accept a small loss
than to take careless risks that expose you to a significant loss.
It’s not surprising that this tendency to avoid a loss exists since
most of us come to trading from other professions. Due to the technical nature of financial markets and the challenge of pitting oneself
against the ranks of highly intelligent and worthy traders, the trading profession especially attracts successful individuals from such
fields as engineering and the sciences. For an example, let’s look at
the case of a medical doctor specializing in the field of obstetrics.
Throughout his education, internship, and practice, he’s taught to
exercise his profession at a level that permits no failures. It is beyond
consideration to accept a “loss” in the sense that we’re describing.
To reason that there is an acceptable loss level and that the successes
will offset the losses on balance doesn’t even enter into his thinking.
Furthermore, by continued study and practice, this doctor will only
raise his expertise and the likelihood of a “loss” diminishes to virtually zero. Now this same doctor, after years of practicing medicine,
decides to take his accumulated earnings and trade his personal
portfolio. His experience has taught him that a loss is unacceptable,
and now he begins to apply that logic to his trading. In short order,
he realizes that his self-imposed requirement of a zero-loss strategy

c05.indd 103

11/2/07 12:18:59 PM

104

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

is the very recipe for his failure. When he discovers that it is possible
to lose on 7 out of 10 trades and still be a successful trader, he has to
shed the mind-set that brought him to his initial level of success. If
his first profession accepted only a 30 percent success rate, he would
certainly not be welcome in the delivery room!
We can’t mention this point enough: It takes only one loss to
wipe out months or years of profitable trading. If you have $100,000
in your trading account and you take a 50 percent loss, you end up
with $50,000. To return to breakeven, you need to get a 100 percent return, though! You took a 50 percent hit but you must double
your balance to get back to where you started. That’s why you must
protect yourself against the single catastrophic loss. The best way to
do that is to take small losses along the way when your trade moves
against you.
Figure 5.2 is a picture of the classic dilemma facing a trader
when it comes time to sell a position. Notice that the moving average
is trending downward. Also, look at the fact that the stock price is
no longer making new highs. It seems to have settled into a trading
range, so the trader who refuses to accept a loss begins to get comfortable holding the position. The problem here is that if you buy a
stock, the only way you make money is if the stock price rises. Not
going down is not the same as going up! Since we don’t have a crystal
ball that lets us see behind the black curtain to the right of the chart,
we’ll assume that this trader holds the position open.

Figure 5.2 Deciding When to Take a Loss—View 1

c05.indd 104

11/2/07 12:18:59 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

105

Now we have a little more information on what the stock has
done. After deciding to hold the trade in spite of the fact that the
stock wasn’t making new highs, we see in Figure 5.3 that the stock
dipped hard shortly afterward to below $45. Following the dip, the
stock inched its way back up to $51. In retrospect, this trader should
have taken his loss at $54, but $51 isn’t looking so bad, considering
that it was about $6 lower just a couple of weeks earlier. Here’s where
the trader starts to justify his actions. “Aha,” he says to himself, “it’s
a good thing I didn’t sell the stock. Look, it’s coming back, and I’ll
soon have a profit.”
Of course, this rationalizing flies in the face of good trading practice since the stock is still in a downtrend. Worse, the stock has risen
right up to the moving average resistance line. It is at this price level
that we expect the sellers to start moving in with enthusiasm. But
the trader who refuses to accept a loss holds on. The driving force
behind his trading has become hope.
Figure 5.4 shows us the point at which the pain really starts to set
in. Having passed on the opportunity to close the trade for a minor loss
when the stock was trading at $54, the trader now faces a gap-down selloff on extremely high volume. This trader only dreams of the chance
to close the position at $50 now that the stock has collapsed to $34.
Understand in this example that the stock didn’t drop out of the blue.
There were warning signs galore: a downward trending moving average, failure to make new highs, and climbing to resistance and failing,

Figure 5.3 Deciding When to Take a Loss—View 2

c05.indd 105

11/2/07 12:18:59 PM

106

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 5.4 Deciding When to Take a Loss—View 3

just to name a few. We’ve had traders come to us in situations just like
this and ask us how they can protect themselves against strong gapdowns like this. Our first question to them is, “Why in the world were
you still in this trade in the first place?!”
It is the rare case where a stock will collapse without any warning
signs of weakness. Whether it be a failed support, a shift in volume to
the sellers, or simply the end of the uptrend, if your stock isn’t going
up, get out!
