
THE 0.618/1.618 RATIO RELATIONSHIP
In an uptrend, as seen in Figure 8-15, when the market retraces back to the
0.618, U-turns, and bounces back up, it is slowing down. It is like a car
traveling 35 MPH in a congested business district. After the bounce, it will
then usually rally to the 1.618 extension before it bounces back down.
Because it is slowing down, it may even bounce at the 1.27 level of resistance first, creating a small a, b, c, d, between the C, D. In a downtrend,
when the market retraces back to the 0.618, U-turns, and dips, it, too, is
slowing down. It may bounce at the 1.27 extension of support first on its
way to the 1.618 extension. When it hits the 1.618 extension of support, it
will probably bounce back up.

THE 0.786/1.27 RATIO RELATIONSHIP
In an uptrend, as seen in Figure 8-15, when the market retraces back to the
0.786, U-turns, and bounces back up, it is really slowing down. The car has
now entered into the neighborhood traveling at 25 MPH. After the bounce,
it will only rally to the 1.27 extension before it bounces back down.

146

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Because it is slowing down, it may first create a small a, b, c, d wave
between the C, D. In a downtrend, when the market retraces back to the
0.786, U-turns, and dips, it, too, is slowing down, like a car traveling at 25
MPH. Because it is slowing down, it may first create a small a, b, c, d wave
between the C, D after the bounce. It will only dip to the 1.27 extension of
support before it bounces back up.

SMALL a, b, c, d’s FORM INSIDE C, D’s
Now that we know that the market moves at different speeds, we need to look
a little deeper into that movement. If the distance between a C and a potential
D is substantial, and there are no fundamental announcements, the market
often forms small a, b, c, d’s between the C, D. This is important to recognize
because most traders are very impatient and want instant gratification. If a
trader has entered the market long or buying, every time the market begins to
retrace or dip, the trader starts to panic and is tempted to exit.
A good habit to get into is to envision the market movement before you
execute the trade. Draw out how you envision the future wave will be. Try
to figure out the amount of time you will need to be in that trade. Then
decide to be a scalper, a day trader, or a long-term trader before you enter
the market. This will keep you from getting frustrated and emotional as you
trade. You must never forget the ebb and flow of the markets and that these
markets wave. It is a natural wave. Very seldom will they race to your
target, regardless of how much you want them to or how little time you have
set aside for trading. The market moves at its own pace, not ours.

THE VALUE OF ADDING THE FIBONACCI NUMBERS
TO YOUR TOOLBOX.
Let’s put everything you have learned so far together to increase your
percentage of finding a winning trade. The natural law of the Fibonacci
numerical sequence is not capricious, it works on every time frame and in
every market. It is just as valid in the Forex as it is in the stock or
commodity markets. As a matter of fact, anywhere you can pull up a
financial chart, on any time frame, you will see the Fibonaccis in action.
I will never forget one class I taught in Sydney, Australia, when I met an
older gentleman, named John, who introduced himself to the class by stating:
“I have come to take your course because three years ago, I bought $250,000
worth of Qantas stock at $2.00 a share. I told myself when it hits $5.00 a share,
I’m selling.” He proceeded, saying, “That #@*#@* stock went to $4.90 cents

CHAPTER 8

THE FIBONACCI SECRET

147

a share, looked at all my sell orders, laughed in my face, then U-turned and is
now back around $2.00 a share. I came here to figure out what happened and
why I was so greedy and didn’t sell at $4.90 a share. That was my retirement
money.” This reminded me of a saying my dear friend and mentor Fred
Gronbacher taught me, it goes something like this: “The ignorant must suffer.”
I told John, and the class, “After I teach you how the markets work, on
the last day of the class, we will pull up a chart and look at Qantas stock.
Mark my words, and write this down right now.” Everyone grabbed a piece
of paper and started writing. “On Saturday, when we pull up the chart, at
$4.90 there will be a bearish candlestick formation at a D Fibonacci extension level followed by an uptrend line break, the reversal will create a
bearish ‘king’s crown,’ and the market will begin to make down A, B, C, D
all the way down to $2.00 a share.” I would have showed all of them at that
moment what I was talking about, but it would have been of no value until
they finished the course.
After class on the third day, we pulled up a Qantas chart and, sure
enough, right before everyone’s eyes was one of the most beautiful evening
stars at a D Fibonacci extension level. This was followed by an uptrendline
break, a bearish king’s crown, and down A, B, C, D’s. John jumped up out
of his seat as he was sitting on the first row and, in front of 45 people,
grabbed me, gave me a bear hug, and kissed me on my cheek. The class
began to laugh, but as John pulled away, he looked at me with a tear in his
eye, whispering “Thank you, chief!”
It has been from countless moments like these, shared by great people
like John, that I have found my true destiny in life. I have learned we make
a living by what we get, but we make a life by what we give.

CONCLUSION
Knowing where to get into the market and where to get out, and why, is
about as close to the holy grail that you’ll ever get. Understanding that
nature exists in the market, and how it works, places the trader at a huge
advantage. It allows a trader to wait for the retracement bounce at a preprojected retracement number, having the market move in their direction
from entry, which is every trader’s dream, then riding it to the preprojected
corresponding Fibonacci extension.
As you read the step-by-step rules of trading a trend, try to envision the
movement of the market and the trading process. This methodology works
on all time frames and in all markets.

148

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

In life, the more we try to avoid financial suffering or any kind of suffering, the more we suffer because what we think is mysterious many times is
nothing more than simple knowledge that needs to be understood. You need
to learn to become financially empowered instead of financially vulnerable.
Nothing I teach is to be feared, only understood. Have the courage to become
empowered in Forex, only then will you be successful in trading Forex.

STEPS TO BE FOLLOWED WHEN TRADING AN UPTREND
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Draw all uptrend lines and downtrend lines, inner, outer, and
long-term. (This will help to determine if the market is in an
uptrend, downtrend, or if a trend line has been broken, signifying
the potential end of a trend or a reversal.)
Find the latest upward A, B and use the Fibonacci tool on your
trading software to draw the Fibonacci retracement and extension
lines.
Find a C buy-entry at a convergence, such as a Fibonacci
retracement level, upward trend line, morning star, tweezer bottom,
or bullish engulfing candle.
Find the projected Fibonacci D extension, as well as four levels of
past resistance. Find the closest level of resistance to the Fibonacci
extension. Place a limit exit order 10 pips in front of, or before it
hits, either the Fibonacci extension or the level of resistance
(remember when the bulls score a point it always pulls back).
Look at your potential financial risk with your protective stop-loss
order. If you can’t afford the potential loss should the trade not work
out, then stay out and do not trade!
Pull out your trader’s checklist that you have created or the one
supplied by Market Traders Institute. Create a trading plan and
trade your plan.

STEPS TO BE FOLLOWED WHEN TRADING A DOWNTREND
1.

2.

Draw all uptrend lines and downtrend lines, inner, outer, and longterm. (This will help to determine if the market is in an uptrend,
downtrend, or if a trend line has been broken, signifying the
potential end of a trend or a reversal.)
Find the latest downward A, B. Use the Fibonacci tool on your trading
software to draw the Fibonacci retracement and extension lines.

CHAPTER 8

3.

4.

5.

6.

THE FIBONACCI SECRET

149

Find a C sell-entry at a convergence, such as a Fibonacci retracement level, downward trend line, evening star, tweezer top, or
bearish engulfing candle.
Find the projected Fibonacci D extension, as well as four levels of
past support. Find the closest level of support to the Fibonacci
extension. Place a limit exit order 10 pips in front of, or before it
hits, either the Fibonacci extension or level of support (remember
when the bears score a point it always pulls back).
Look at your potential financial risk with your protective stop-loss
order. If you can’t afford the potential loss should the trade not work
out, then stay out and do not trade!
Pull out your trader’s checklist that you have created or the one supplied by Market Traders Institute. Create a trading plan and trade
your plan.

Fibonacci numbers are really significant and play a big part in our
lives. Learning the Fibonacci numerical sequence and trading ratios adds a
very important tool to your trader’s toolbox.
Many traders fail because they are too busy trying to tell the market
what to do. Do not try to tell the market what to do—that is like telling the
rapids to step aside because you want to leisurely swim upstream. It is not
going to happen. Learn how to read the markets. Let it tell you what it is
going to do and then go with it.
There is a reality as you trade, and you need to accept the fact that you
cannot make money 100 percent of the time in the market, even with the
knowledge of the Fibonaccis. But you can execute your trades 100 percent
of the time using productive trading rules and become a winning trader,
even by only winning 50 percent of the time, provided you maintain the
right equity management.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

9

A

P

T

E

R

THE REALITY OF
THE FIBONACCI
SECRET
WANT TO DEDICATE this chapter to all the families who lost loved
ones in the September 11, 2001, tragedy, as well as the countless
millions who were affected by that day.

I

FIBONACCI MARKET MOVEMENT ON SEPTEMBER 11, 2001
On September 11, I learned that adversity causes some men to break and
even crumble, whereas others willingly rise to the occasion and break
records. Americans, on that day and the days that followed, proved that
difficulties are meant to rouse, not discourage.
I think back on how that day started. It was nothing but blue skies
and another beautiful day in sunny Florida. As a matter of fact, the whole
east coast of the United States was free of clouds. I was trading from
my office at home, expecting an average non–fundamental trading day

151
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

152

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

(see Chapter 10). I was trading the euro, the British pound, the Swiss franc,
and the Japanese yen all against the U.S. dollar. All of a sudden, all four
currencies shot in the opposite direction of their current movement, as
if they had been shot out from cannon. I sat wondering what was going on.
I was sure there were no scheduled fundamental announcements and,
even if there were any announcements, an aggressive price movement after
an announcement is approximately 240 pips in any specific direction
and these markets had just moved approximately 500 pips! I was in shock.
“Today is going to be a huge bloodbath for those traders who don’t
have any stops or protection, and one exceptional pay day for others,”
I thought, still not knowing what had caused such tremendous market
movements.
All of a sudden, my phone rang, and my friend from Ada, Michigan,
told me to turn on my TV.
He said, “A plane hit the World Trade Center.”
I responded, “Unreal,” and sat in disbelief, wondering how a pilot could
not see those towers. Being a pilot myself, I thought maybe the pilot had
fallen asleep or had a seizure. Just a few minutes later, a second plane hit
the other tower.
The World Trade Center had special significance to my wife and I.
While we were dating, I wanted so much to impress my wife and capture
her heart that I would occasionally take her to New York. And just about
every time we went, we visited the World Trade Center and ate at Windows
on the World, the restaurant at the top of the first tower. Till this day, we
hold those memories dear to our hearts.
All of a sudden, the news flashed, and the announcer reported that a
plane had just struck the Pentagon and further stated, “It now appears
America is under attack.”
As we continued to watch this incredible, horrific event take place, I
witnessed another amazing event unfold. As I turned to the markets and
watched the currencies move, they moved in near perfect harmonic
Fibonacci sequence, as if their movement was orchestrated by the finest
market conductor in the world.
Figure 9-1 shows the movement on an hourly chart of the Swiss franc
traded against the U.S. dollar. The Swiss franc fell 500 pips within four
hours. After it bottomed out, it retraced immediately back to the exact
Fibonacci 0.382, retracement level, bounced there, and then retraced
further to past support, which was located at the Fibonacci 0.618 retracement level. There it bounced like a ball, hitting a concrete ceiling and then
fell first to the 1.27 Fibonacci extension level, finding temporary support

CHAPTER 9

THE FIBONACCI SECRET

153

FIGURE 9-1 CHF/USD (One-Hour Chart)

there before it moved to the designated 1.618 Fibonacci extension level,
where it bottomed out, and settled down finding the final level of corresponding support in the down A, B, C, D move. Many other currencies
responded in the same way.
Witnessing this tragic event and the market’s methodical response was
confirmation that the market is not this mysterious, chaotic place that most
people fear. It is, in fact, a place where organized chaos and perfect balance
exists, regardless of the situation. I witnessed the science of matter and
energy interacting—the ebb and flow, the yin and yang, the action and reaction, all confirming that humans are the market.
Over the next few weeks, I couldn’t help but think about what I had
witnessed. Very little focus at that time was on the financial markets of the
world. After all, America shut down the stock market for an entire week
after September 11.
As the world searched for answers, the financial markets moved in
near-perfect Fibonacci balance. Figure 9-2 is a chart of American Airlines
stock, which was one of the airlines used in the attack. As you can see in the
chart, the week before September 11, the market had already broken an

154

FIGURE 9-2

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

American Airlines (Hourly Chart)

uptrend line and entered into the sell zone. The stock then bounced off the
backside of the uptrend line before it crowned and entered into its free fall.
You can see the gap after September 11 when the stock market was closed.
A week later, when it opened, the market free-fell to the 1.618 Fibonacci
extension, forming a morning star confirming the bearish achievement of
the 1.618 extension, and then proceeded to the 2.618 Fibonacci extension,
but not before it stalled at the 1.618 extension.
Figure 9-3 is a chart of the Dow Jones Industrial. As you can see in the
chart, in the two weeks before September 11, the market had already
broken an uptrend line and entered into the sell zone. The Dow did not
bounce off the backside of the uptrend line, rather, it kept dipping and waving as it fell, creating down A, B, C, D’s. A week after, when the stock market opened, the Dow opened right at the 1.618 Fibonacci extension to the
point, bounced up from there, then U-turned and proceeded onto the 2.618
Fibonacci extension, as if the stock market president or director instructed
the 1.618 extension as a numerical opening.
If I really didn’t know better, I would have to believe there was a conspiracy going on in the market.

CHAPTER 9

THE FIBONACCI SECRET

FIGURE 9-3

155

Dow Jones (Hourly Chart)

Figure 9-4 is a chart of the S&P (Standard and Poors). As you can see,
this chart somewhat emulates the Dow. After September 11, both markets
(the S&P and the Dow) kept dipping and waving as it fell, creating down A,
B, C, D’s, and opened a week later in front of a 1.618/2.618 Fibonacci
extension convergence from a previous down price swing, falling exactly to
that convergence to the point, bouncing up from there, displaying an
engulfing bullish candlestick formation, then U-turning and proceeding
onto the 2.618 Fibonacci extension of the latter swing.
Watching the markets move during and after September 11 changed my
life forever. The knowledge of the Fibonacci numerical sequence and how
the numbers remained true to the sequence, even in times of tragedy,
became one of my defining moments. I know that life can only be understood by looking backwards, but it must be lived by looking forward.

FIBONACCI RETRACEMENTS EVERYWHERE
I was in Vancouver, Canada, teaching a group of traders about the
Fibonacci numbers in a conference room with a perfect view of the ocean

156

FIGURE 9-4

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

S & P 500 - Standard & Poor Indices (Hourly Chart)

and the Rocky Mountains. As I went into greater detail about the Fibonacci
retracement and extension numbers, I asked them to look at the mountains
in the distance and envision a Fibonacci rally retracement and extension in
the mountains, as seen in Figure 9-5. They sat in total disbelief as I pointed
it out to them.
As if that was not enough proof, I asked them to look to the right and
envision Mother Nature creating a downtrend, as she created the mountains
accompanied with a downtrend line (see Figure 9-6).
Things in life don’t change, we only change the way we look at them.
Next time you are in the mountains, take the time to marvel at what Mother
Nature created and how she did it in a numerical sequence. Or, the next time
you are in an airplane, look down when you fly over a river and witness firsthand how gravity takes the river to the oceans or nearby lakes (see Figure 9-7).
Destiny is not a matter of chance, it is a matter of choice. If Columbus
didn’t discover that the world was round, somebody else would have. I guess
part of my destiny is to point out to the world that the Fibonaccis can be
found just about everywhere in nature, even in the market! Mother Nature
obviously felt so strongly about the Fibonaccis that she wrote it in stone.

CHAPTER 9

THE FIBONACCI SECRET

FIGURE 9-5

157

Fibonacci Sequence Seen in Mountains

Look at the Fibonacci Retracements
and Extensions in Nature

Copyright 2005 by Market Traders Institute, Inc.

If you ever have the opportunity to visit the Beverly Wilshire Hotel in
Beverly Hills, California, please pay special attention to all the marble used
in the bathrooms of their suites. The marble displays one of the greatest
examples of the Fibonacci ratio numerical sequence written in stone as
seen in Figure 9-8.

FIGURE 9-6

Fibonacci Sequence Seen in Valleys

Look at the Fibonacci Retracements
and Extensions in Nature

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

158

FIGURE 9-7

Fibonacci Sequence Seen in Rivers

Look at the Fibonacci Retracements
and Extensions in Nature

FIGURE 9-8

Fibonacci Sequence Seen in Marble

CONCLUSION
Life moves quickly, and it only takes one split-second to change it forever.
September 11 proved that to most Americans.
I have come to learn that this world does not evolve around mankind,
mankind evolves around nature. Mankind is not nature, it is only a part of

CHAPTER 9

THE FIBONACCI SECRET

159

nature living in this world, no different than all the other living creatures in
the world. Unexpected things, even tragic events, happen to all living creatures. Most are totally beyond our control. It is not the tragic events that
take place that change us forever, rather, it is what we do with our lives—
the decisions we make after the tragic event takes place—that define who
we are. Those critical decisions can build and create a beautiful life or they
can destroy it.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

10
A

P

T

E

R

FUNDAMENTAL
ANALYSIS
FUNDAMENTAL ANNOUNCEMENTS ANALYSIS
Countries are managed, to a large degree, like companies. Some countries
have a single leader they call a president, prime minister or king, much like
the CEO (Chief Executive Officer), President or Managing Director of a
Company. Other countries have a ruling body called a house of commons,
a senate or a congress, much like a corporation’s board of directors.
Countries produce goods or services for consumption and so do companies
(see Figure 10-1).
Companies issue stock certificates enabling individuals outside the
original founders to participate in its growth and financial benefits, just
as countries do with their currency. The currency you carry around or
place in a savings account is your stock certificate or part ownership of that
country.
If a company grows, as a rule, the stock certificate increases in value.
If the company incurs too much debt, has a bad year or two, or ends up with
bad leadership, the share value decreases. A country is the same. If the
country grows economically in comparison with other countries around the
world, the value of its currency will grow in proportion to the devaluation
of another country’s currency.
If you have acquired a sufficient amount of currency from a particular
country, whether it be by inheritance or by hard work, you may choose
161
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

162

FIGURE 10-1

Country Versus Company

Countries Are Like Companies
Country
Has a president
House / Senate
Employees
Issues Currency
Manufactures
Imports / Exports
Fundamental
Announcements

Company
Has a president
Board of directors
Employees
Issues Stock
Manufactures
Imports / Exports
Fundamental
Announcements

to keep it in that country. If you are educated about the world economy, you
may prefer the economic stability of another country versus the one
you live in and choose to save your money elsewhere. For example, let’s say
you live in Venezuela and do not feel safe with the way the leader is running
the country but you feel fairly secure about America. You may earn your
money in Venezuela but save it in America by converting your bolivars into
U.S. dollars.
What happens to the value of a stock when earnings did not meet
expectations, or an officer is caught stealing from the company, or the
president sells 80 percent of his shares or holdings in the company? The
value of the company share goes down. Investors start to believe that
management is not keeping its eye on the ball, they become insecure
about the company as a whole, and they begin to sell their stock.
When more people sell shares of a company versus buying shares, the
value of the share goes down. Conversely, what happens if a company
announces that it has created a revolutionary product and will need to
increase its employees by 20 percent? Investors may get excited and start
a buying frenzy of the company stocks and drive the share value up. The
news that comes out about a company, good or bad, is called a fundamental
announcement.
Countries and companies both have fundamental announcements,
which have similar effects on the value of a country’s currency as it will
