
book_c20.qxd

12/20/06

2:40 PM

Page 189

CHAPTER 20

Presenting
Our Findings

oddy wore his oldest suit the next day. This was to show off in front
of George Sisler. The fact was that the only thing that could impress
George Sisler would be a ton of interest rate data.
And we had it.
Winnipeg George and Roddy had hardly slept on Saturday or Sunday
and had produced an astounding amount of information. On that Monday
morning I had done some of my own research, finding the time by taking a
half day off work. I hadn’t seen Roddy or Winnipeg George that morning,
so they didn’t know what I was going to say. But it would dramatically increase the profits in the system that we were following.
At lunchtime we met in the dark lobby of Sisler & Company, and we
were buzzed onto George Sisler’s trading floor right on time. I could tell
that Roddy and Winnipeg George were unimpressed, to say the least, with
the offices. They had heard more about Sisler than I had, and so they’d expected to see a sparsely decorated office, but not a downright ugly one.
Later Roddy would tell me that he was going to sign Sisler up for a subscription to Martha Stewart Living magazine.
George Sisler had set aside an hour for us, and some of his traders
gathered around as well. He explained that they were curious to see what
we’d discovered about interest rates, since they had been doing their own
research. And then we let Winnipeg George launch into our presentation:
“Mr. Sisler, our basic conclusion is that interest rate differentials lead cross
currency values by several months if not more. I want to start off by telling
you how we approached the project and then, in a roundabout way, let you
know how we can use this information in our trading.”

R

189

book_c20.qxd

12/20/06

190

FIGURE 20.1

2:40 PM

Page 190

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

The interest rate differential is 3.75 percent.

“Sounds fine to me, boys. Let’s dig right in.”
Winnipeg George opened his laptop and produced a chart. “You can
see on the graph here that between February 1986 and January of this year,
there have been some wide fluctuations in the difference between the interest rates set by the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan. The dark
grey bars in the bottom of the chart represent the numerical difference between these rates. For example, in January 2004, at the far right edge of the
chart, the base interest rate set by the Bank of England was 3.75 percent.
The Bank of Japan was entering the fourth year of its zero-interest rate policy. So the difference between the rates was 3.75 percent. Does that make
sense?” (see Figure 20.1).
Sisler nodded. “Yep. Gotcha so far.”
“Now,” Winnipeg George continued, “The thin line floating above the
grey bars is the spot rate for the GBP/JPY currency pair. And now it becomes quite simple to analyze the chart. Let’s start at the far left and work
our way forward. We can notice that in 1990, the two central banks diverged farther from each other than they have ever since—the difference
between the base rates was over 10 percent in May of that year. But the
spot rates kept rising even afterward. In fact, between May and August
1990, the pair rose an additional 2,200 pips, even while the interest rate differential started to actually fall lower” (see Figure 20.2).
“This same dynamic plays out over and over again, all the way up to
the present time. The conclusion is that it takes the market time to digest

book_c20.qxd

12/20/06

2:40 PM

Page 191

Presenting Our Findings

FIGURE 20.2

191

The interest rate differential drops.

the changes in interest rates, so that it is actually possible to use the interest rate differential to forecast future moves in the spot market.” Winnipeg
George took a deep breath and waited.
Sisler did not speak.
“Folks, what do you think?” he asked to the traders who had gathered
around.
One trader spoke for everyone else. “That is a boatload of data. And it’s
fantastic.” Then he looked at Winnipeg George and posed the question that
all of Sisler’s traders were dying to ask: “Can I have a copy of that?”
We all laughed. “Of course,” replied Winnipeg George. “No problem.
We did this for the GBP/USD, the GBP/CAD, and the GBP/CHF, too. You
can have all of that.”
Sisler then spoke up. “So how does this fit into a system you’re already
following?”
“Well, sir,” replied Roddy, “You see, we don’t really have a system that
we’ve been following. These interest rates combined with some of the support and resistance stuff that Harry’s been studying, well, we think we’ve
got something good we can follow in the long term.”
Sisler nodded. “I like what I see. Very much. Where did the two of you
go to school?” he asked.
Winnipeg George answered that he had attended Yale. Roddy had graduated from the London School of Economics. Then Sisler repeated, still
looking at the graph: “I like what I see here.”

book_c20.qxd

12/20/06

192

2:40 PM

Page 192

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Then it was my turn to speak up.
“I think I’ve also found something that might be a good addition to this
research.”
Everyone looked at me, eager to hear what I could add. Suddenly, I realized that they were including me. I was part of their world. It felt strange,
and it felt right. I hoped I didn’t screw any of this up. I started: “Mr. Sisler
asked me a few weeks ago to find a way to produce a carry trade on a retail
platform, since that’s what I’ll be trading on for the foreseeable future. He
also said that the purpose of the carry trade is to earn interest at a very low
risk. At first I didn’t understand how it would be possible, since the standard carry trade done by hedge funds requires lines of credit with Japanese
banks, or access to currency options and fancy formulas for figuring the
future value of currencies. I can’t do any of that. But I did find something
on a retail platform that can’t be used by a bank or a hedge fund. And it
might be even better.”
Everyone now sat on the edge of their seat. To them, this was better
than a movie. If I had told them I needed them each to sing the theme song
from the Brady Bunch before I continued, they would have all broken
into song.
“What I found is that I don’t need options. I don’t need futures contracts and I don’t need lines of credit with Japanese banks. I can just buy
the GBP/JPY in one account, and sell it—or hedge the buy trade—in the
other. That way, I would be pip-neutral. I wouldn’t earn or lose any pips at
all in either account because they would be matched against each other.”
“But Harry,” began Roddy, “you’re gonna get charged interest in the
sell-side account.”
“Ha!” I cried out. “That’s what I thought. I did. But I was wrong. I found
three currency dealers that don’t charge interest.”
“What? That’s impossible. The dealer would go bankrupt offsetting the
trades and paying the interest themselves.”
“That’s right. Here’s what I found. Today, I asked a sales trader on the
floor who his clients were. Not specifically, you know, but just in general.
And he named three or four retail dealers that I hadn’t ever heard from. He
also added that they were always heavy on one side or the other—he noticed that these clients rarely had a balanced or hedged portfolio of currencies. It didn’t mean anything to me at the time so I asked what the
significance was. He said that these retail currency dealers were probably
making fairly reasonable, and hugely profitable, bets that their clients were
going to lose all their money.”
Winnipeg George’s eyes lit up. “So why offset the trades in the first
place? They’re not getting paid by the spreads. They’re betting that most of
their clients are going to lose all their accounts—so they trade against their

book_c20.qxd

12/20/06

2:40 PM

Presenting Our Findings

Page 193

193

client directly and then take the entire amount of the losses when the
trades go badly.”
“Right,” I answered. “So I knew, naturally, that if they were not offsetting the majority of the positions, that they wouldn’t care about interest
payments. So I called one of them up and said I was interested in opening a
large account, something in the neighborhood of a hundred thousand dollars. And that I preferred not to pay or be charged interest.”
“And they agreed?”
I nodded. “The account rep had to check with his manager, but then
came back quickly and agreed to do it.”
Sisler was now superimpressed. “You could earn a lot of money just in
interest alone in a trade like that. Are you going to do it?”
I laughed. “Are you kidding? I’ve got the paperwork filled out already.”
“How can you be sure this will last?” asked one of Sisler’s traders.
“I can’t,” I replied, “but I’m going to make the most of it while it lasts”
(see Appendix A).
We sat for a while longer and talked with George. A few of the traders
asked if I would let them put some money into the retail carry trade, and I
told them I’d talk with them later about it. They didn’t want to talk later
about it: They wanted to split the profits and go in as soon as possible.
These were traders who were used to pouncing on a good idea and bleeding it dry. Sisler was as much impressed with the fact that I’d found a way
to game the retail currency trading system as he was with the charts.
I promised that we would test the retail carry trade and let them know
soon.
Winnipeg George and Roddy bought me lunch afterward and told me
that they were working on something else—something big, something that
they couldn’t tell anyone else. And that they would share the secret with
me at the end of the week.

book_c21.qxd

12/20/06

2:41 PM

Page 194

CHAPTER 21

Back in
the Game

ow is a good time to bring you up to speed on another trade that
Winnipeg George and Roddy and I planned and took. This would be
my first live trade since I had blown up my account. Even with Harvey’s blessing, I still felt reluctant to take any live trades. I wasn’t sure
about his insistence that I fund the account with the same amount of
money that I had lost—$5,000—and I started to wonder if I could plan live
trades as well as I planned the paper trades.
Notwithstanding my doubts, my wife and I funded the account with
$5,000 of our savings and on Monday I met up with Roddy and Winnipeg
George.
We had been waiting for days for the EUR/USD to fall down to 1.1850.
I liked the foundation for the trade—it was based on the EUR/USD line at
1.1850. The week before, on Wednesday morning, Roddy called up to the
law firm and started screaming into the phone. He was elated that he’d
stayed in his short Euro position (the one from my first Post-it note) all the
way from 1.2200, and now it was getting close to 1.1850. He got Winnipeg
George on the phone, too, and we talked about what we wanted to do. This
was all happening in between the other trades that I’ve already described.
After just a short discussion, Roddy decided that if the EUR/USD fell
within 20 pips of the 1.1850 mark, then he was exiting his sell trade (taking
a huge amount of profit) and reversing to go right back in the other direction. Winnipeg George and I wanted to see the pair fall all the way to at
least 1.1855 and then buy. By 9:30 A.M., Roddy got his wish when the pair
fell as low as 1.1866 and he went long (see Figure 21.1). At the time, I was

N

194

book_c21.qxd

12/20/06

2:41 PM

Page 195

Back in the Game

FIGURE 21.1

195

Roddy goes long.

still paper trading and decided that even though I would only be risking
fake money on the trade, I didn’t like it until it fell further.
We needed a take profit target on the trade and that was relatively simple: Roddy wanted to hold on for 1.2200 and not let go. Planned like this, it
would be a complete reversal of the exact trade that he had just exited.
Roddy was convinced that until September we were going to see a rangebound market, and he could just keep buying and selling between these
levels. He started off with a stop loss of 116 pips, so that he would be protected all the way down to 1.1750, or 100 pips lower than the original entry
idea of 1.1850 level.
This made me wonder why he just didn’t simply wait for the original
entry price in the first place. Anyway, this is what Roddy’s trade looked like:
Buy EUR/USD 1.1866, Stop: 1.1750, Target: 1.2200
As I said earlier, Winnipeg George and I stayed out of the trade for the
time being. A few other of our trade ideas opened, and I paper-traded those
as well. Then came the weekend, the Sunday meeting with Harvey Winklestein, and the Monday meeting with George Sisler. On Tuesday, the
EUR/USD fell to 1.1850 and I took my first live trade since blowing up the
account. Winnipeg George and I kept the 1.1750 stop loss and 1.2200 profit
target that Roddy had used.
Five days later, I was having a cow. In fact, we were all a bit afraid for
me—the EUR/USD, which at first had cooperated, had now fallen all the

book_c21.qxd

12/20/06

196

FIGURE 21.2

2:41 PM

Page 196

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Harry’s first live trade since blowing up the account.

way down below 1.1800 and was rapidly approaching our stop-loss (Figure 21.2).
But it never fell farther than 1.1757, and we narrowly escaped stopping
out. This trade stayed open through one more scare, on May 13, and then it
shot like a rocket to 1.2200 on May 27. We had held the trade for over a
month, and gained 350 pips. We twice experienced drawdowns of 90+ pips,
but we never stopped out. I had traded 1 mini lots, for $1 per pip. I had
risked $100 of my account (100 pip stop loss times $1 per pip, or 2 percent
of my account). I gained $350 on the trade.
That was a 7 percent gain in my account, for one trade. Could I repeat
this again? Was it simply a fluke that I could produce a profit in my account? Could it last?

book_c22.qxd

12/20/06

2:42 PM

Page 197

CHAPTER 22

Return to the
Thirty-First
Floor

discovered the very next week why Anderson had been so kind to me.
One evening not long after the EUR/USD trade was closed, he called up
to the law firm and asked if I would pay him a visit downstairs. Downstairs on Floor 31, I found him working in one of the glass conference
rooms off the trading floor. I knocked lightly on the glass and he waved me
in. Once behind the soundproof glass, he welcomed me and asked how I
was doing.
“I’m doing very well, Mr. Anderson. I want to say thank-you for providing some space for me to work. It has been a huge help. I don’t know what
to say, really.”
He chuckled. “No, I suppose that I wouldn’t know what to say in a spot
like this, either. But you haven’t only taken from us. You’ve planned some
good trades, Harry. We made some good money from those trades, Harry.
I’m sure we wouldn’t have taken them without you. And they came at a
time when the London office was having some problems, not to mention
some of our own problems here, which you’re already familiar with. Having you here took some focus off those challenges.”
“I was happy to be a profitable distraction,” I replied.
“Well, profitable is the operative word here,” he added. “That’s why I
wanted to give you this,” and he handed me an envelope.
“What’s this?” I asked.
“It can’t be a commission based on your trades, or a bonus, since you
don’t actually work for us. But we can consider you an outside consultant.”

I

197

book_c22.qxd

12/20/06

198

2:42 PM

Page 198

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I desperately wanted to look inside the envelope right then. How rude
of me. But who wouldn’t want to know how much was in there?
“I appreciate this. I don’t know how to every repay you. If I can ever
help out, in any way, I don’t even know how I would, but I’d be willing to do
anything.”
He replied so quickly that I imagined he might have been hoping that I
would make that offer. He said: “If you don’t mind, I would like to ask you
a favor.”
“Sure. Anything.” Now I started to feel uneasy.
“There are some files upstairs that I’d like to take a look at.”
Phew. That wasn’t a big deal at all. Files, I could get those. We had
stacks of Anderson/Ernest Wellington files upstairs. For all I cared, he
could camp out in my cubicle and I’d bring him files and coffee until morning. “Which ones do you need? I can make copies and bring them down in
the morning, or even tonight, if you need something right away.”
“Tonight would be fine, Harry,” he replied. “I need the some documents
from a case entitled Falkenburg v. American Banking Company, and it’s
from at least a couple of years ago.”
I remembered the file. It was a case nearly as large as the Anderson
matter. But what would he want with that?
“I’m not sure I understand.”
“Well, Harry, I’m technically not supposed to see those files, but I’d like
to. There is some information from those proceedings that never made it
into the court filings, some information about a few of our former traders
that are now causing us some problems.”
“I can talk to Mr. Johnson about it in the morning. I’m not sure what
he’s going to say about this.”
“Harry, I’d prefer it if you didn’t mention this to Herb. Or anyone else at
the firm.”
“What?”
“The Falkenburg case ended in a settlement right before the jury
started deliberations. Part of the settlement agreement included the sealing of the files. Mr. Johnson has pretty much made it known to me that he
can’t help me out. That’s where you come in.”
Where I came in? I thought. This isn’t where I came in! This is right
where I would be stepping off. Anderson’s kindness made so much more
sense now that he was asking me to violate the trust I had with the law
firm. Giving him access to those files wouldn’t just cost my contract with
the firm, but could land me in jail.
“I can’t do that, Mr. Anderson.” I looked him in the eye. “I just can’t do
that for you.”
He looked down at the envelope in my hand. I looked down at it, too.
So he was offering money not for the trade ideas, but to buy some
sealed case files! All along he’d wanted those files, and he thought he could

book_c22.qxd

12/20/06

2:42 PM

Page 199

Return to the Thirty-First Floor

199

get them through me. If I had been as dishonest as I’d been a few weeks
ago, I would probably have taken the money and given him the files. But
now I had a life ahead of me as a trader, and no reason to destroy the trust
I’d regained with Mr. Johnson and the law firm.
I handed the envelope back to him. “I can’t accept this from you. I have
too much to lose.”
He smiled warmly as if I’d just offered him a brand-new car or a back
massage. He wasn’t bothered at all, and I could see how he got his reputation for staying cool even when traders were blowing up, or the London office was losing money, or when he was being sued. “No hard feelings,
Harry. I understand where you stand on this issue. That’s all.”
And then I left.

book_c23.qxd

12/20/06

2:42 PM

Page 200

CHAPTER 23

Settling
My Tab

wo more weeks passed. I hired a replacement at the law firm and
planned to work alongside the newcomer for at least a month to
make a smooth transition. I met in person with Roddy and Winnipeg
George every evening in my cubicle at the law firm to plan longer term
trades. We no longer met down on the trading floor, and I let them know
that I no longer felt like I could take up space at Ernest Wellington without
giving something back. They didn’t care one way or the other—every day
they still called me at least once every hour to give me a blow-by-blow
account of how our trades were doing. In fact, they watched my retail trading accounts for me during the day so that I didn’t have to take my focus off
my work.
Roddy and Winnipeg George’s secret was that they had raised nearly
$25 million from their clients and they were setting out on their own. They
had formed a hedge fund which they called, and I am not making this up,
Paycheck Partners. By July, it would be up and running and they wanted
me to join them as a trader. I wouldn’t own any of the company (which I
didn’t care about), but at the end of the year, I would be paid 30 percent of
all the profits from the trades that I made.
I talked to Harvey before I accepted the position, and he wondered
why I was even asking his opinion. It was obvious to both of us that this
was a chance of a lifetime.
Harvey and I had spoken in person every day since the day that he had
shown up at Mass. Within a couple of weeks, he was repeating a lot of what
he already had said, and although he always checked my notebooks to

T

200

book_c23.qxd

12/20/06

Settling My Tab

2:42 PM

Page 201

201

make sure that my wife had signed off on the trades that I took and the risk
that I incurred, he kept telling me that he was no longer worried about
what kind of trader I would become.
I could sense that he had less and less that he wanted to teach me, and
more and more that he wanted me to teach him about what I was doing. He
didn’t need the information because he was going to trade like me; rather,
he wanted me to teach him what I was doing so that I could prove that I
was focused.
And I was definitely focused! I only traded support and resistance
from the daily and four-hour charts. That doesn’t include the retail carry
trade, which I opened the very next week with $20,000, and which I talk
more about in Appendix A.
A short time later, I reported to Harvey that I’d taken my 50th trade and
that 35 of them had been profitable; 15 had been losers. My average winner
was about 164 pips—less than I would have liked. I found that I had a hard
time hanging on to the winners. The longer that I held a winning trade, the
more worried I became that it might turn into a loss. But at least I was having winning trades in the first place.
The flip side of this was that the losers were really small. I averaged 67
pips per loss, much less than I had expected, and for the same reason. I just
couldn’t stand to watch myself lose money, and I was very likely to cut a
losing trade fast and then get back in later, than I was to ride it out for a big
drawdown.
I still traded for $1 per pip, and I’d made what to me seemed an astonishing number of pips: 4,774. I had nearly doubled my trading account. The
next step would be to double the size of my trades from that point forward.
Harvey took me to Little Italy to celebrate over a pound of olives, Italian
sodas, and a mountain of pasta.
Harvey approved of my plans to double my trade size.
“You’re going to find that you can make more money, more quickly
from your trading at the firm,” he said. “So you might want to pause in
some of your own trading so that you can focus. Or you might find that you
don’t really want to work at the hedge fund—you just want to rent some
space from them and trade there. Don’t overcommit to any course of action right now. I have a feeling that you can do great things on your own.”
“I don’t know how I can repay you,” I told him.
“Well, there is a little matter of payment that we need to settle,” he
replied.
“I’m happy to do anything that you want me to do. Pay you anything
that you charge. I already get the feeling that you don’t want my money.”
“Right,” he said. “I really just want your time.”
“You have it. As much of it as you want. I don’t know what I can really
do to help you, but I am willing.”
