
07 506455-ch03.indd 44

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

Chapter 3: Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall Street

45

Investors who want to ride Buffett’s coattails could just invest in Berkshire
Hathaway. But given his successful long-term investing record, it’s not surprising there’s an industry out of helping investors mimic him. There are more
than 4,000 books with Buffett’s name in the title, according to Amazon.com.
Others try to mimic what Buffett does. There’s a mutual fund called the
Wisdom Fund, which attempts to mirror Buffett’s investments. Still others
try to figure out what Buffett is investing in by reading Berkshire Hathaway’s
annual report, a document that discloses all the firm’s large holdings.
It’s never a good idea to blindly buy stocks just because another investor did.
Still, reviewing the stocks that pass Buffett’s fundamental analysis might be
a good place to start. The list of Berkshire Hathaway’s holdings in publicly
traded companies can be found at www.buffettsecrets.com.
Blindly following moves of top investors isn’t an instant route to riches. That’s
especially the case when trying to take cues from Buffett. Buffett constantly
reminds his shareholders that he plans to hold investments for a long time.
And his holdings can also suffer large losses. For instance, had you bought
Tesco at the beginning of 2008 after seeing it was a top holding at the end of
2007, you would have suffered a 75% loss.

Checking in on Graham and Dodd
As much as Buffett is revered and admired, he, too was a student of fundamental analysis. Buffett has utilized and perfected the tools of professors
Benjamin Graham and David Dodd, who are discussed at more length below.
Graham and Dodd, whose names are synonymous with a method of investing
called value investing, trace their roots to Columbia University, which Buffett
attended.

The origins of value investing
Value investing, along with the work of Graham and Dodd, is usually central to
the work of fundamental analysis. Graham and Dodd explained that a stock is
really a claim on the cash a company is expected to generate in the future, or
its intrinsic value, as referred to above. Just know that if a stock is trading for:
✓ Less than the cash it will generate, then it’s undervalued and may be
bought.
✓ More than the value of cash a company is expected to churn out, it’s
overvalued.

07 506455-ch03.indd 45

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

46

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
Using fundamentals to see when a stock is priced right
But Graham and Dodd took things a bit further than just weighing whether
stocks were over or undervalued. Other lessons from Graham and Dodd
worth noting include:
✓ Protecting yourself. Buy stocks well below what they are worth, or their
intrinsic value. This extra cushion gives you a margin of safety in case
the business runs into trouble and the stock price falls further.
✓ Investing isn’t necessarily speculating. While it’s tempting to think of
Wall Street as a giant casino, Graham and Dodd explained that wasn’t
necessarily the case. If you’re buying stocks with little information about
the companies’ business, then yes, you’re betting or speculating. When
you speculate, you bet you can sell the stock to someone else for more.
But with fundamental analysis, you can become more of an investor
by understanding what you paid and what you can expect to receive in
exchange.
✓ Being cautious of companies with excessive debt. Companies that
borrow heavily to finance their operations may face onerous debt payments during difficult economies.

Figuring Out When to Buy or Sell a Stock
Most investors are frustrated by the difficulty of getting the timing just right.
Even professional investors complain that while it’s hard enough trying to
find the right investment and buy it at a good price, it’s even harder to know
when to sell. Fundamental analysis can help you with this because you’ll
learn how to estimate what a company is worth. As discussed above, knowing what a company is worth is very helpful, since you’ll know whether the
current stock price is higher or lower than what you think the company’s
value is.
On the flip side, the discipline of fundamental analysis can help you evaluate
when you might want to sell a stock. If a stock price is well below what you
think the stock is worth, why would you sell at that price unless you had to?

Looking beyond the per-share price
Many investors get obsessed with the per-share price of a stock. It’s easy to
understand why. When you buy a slice of pizza, for instance, you might not
think to calculate how much, based on the per-slice price, how much you’re
paying for the entire pie.

07 506455-ch03.indd 46

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

Chapter 3: Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall Street

47

But one of the basic premises of fundamental investing is just that. You want
to know how much you’re paying for your slice of a company, and how that
compares to what it’s really worth. And if there’s one aspect of fundamental
analysis you can use immediately from this chapter, it’s that the per-share
price of a stock, by itself, doesn’t tell you much.
Just looking at a company’s per-share price can lead you to make incorrect
judgments. Some investors, for instance, have puzzled over how shares of
Visa could trade for less than $60 a share while rival MasterCard commands a
price of more than $160 a share, since Visa processes more credit card transactions than MasterCard does. You might assume Visa is a better value than
MasterCard, especially since MasterCard is a smaller company than Visa in
terms of revenue. You will learn more about using revenue to compare the
sizes of companies in Chapter 6.
Fundamental analysis, though, will show you that Visa’s lower per-share price
doesn’t mean it’s a screaming buy. And that’s due to the use of market value,
perhaps the most basic thing fundamental analysts consider. Market value
tells you how much investors are paying for an entire company based on the
price of the single share of stock. Using the pizza metaphor, market value tells
you what the price of the whole pizza is, based on the price of one slice. You
can apply this information immediately to stocks, by using this formula:
Market value = share price × number of shares outstanding
The key parts of market value are:
✓ Share price: How much investors are willing to pay for a slice of ownership in a company. You can get a company’s share price from many
sources, ranging from your online brokerage firm, investing Web sites or
in the business section of your newspaper.
✓ Number of shares outstanding: The number of slices, or shares, a company’s value is cut into. The number of shares outstanding is available in
a company’s balance sheet, as described more fully in Chapter 6.
Applying market value to Visa and MasterCard reveals much more than
simply looking at their share prices does. The analysis shows that despite
its lower per-share price, Visa is actually the company with the bigger total
value. You figure this out by:
Calculating market value of Visa:
$60 a share price × 846 million shares = $50.8 billion
Calculating market value of MasterCard:
$160 a share price × 129.2 million shares = $20.7 billion

07 506455-ch03.indd 47

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

48

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
You can see that investors are in fact paying a greater amount for Visa than
MasterCard. Whether or not they’re paying too much is another question and
something you can explore in more detail in Chapter 8. But at this point, it’s
important to understand how fundamental analysis goes well beyond just
taking a look at a company’s share price.

Seeing how a company’s fundamentals and
its price may get out of alignment
You don’t need a long memory to remember how fundamental analysis could
have helped your investing. During the tech-stock boom of the late 1990s,
investors were so enamored with dot-coms, they were willing to pay boundless amounts for them. And just a few years later, in the mid-2000s, a housing
boom drove up shares of homebuilders’ stocks. What’s remarkable is that
there were two massive bubbles in just one decade. Fundamental analysis
could have helped you sidestep the intense pain after both these bubbles
inevitably burst.
Academics argue over why bubbles and manias occur with investing. And
you can leave that heady discussion to them. Just know that sometimes,
over-enthusiasm for stocks can drive their prices, albeit temporarily, to levels
that aren’t justified by their underlying businesses. Fundamental analysis is
one way to try to see when a bubble is forming and try to profit from it.
Even masters of fundamental analysis have difficulty timing bubbles just
right. Many analysts had warned that tech-stocks were overvalued in 1998, for
instance. These investors had to bear being wrong and missing out on huge
gains as tech stocks continued to soar in 1999 and early 2000.
Investors who pay attention to company fundamentals are often able to at
least recognize when a bubble is forming. Weak fundamentals, for instance,
were the tip-off for the dot-com bubble. More than a third of the 109 Internet
companies that failed had business models that didn’t bring in enough
revenue or had costs too high to ever make a profit, according to Boston
Consulting.
Fundamental analysis can help you recognize when stocks are rising too
much, well beyond what’s justified by their businesses. Investors will often
become charmed by story stocks, or companies that seem to have boundless potential. Consider the rise of satellite radio. Like many investment
ideas based on promise, the story was irresistible. Subscribers fed up with

07 506455-ch03.indd 48

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

Chapter 3: Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall Street

49

commercial-filled FM radio were rushing to sign up for monthly subscriptions
that gave them thousands of crystal-clear radio stations from satellites. Even
automakers were installing satellite radio players in cars. The growth of satellite radio companies looked unstoppable in 2000.
And most investors certainly took the bait. Sirius Satellite Radio’s stock
soared, racing to the point where it had a market value of $1.9 billion in 2000.
While the company was losing money, it told investors customers were signing up at a rapid clip and that subscription fees would roll in. Meanwhile,
the company continued to heavily spend on costly items, including paying
personality Howard Stern $100 million a year for five years, plus issuing him
nearly $200 million in stock. Investors continued to buy in.
But eventually, the investors who took the time to read the company’s financial statements with horror were proven right. Eventually, Sirius bought rival
XM Satellite in 2008, for form Sirius XM Radio, with hopes that it could gain
an advantage through being larger. Still, fundamental analysts spotted two
signs they routinely look for, including:
✓ Lack of profit: Even as the company grew, it continued to lose more
and more money. Losses at the company continued to surge, swelling
from $226 million in 2003 to $5.2 billion during the twelve months ended
September 2008.
✓ Large debt burden: As of 2009, the company faced the prospect of a
$1 billion pile of debt coming due. That’s the corporate equivalent of
your mortgage lender telling you that you have to pay your entire mortgage balance back next year.
Despite the glowing promises of the company, investors ended up suffering
as those promises didn’t pan out. The company’s stock price collapsed 99%
from the high in 2000 to less than 20 cents a share in February, as Sirius XM
flirted with bankruptcy until receiving a costly bailout from Liberty Media.
Fundamental analysis proved correct.

Using buy-and-hold strategies
with fundamental analysis
You might be thinking that fundamental analysis sounds like a good idea, but
fear that doing so might cause you to constantly change your opinion on a
stock. After all, companies report their earnings each quarter, and the new
data, in theory, could cause you to change your opinion on the stock.

07 506455-ch03.indd 49

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

50

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
But fundamental analysis doesn’t require you to constantly buy and sell
stocks. In fact, many investors tend to do their homework, buy a stock, and
hold on. They realize that constantly buying and selling stocks can be hazardous for your portfolio because it may hurt you with:
✓ Mounting trading costs: Every time you buy or sell a stock, it costs
you something. Certainly, you can reduce commissions by opening an
account with a deep-discount online brokerage, as described in Investing
Online For Dummies (Wiley). But the costs are still a factor, including
ones you might not notice.
There are two prices for stocks, the bid price and the ask price. The ask
is the price you must pay when you buy a stock. The bid is the price
you get when you sell. The ask is always higher than the bid, just like
the price you get for trading in a car to a dealer, the bid, is less than the
price the dealer will resell the car for, or the ask. When you buy a stock,
you’re paying a hidden fee, which is the difference between the bid and
ask, or the spread.
✓ Unnecessary taxes: Flipping in and out of stocks can end up making
Uncle Sam rich. If you sell a stock for a profit before you’ve owned it at
least a year, it’s a short-term capital gain. Short-term capital gains are
taxed at your ordinary income-tax rates, which can be up to 35%. On the
other hand, if you hold onto a stock for more than a year and sell it, the
highest tax rate you pay is 15%. By just holding on a little longer, you can
save a bundle on taxes.
✓ Mistakes: It’s tempting to think that you’re never wrong. And after
reading this book and applying fundamental analysis, you’ll be more
informed than many other investors. Still, it’s easy to make a mistake if
you sell too early.

Looking to the long term
While it’s not always the case, investors who rely on fundamental analysis
are often resigned to being patient. After all, when you’re counting on the fact
that the stock market and its scores of traders, portfolio managers, and other
investors are wrong, you can’t expect them to arrive at your way of thinking
overnight.
Fundamental analysis often works best when paired with a passive investing
strategy. With passive investing, you do all your homework, pick your stock,
and then wait. The stock might fall further. But it’s up to you to have the courage to trust your research and wait until other investors see what attracted
you to the stock.

07 506455-ch03.indd 50

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

Chapter 3: Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall Street

51

And because making money with fundamental analysis requires you to go
against the crowd, you’ll often need to buy the stock when you think others
are wrong. A few of the times where stock prices might, temporarily, undervalue a company include:
✓ The wake of an accounting scandal: When investors can no longer trust
a management team because the financial statements have been falsified, they might sell the stock indiscriminately. If the stock is adequately
beaten down to a point where you feel the company’s not being properly
appreciated, there could be opportunity.
Trying to buy a stock after it’s been “cooking the books” is extremely difficult. Since fundamental analysis is based on accurate financial accounting, making a decision based on false information is complicated and
beyond the scope of this book.
✓ Amid pending litigation or liability claims: Stocks will often trade at
discounts, or below their true value, when investors are worried a company might face massive claims. This has happened with companies
involved in tobacco and asbestos.
✓ Slowing growth: When a company matures, it may see the rate of increase
in revenue and earnings slow. When that happens, growth investors, who
buy growth stocks, may dump the stock so they can move on to the new
darling.
✓ Industry shifts: When there’s a major disruption to an industry, the
stocks in the group might get seriously punished. Following the credit
crunch, for instance, stocks in the financial sector lost 58% of their value
as a group in 2008. Certainly, not all banks and financial firms deserved
to be punished that badly.
Being willing to step up and invest in a company others want nothing to do
with can be lucrative. Beaten-down stocks that get rediscovered by investors
can rally strongly.
For instance, investors had to be brave and confident enough to buy stock in
Tyco in June 2002. The diversified industrial supply company was mired in a
scandal pertaining to alleged accesses by its CEO, Dennis Kozlowski. But by
the end of 2002, the value of the investment soared more than 250% as investors figured they overestimated the trouble the company was in.

Patience isn’t always a virtue
According to classic value investing, if you’ve done your fundamental analysis,
you can practically buy your stocks and forget about them. Unless there’s a

07 506455-ch03.indd 51

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

52

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
major change that warrants changing your opinion, which you can find out
about in Chapter 10, value investors hang on and wait for the market to wake
up. But the danger is, sometimes investors were right to dump the stock.
Overconfidence in fundamental analysis can turn a bad decision into a devastating one. The brutal decline suffered by Lucent shareholders is a classic
example. Lucent was born out of the technology arm of AT&T, which was
known for innovative patents for telecommunication and computing. Lucent,
considered a blue chip by many investors, routinely showed up on lists of the
most popular stocks with individual investors.
But the stock’s downfall remains an example of the dangers of hanging on too
long. The stock hit its all-time high of $85 a share in 1999 amid the technology
boom. Many investors looking at the stock’s falling market value figured the
company would come back. They kept thinking that as the stock fell to $75,
$65, and $55. But it didn’t come back. The stock collapsed to $2.34, the price
at which rival Alcatel offered to buy it in 2006.

07 506455-ch03.indd 52

9/24/09 10:06:42 PM

Chapter 4

Getting Your Hands on
Fundamental Data
In This Chapter
▶ Understanding what information companies must provide to investors
▶ Getting a grasp on some basic accounting and math for fundamental analysis
▶ Discovering how to access fundamental data right when they are released by companies
▶ Getting familiar with databases that allow you to access financial information

Y

ou might have your financial calculator or spreadsheet fired up and
ready to start analyzing fundamental data. There’s just one little
problem: You need to get the data first.
Luckily, when it comes to getting your hands on data, there’s never been a
better time to be a fundamental analyst. You’re able to get data faster, at less
cost, and with less technical expertise than ever before. The ability to obtain
financial data almost immediately from companies allows fundamental analysts to closely monitor how a company is doing.
This chapter will show you what types of fundamental data companies provide to investors, what form they come in, and when you can expect to get
them. You’ll also get a quick refresher on accounting basics you’ll need in
order to understand what’s contained in the reports when they land. Finally,
this chapter will show you how to obtain financial data, including a detailed
look at the treasure trove of fundamental data provided by the nation’s top
financial cop, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC.

08 506455-ch04.indd 53

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

54

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

Getting In Sync with the
Fundamental Calendar
Companies you can invest in don’t get to decide whether or not to give you
their financial information. And that’s a relief. Just imagine how haphazard it
would be if companies could choose. What if they just weren’t in the mood to
report their revenue or earnings in a quarter? If a retailer had a bad holiday
selling season, for instance, it could tell investors, “Sorry, we’re not going to
tell you how we did.” Such selective disclosure would be the corporate version of letting your kids only bring report cards home if they got all A’s.
In reality, publicly traded companies agree to be somewhat transparent.
Transparency is a popular buzzword in business, but it’s a noble goal. To be
transparent, companies must adhere to strict rules about what financial information they disclose, and must even meet deadlines. And this goes for nearly
all publicly traded companies, or those that sell ownership stakes of themselves to the general public who buy the shares. Similarly, when companies
borrow money from the public, they too, must disclose their financial results
to the public.
By taking the public’s money, companies agree to give investors quarterly
updates on their financial progress. Access to current and accurate fundamental data is one of your most basic rights when you either invest in or lend
money to a company.

Which companies must report their
financials to the public?
Just about any company you can invest in must follow financial reporting
rules. That includes companies that are publicly traded, as explained above.
But even some private companies, which haven’t sold stock, must provide
some financial information if they have $10 million or more in assets and
have 500 or more owners.
Most major stock market exchanges, including the New York Stock Exchange
and NASDAQ, require their listed companies to provide quarterly and annual
financial reports to investors. That includes foreign companies with shares of
stock that trade on either exchange.
Some private companies offering generous stock option programs to employees often find themselves eventually having to start filing financial reports.
Internet search company Google, for instance, was private for roughly six
years after it was founded in 1998. The company quickly hit the $10 million

08 506455-ch04.indd 54

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

55

threshold for total assets, meaning it was required to provide financial statements. At that time, Google decided it might as well become publicly traded
and sell shares to investors in an IPO since it was going to have to report its
financial statements. Google launched its IPO in August 2004.
