
The Complete
Trading Course

PART I
Foundational Principles

CHAPTER 1
Supremacy of the Trend
Where do you start when you first look at a stock chart? Are your eyes drawn to the indicators first?
Perhaps your chart has too many indicators and you don't know where to start. With so much
information for the technical analyst to discover, new traders often do not know where to begin or
what should guide them in structuring their price charts. Sometimes it can be helpful to remove the
indicators and focus squarely on price itself—after all, you've certainly heard the axioms “Price is
King” and “Only price pays.”
This introductory chapter will examine why trend analysis is so important to formulating your
trading plan. Using your assessment of the current trend structure as guidance for which indicators to
use and which to ignore, you will then be able to envision a clearer pathway ahead for the next swing
or directional move in price, and thus be better equipped to take advantage by trading the expected
move.
After all, you must start your decision-making process somewhere and you must be as objective as
possible, as opposed to subjective analysis which is prone to opinion, bias, and error. While
technical analysis is more of an art than a science—which leaves the chart open to interpretation—
you build your foundation from time-tested principles that guide your analysis each time you review a
chart and seek opportunities for profit. This chapter lays the foundation for successful analysis and
trading, starting with the underlying principle of technical analysis—the trend.

WHAT IS A TREND?
Before making any decisions about buying or selling a particular stock or market, you must first
assess the current price trend as a backdrop to further analysis. Afterward, you will be better able to
assess the longevity, magnitude, and probabilities of the current trend continuing. Before applying any
intermediate or advanced analysis methods, you should always start with a firm understanding of the
basic concepts of supply and demand, as revealed through the price charts. The best way to begin
your analysis is by simply quantifying the current trend objectively, be it up, down, or sideways.
While it seems so simple, many traders skip this step and jump right to the indicator signals, not
understanding that some popular indicators work well when a trend is established but then fail when a
sideways trend occurs. By objectively assessing the trend in place, you will then be prepared to take
the next step in your analysis. Let's start with the basic question, “What is a trend?”
Breaking it down into simplest terms, a trend is a series of price swings traveling in the same
direction over time. Most traders assess the strength of up-trends in order to find buying opportunities
in a prevailing trend that has been confirmed. In the context of a prevailing up-trend, traders will be
looking to put on new positions on pullbacks to expected support levels.

TREND

Trend is the prevailing tendency of the price of a security or market to move in the same direction over time. In the stock
market, trends are often divided into long-term or secular trends, intermediate term trends, and short-term trends.
Up-trend: A series of higher price swing highs and higher price swing lows over a given period of time.
Down-trend: A series of lower price swing highs and lower price swing lows over a given period of time.

In his book Technical Analysis Explained, Martin Pring gave us the best definition of technical
analysis—the method of making decisions to the likely future price movement of a stock based on the
past and current chart—with the following definition, which underscores all of our efforts as traders:
The technical approach to investments is essentially a reflection of the idea that prices move
in trends which are determined by the changing attitudes of investors towards a variety of
economic, monetary, political, and psychological forces.
The art of technical analysis is to identify trend changes at an early stage and to maintain an
investment posture until the weight of the evidence indicates that the trend has reversed.
For traders, the most important parts of the definition are the “identify trend changes at the earliest
stage” statement as well as the “weight of the evidence” portion. These two concepts underscore all
of the decisions you make as a trader or an investor. Let's break them apart individually.

Identifying Trend Changes Early
One of the most commonly accepted principles of technical analysis states that the trend, once
established, has greater odds of continuing than of reversing. If we accept this principle as true, then
the most profitable, lowest risk opportunities will come by trading retracement-style set-ups in the
direction of a confirmed, prevailing trend. Many new traders try to call tops and bottoms in a stock
and thus fight established trends, which often results in monetary losses and psychological frustration.
While all traders want to be the first to call reversals in markets, and indeed traders can make a
public name for themselves by accurately calling major turns in a market, it is important to realize that
for every correctly called market top or bottom, there are dozens if not hundreds of inaccurate calls of
tops or bottoms that lie scattered in the graveyard of market analysis and in personal trading accounts.
Some traders destroy their accounts by stubbornly fighting a trend, clinging to their opinions of what
the market should be doing as opposed to what the market is actually doing. Traders lose money when
they try to force their will on a market, and traders who fight prevailing trends can suffer major losses
as they trade against the probabilities from the onset.
On the other hand, a trend cannot persist forever; as such, downtrends evolve over time into uptrends, and then mature up-trends must devolve again into down-trends as the market cycle continues
throughout history. Chapter 7 describes the typical life-cycle of a price move from bottom, to top, to
bottom again. Those who do well over their trading careers are the ones who understand this
principle and act accordingly when the weight of the evidence has shifted, rather than remaining
committed to a losing position. The majority of this book will be dedicated to identifying trend
reversals as early as possible as you assess the weight of the chart evidence, which implies never
looking at one indicator or variable in isolation, but as a composite whole to the best of your ability.
While your goal should always be to determine trend structure, you must simultaneously be aware of
potential signals that a trend in its mature stage might be reversing. No matter what your emotions or
other anecdotal evidence suggest, you must be able to change your expectations once the price chart
gives a trend reversal signal, and not stubbornly assume that the current trend will continue forever.

Sometimes traders learn this lesson with one painful experience, as a child learns not to touch a hot
stove, though other traders may need to be reminded throughout their career that the best trades often
come in the direction of the prevailing trend, rather than against it.
You must be prepared to sell your position and take profits when the trend changes from up-trend to
early down-trend, just as you must also be able to act on any positive reversal in a down-trend which
is showing signs of reversing into an up-trend. It takes confidence to buy after a sustained down-trend,
just as it takes a strong fortitude to sell a position with profit once a market signals odds favor a turn
to the downside. Those who identify confirmed reversals at the earliest reasonable stage possible
will outperform those who are not as systematic in determining the health of a trend in existence and
the probabilities of continuation or reversal of the prevailing trend. We will be discussing this
concept in great detail.

Waiting for the Weight of the Evidence
As mentioned earlier, you cannot wager consistently on a trend reversing. Doing so will often result
in numerous losses and unnecessary frustration. Most of the easiest trades come from positioning
yourself in the direction of a prevailing trend, usually during pullbacks or retracements to support or
resistance levels, and assuming that the trend will continue rather than reverse. In those terms, you can
think of almost all the trades you take as either betting on a prevailing trend continuing or of a mature,
lengthy trend reversing. Do not make this decision lightly.
Many of the most successful traders have solid rules for assessing the markets or stocks they trade,
and their methods can be summarized as assessing the evidence—whether from fundamental,
technical, or quantitative methods—and making a determination of the probabilities of a market
continuing to rally or reversing into a down-mode. No single method is perfect, and no one method
can ever call all tops and bottoms in a market.
Over the lifetime of your trading or investing career, you will do better to use noncorrelated
methods to assess the probabilities from an unbiased approach to the best of your ability. In this book,
I will be sharing how to combine leading methods into a unified approach for assessing the
probability of the next likely swing or directional move in price. In so doing, you will be assessing
the weight of the evidence using methods that you understand and that interest you. Do not feel as
though you have to learn every single method of any trading system or strategy perfectly. By the same
token, do not give any one method absolute dominance over others. When you observe noncorrelated
methods and indicators such as moving averages, candles, divergences, and price patterns pointing in
the same direction, you will increase your odds of a successful trade outcome more than if you used
any one of these methods in isolation.
For example, if you see a reversal candle, it can be a bearish signal to exit a position. However, if
you fail to assess the weight of the evidence, or the context in which the reversal candle occurs, you
might be exiting a profitable position too early, or worse, if you chose to put on a short-sale position
(attempting to profit from a market decline) based on a single candle, you might subject yourself to an
unnecessary loss had you taken more time to assess the trend structure, volume signals, confirming
indicators, or any number of analytical methods before making a final trading decision.
It can simplify your task immensely if you think of trading as a measurement of the probabilities of a
trend continuing or of reversing, and taking specific entries and exits based on the developing
structure that the price chart reveals to you. You will enter at more favorable levels, place stops at

key points at the price where an idea will be proven incorrect, and play for realistic targets with exits
that are generated by the weight of the evidence that solves the “exiting too early or too late” problem
that most traders face.

METHODS FOR DEFINING TRENDS
“What is a trend?” seems like such an easy question to answer but, as you'll see, the answer can be as
simple as “higher highs and higher lows” or as complex as a linear regression analysis or other
statistical calculations. Despite the complexity (not to mention usefulness) of some mathematical
models, the best way to define a trend can still often be the simple principles defined by Charles Dow
in the early 1900s.
Charles Dow was one of the earliest researchers of technical analysis, and modern traders study his
principles of what developed later into the Dow Theory of technical analysis. Dow noted that an
uptrend required a higher high and a higher low to be valid, just as a downtrend required a lower low
and lower high to be valid. Dow noted that volume confirmed the trend, such that in the context of an
uptrend, volume rose during the upward swings in price and declined during the downward
corrections or retracements, just as volume rose during the downward swings in a downtrend and
declined during the corrections or upward retracements in the context of a trend. Modern day traders
have layered complex methods over these simple, basic principles.
Recall that early technical analysts did not have the benefit of computer charts as we have today.
Instead, they calculated charts each day by hand and placed a high emphasis on trend structure as
defined by price itself. This is called the Pure Price Method and it is still used today as one of the
most accurate and objective methods of defining a trend. In addition to the Pure Price Method,
contemporary traders use the Moving Average Method to assess the structure of a short-term,
intermediate term, and long-term moving average, paying specific attention both to the orientation of
the averages themselves, and the relation of price to these averages.
The preferred method combines both the Pure Price and Moving Average methods, as each give
similar signals and exact prices where a trend officially reverses. It will be these official
classifications that remove the subjectivity or confusion most traders experience when attempting to
label trends on price charts.

The Pure Price Method
Let's start with the simplest concept and move to more detailed definitions. As its name implies, the
Pure Price Method removes all indicators from the charts and builds the foundation for trend analysis
on the price itself. The method is only concerned with locating swing highs and swing lows while
comparing prior highs to recent highs and prior lows to recent lows. You can use a candle chart,
standard bar chart, or even a line chart to define trends using this method; sometimes a line chart can
be the best place to begin when objectively analyzing trend structure. The goal is to remove bias and
get a clear picture of the steady rising or falling rhythm of the price of the stock or market you are
analyzing and thinking of trading.
As most traders can recite without thinking, an uptrend is defined as a series of higher price highs
and higher price lows while a downtrend is defined as a series of lower price highs and lower price
lows. Using this phrasing as our departure point, let's see this definition in action.

Figure 1.1 shows a snapshot of the Dow Jones Industrial Average rising through 2006 to the
October 2007 peak. According to the Pure Price method, we are only concerned with key swing highs
and swing lows to develop our definition of the trend. Any change in the series of higher highs and
higher lows will be a warning sign of a potential reversal ahead, but until we see price either form a
lower swing low or a lower swing high, we must assume that the uptrend in place will continue and
trade accordingly in the direction of the prevailing trend. We will learn trading tactics in later
chapters, but this principle lays the foundation for all other analysis we layer onto the price trend
structure.
FIGURE 1.1 Dow Jones Industrial Average Daily Chart from 2006–2007

What Constitutes a Swing?
On the surface, the Pure Price method is deceptively simple, but the challenge comes from your
definition of what constitutes a price swing. Can one bar (day or week) be a swing? Does price have
to move a certain percentage to classify as a swing? Does a swing have to last a certain number of
bars? These are just some of the questions a trader must define in advance when labeling price highs
and lows.
Like most things you will discover as a trader, there is a balance you must achieve when defining
what constitutes a price swing. If your definition is too narrow, you will label too many swings and
arrive at false conclusions, calling a potential trend reversal far too early. If your definition is too
broad, you will not label enough swings and likewise arrive at false conclusions and call changes in
trend far too late. This is where eyes can be deceiving and simple mathematical models can provide
clarity.
Let's first start with time or duration. What you label as a swing depends on the timeframe you are
analyzing. On a five-minute intraday chart, a single price swing may last 30 minutes to two hours or
more. On a daily chart, a single swing might last weeks to months. On a weekly chart, a single swing

might last months to one year. Your chosen timeframe provides guidance for you in assessing the time
component in classifying what a swing actually is. Let's focus mainly on daily and weekly charts.
In Figure 1.1 we see a two-year span of time on the daily chart. During that period, we can label
four up-swings and three down-swings. Notice how the up-swings are longer in both time and price
range than the down-swings. In an uptrend, you would logically expect up-swings to both last longer
and cover more ground in price than the down-swings, or counter-trend swings. Figure 1.2 gives us a
closer look at the time period from January 2006 to August 2006 for specifics of the time and price
concept of defining a swing.
FIGURE 1.2 Dow Jones Industrial Average Daily Chart from January 2006 to October 2006—Swing
Duration and Percentage

The daily chart perspective reveals a series of higher highs and higher lows from January 2006
from 11,000 to the May 2006 peak above 11,600. On a lower timeframe chart, these would certainly
count as swings within a lower timeframe uptrend. However, do we count these when looking at the
daily chart itself? For almost all traders, the answer is no. Why? Doing so would take a definition of
swing that was too narrow, leading to a costly whipsaw and false classification of a downtrend taking
place in June 2006 (assuming that the early March swing down from 11,600 was a lower low then the
5-bar swing up to the late March 11,300 swing high was a lower high and that the May swing under
11,000 took out the lower low, defining a trend change).
It is better to classify the entire move from early May at 11,600 to mid-July 2006 at 10,700 as a
single down-swing in price, labeling the double-bottom pattern that formed as a single swing low on
your chart instead of labeling this up-swing as a lower high. The bounce rally in June 2006 from
10,700 to 11,200 that lasted 15 days and moved up 5 percent was also not enough to be classified as
an up-swing in price. When making the final decision, take into account time in number of bars on
your chart and percentage change, depending on your timeframe. Classifying swings seems easy, but it
is a skill that you will master with time and practice.

Remember, if your definition of swing is too narrow (in that one to five bars can comprise a single
swing) then you will be classifying too many swings which will lead to false classifications in the
context of a larger, broader uptrend. The following grid reflects generally accepted classifications for
swing definition for the daily timeframe of stocks or a market.
Consider the following parameters for using daily charts:
Price Percentage Change
Less than 5 percent is probably too narrow
From 5 percent to 15 percent is average and usually works best
Greater than 15 percent (depending on the stock) is probably too wide
Time Duration or Number of Days
Less than one month is almost always too narrow
From one to six months usually works best
Six months or one year is probably too wide
For the weekly chart, you would have larger parameters in all categories while for intraday charts
you would have smaller parameters in all categories. While most swings will be obvious to you on a
chart in hindsight, you will likely struggle as you start to apply this method in real time when you are
confronted with price moves that fall just beyond the comfort level of classification.

Trend Reversals
Now that you know how to label price swings as the building blocks for uptrends and downtrends, the
next task is to find the exact spot on the price where a trend reverses from an uptrend to a downtrend
and vice versa. While the Pure Price method can never call an absolute top and bottom, the lag time
satisfies Martin Pring's threshold of the “weight of the evidence.” In other words, pointing to a chart
and declaring a new high that occurs in real time to be the top of the market would not be taking into
account the weight of the evidence. However, waiting for price to form a lower low, rally to form a
lower high, and then decline to break under the recently formed lower price low would argue that the
weight of the evidence for trend continuity has shifted to favor a reversal, and would thus change your
definition of uptrend to a newly developing downtrend. In other words, there is a specific process
price must complete in order to declare a trend officially reversed. Of course we will be using other
indicators and methods, but we must start with the foundation and build from there.
By definition, a trend reversal using the Pure Price method occurs one of two ways, assuming an
uptrend is currently established. The easiest outcome is for price to break its series of higher highs
and higher lows by first making a new swing low, breaking under a prior swing low, and then rallying
to form a lower high beneath the recently established swing high. The reversal is only confirmed
when price turns back to the downside and breaks under the newly established low in price, officially
reversing the uptrend to a new downtrend.
The alternate method of trend reversal occurs when price is in an established uptrend and first
makes a lower high at a lower price than a recent peak and then swings down to break to a new low

beneath a prior price support or swing low in price. This method can call a trend reversal quicker but
also can have its fair share of whipsaws until price breaks under the newly established low.
Let's see an example of these concepts in Figure 1.3.
FIGURE 1.3 Two Methods of Pure Price Trend Reversals and the Exact Spots to Confirm Trend
Reversals

The image on the left shows the first method, where price in the context of a rising uptrend first
swings down to a lower low and then swings up to a lower high. At this point, odds are reduced for
trend continuation, but price has not triggered the official signal that the weight of the evidence
suggests an official reversal in trend. The signal, or precise trend reversal point, occurs exactly when
price takes out the newly formed lower low to confirm that a new downtrend has begun. As a trader,
you'll often find it better to wait for confirmation rather than to jump the gun and try to call tops and
bottoms early, especially in an established uptrend. However, once price does form a lower high and
then break beneath the prior low, then we can feel confident in our assessment that the trend has
reversed. Chapter 2 explains how momentum factors in to our assessment of trend reversals.
The image on the right side of Figure 1.3 shows the second scenario where the price reversal first
begins with a lower swing high and then immediately moves down for a lower swing low. The
aggressive or early trend reversal spot (Spot 1) occurs immediately as price breaks under the low as
labeled, which itself is not yet a lower low (as it made a higher low than the previous swing low).
This scenario can be more puzzling than the first scenario that leads with an observable lower low.
However, when price forms a second lower high and then breaks to a new swing low under the
prior new swing low which is labeled Spot 2 in Figure 1.3, we can be confident that the trend has
reversed, as we stood by patiently for the full weight of the evidence to come in. By this time
however, the downtrend is well-established and we have exited our long position or entered a new
short-sale position at a less-than-favorable price than had we taken the more aggressive Spot 1 signal,
but that only underscores one of the main realities of trading: You pay for confirmation.
There is a balance between gathering too much information (leading to late entries but higher
confidence) and not enough (leading to early entries with lower confidence that have greater odds of
being incorrect). We will discuss the finer nuances of these trade-offs in the discussion on aggressive
and conservative trading tactics in Chapter 8. Figure 1.4 reveals a real-world example of how the
Dow Jones Index transitioned from an uptrend to a downtrend after peaking in October 2007.
FIGURE 1.4 Dow Jones Weekly Chart: Transition from Uptrend to Downtrend
