
Dev-Stops7
Cynthia Kase coined the term “dev-stop” in her book, Trading ulith
the Odds, and devotes an entire chapter to the topic. If you have a
normal distribution of prices, then 1 standard deviation of price
change in either direction would account for about 67 percent of the
prices. Two standard deviations will encompass about 97 percent
of the prices. Market prices are not normal-they tend to be
skewed to the right-so some correction is needed in the standard
deviation to take into account this skew. This amounts to about a 10
percent correction on the first standard deviation and a 20 percent
correction on the second standard deviation.
While it’s not appropriate to go into calculations of the Standard deviation in this chapter, you might find the standard deviation of the average true range to be quite useful as a stop. Take the
average true range for the last 30 days and calculate the standard
deviation. The average true range plus 1 standard deviation plus a
10 percent correction factor would be one level of stop. The average
true range plus 2 standard deviations plus a 20 percent correction
factor would be another level of stop.
Channel Breakout and Moving-Average Stops
Just as the channel breakout and moving-average concepts can be
used as entries, they can also be used as stops. My personal bias is
that these sorts of stops are not nearly as good as stops based upon
the average true range or MAE. In addition, they are both stops and
profit-taking exits. Nevertheless, they are worthy of a brief discussion for the sake of completeness.
A common entry technique that has been used for many years
is the moving-average crossover. These were discussed extensively
in Chapter 8. When you have two moving averages, you basically
have a reversal exit. When you are in a position and the short average crosses the longer, you have both a stop to get you out of your
current position and a reversal entry signal to go the other way
(long or short, depending upon the direction of the cross). Of
course, the problem with such systems is that you are always in the
market and get whipsawed many times.

246

FART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

R. C. Allen” popularized the three-moving-averages system in
which you get an entry signal when both the shorter averages have
crossed the longer. This would mean, by definition, that the shortest average was now on top (or on the bottom). When the shortest
signal crosses the medium signal, you now get your stop signal.
However, you do not get a reversal signal to enter a short position
until both the short and medium averages cross the longer average.
Channel breakouts were also discussed in Chapter 8. You
might enter the market, for example, when prices make a new high
for the last 40 days. Your stop might also be a channel breakoutwhen prices make a new low for the last 10 days. This method has
the advantage of giving prices a lot of room, being well beyond the
noise, and has been used by many well-known traders. However,
it has the tremendous disadvantage of giving back a lot of profits
because your stop is both the worst-case protective stop and your
profit-taking exit.
Support and Resistance Stops

Support and resistance stops have also been mentioned earlier.
Typically, the trader will enter the market and look for areas of support and resistance on the chart. Stops will typically be placed at
the extremes of these levels. Some traders may be paranoid about
such stops because they seem so obvious. If so, you may want to
add a constant to the stop. Thus, you might have a stop at a support
area below your entry plus some constant.
Time Stops
Many traders and investors say that if a position does not go in
your favor fairly quickly, then it probably will not. As a result,
another common stop-loss method is the time stop. The time stop
simply takes you out of a position after a fixed amount of time if
you haven’t made a profit (or made a profit above some arbitrary
level).
One great trader said that he treated each day in a trade as an
entirely new day. If he could not justify getting into that trade on that
day, then he would simply close it out. This is effectively a time stop.

CHAPTER 9

Knowing When to Fold ‘Em

247

The choice to use a time stop is very personal. Don’t use one if
you are a long-term trader and have no way to get back in the market should your big expected move suddenlv occur. Don’t use one
if you have trouble getting back into a position you have exited.
However, if you like short-term trading, then time stops are probably an excellent addition to your arsenal.
Before using time stops, however, check out their effectiveness
within the framework of your methodology. If you decide to use a
3-daytime stop, for example, determine the effectiveness of such a
stop. How often will a position do nothing for 3 days and then take
off? If you find enough examples to suggest that you could miss a
major move, then avoid such stops. However, if you find that they
only cut your losses faster, then by all means include them.
Discretionary and Psychological Stops
If you have a good intuitive sense of the market, then you might
also consider discretionary stops-of which one might be a time
stop. Many of the best professional traders use discretionary stops,
but I would not recommend them for the amateur or beginning
trader.
The psychological stop, in contrast, is great for most market
players. Unless you are in the market for the long haul, i.e., you
don’t ever plan to sell, you should consider psychological stops.
Long-term trend followers could have a problem with such stops
as well, since one good trade can make a whole year of trading.
Unless you are psychologically well balanced, you’ll probably
decide it’s time to take a vacation or use a psychological stop right
about the time the big trade comes along.
There are certain time periods when the most important factor
in your trading-you, the human being-is nowhere near 100 percent. These are the times you should just consider getting out of the
market. The times that almost predict certain disaster are (1) when
you are going through a divorce or separation from a significant
person, (2) when a significant person in your life dies or is in the
hospital, (3) when a child is born, (4) when you move your home or
office, (5) when you are psychologically exhausted or burnt out,
and (6) when you are so excited about the market that you see your

CHAPTER 9

position doubling overnight+ven
when it hasn’t moved. These
are probably periods when you should just close down all your
active positions.
You might also consider using psychological stops when you
go on a trip. For example, if you take a vacation, allow that vacation
to be a time away from the market and close out all your positions.
When you take a business trip and cannot follow the market in a
normal way, I’d also suggest closing out all your positions. These
psychological stops are among the most important you can have.
I’d strongly recommend that you start using them.
SUMMARY:
CAPITAL

PRESERVING

. Your protective stop is like a red light. You can go through
it, but you’re not very likely to do so safely.
. Your protective stop has two main functions: (1) It sets up
the maximum loss that you’ll likely take in your position
(R), and (2) it sets a benchmark against which to measure
subsequent gains.
. Your primary job as a trader or investor should be to devise
a plan that will get you profits that are large multiples of R,
your initial risk.
. Consider going beyond the noise when you set your stops.
This can be done by setting stops that are several times the
ATR, by using dev-stops, or by determining the MAE and
going beyond that.
. Tight stops have the advantage of creating large-R-multiple
winners and minimizing losses. However, they have the
disadvantage of reducing reliability and greatly increasing
your transaction costs. As a result, you should probably
only use tight stops if you have really planned your entry
well.
. Other types of stops include dollar stops, percent
retracement stops, volatility stops, channel breakout stops,
moving-average stops, support and resistance stops, time

Knowing When to Fold ‘Em

x9

stops, and discretionary stops. Each has its own particular
merit, and selecting the right one for you is part of the job
of designing a trading system that is right for you.

STOPS USED BY COMMON SYSTEMS
Stock Market Systems

William O’Neil’s CANSLIM Method
William O’Neil does not promote market-related stops, but instead
argues that you should never let a stock go against you by more
than 7-8 percent. This is a version of the “percent retracement” stop
discussed earlier. Essentially, O’Neil’s 7-8 percent refers to a 7-8
percent retracement in the price of the stock-it has nothing to do
with your equity. Thus, if you buy a stock at $20, you should never
let it go against you by more than 7-8 percent of $20, or $1.40 to
$1.60. If you buy a stock at $100, then you should never let it go
against you by more than $7 to $8. O’Neil cautions that 7-8 percent
should be the maximum loss you should tolerate. He actually recommends that your overall average of all losses be around 5 to 6
percent.
Although O’Neil’s guidelines are some of the best provided
by anyone recommending methods to trade stocks, in my opinion
they can be improved upon. You would be much better off with a
market-based stop. Determine your MAE using the O’Neil system.
This probably should be calculated with respect to various price
ranges. If you find that low-priced stocks, i.e., under $25, seldom
move moie than $1 against you if they are good purchases, then
your stop might be $1. You might find that even $100 stocks seldom
move against you by more than $2 if they were good purchases. If
that’s the case, then your potential for big R gains on high-price
stocks would be tremendous.
Since O’Neil recommends that you enter when the market
breaks out of the base, you probably should exit if it returns to the
base--or at least if it goes to the bottom of the base. Another possible exit would be to abort the position if it moves three times the
average daily price volatility against you.

CHAPTER 9

The Warren Buffett Approach to Investing
Warren Buffett, according to most of the books on him, considers
most of his holdings to be lifetime holdings. He feels that his
returns will be large enough over the long term to weather the psychological ups and downs of the market. In addition, he has no
desire to pay the transaction costs of getting in and out-to say
nothing of the tax consequences. As a result, Warren Buffett considers his main job to be that of buying companies that he is willing
to own forever. As a result, Warren Buffett doesn’t seem to have any
protective stops:
I never attempt to make money on the stock market. I buy on the
assumption that they could close the market the next day and not
reopen it for five years.’
However, Buffett has been known to sell an investment occasionally. Remember that a protective stop is something that you use
in a worst-case scenario to protect your capital. As a result, I’m sure
Buffett must go through some regular review of his investments to
determine if they still meet his criteria. The more wisely you select
your investments, understand how the companies operate, and can
evaluate whether or not they are managed well, the more you can
use this sort of approach. However, I would strongly recommend
that even the most die-hard long-term investor have a worst-case
bailout signal for every investment at the time it is purchased.
Motley Fool Foolish-Four Approach
This approach also has no real protective stops except to reassess
the portfolio each year on the anniversary date. Since high-yield
approaches generally work only on very high capitalization stocks
that are highly respected (such as the Dow 30), there is probably little chance of having a serious problem” with these stocks.
Nevertheless, when you research this method, you’ll find that
most of the time the quarterly return is because of the performance
of one or two of the four stocks that really ran. However, quite often
one of the stocks will have gone down considerably. Thus, in my
opinion, this method could be improved upon with a stop.
Compare the losing years with the winning years in this technique.
How much did you lose (at most) during twinning years? How

Knowing When to Fold ‘Em

251

much did you lose during losing years? In other words, determine
the MAE of this technique. You might find that the MAE technique
will have little effect on the downside risk in winning years and
limit the downside risk in losing years.
Futures Market Systems
Kaufman Adaptive Moving-Average Approach
Kaufman in discussing the nature of stop losses makes an interesting observation. He says that the size of the erratic price move
against you times the number of times that move is likely to occur
is always about the same. For example, you might have 20 occurrences of a ii-point move, 10 occurrences of a lo-point move, and 5
occurrences of a 20-point move. All these would add up to 100
points of loss plus slippage and transaction costs. As a result, he
argues that larger stops are generally better because they minimize
transaction costs,
When Kaufman tests a system in his book, he only uses a few
simple ideas with respect to stops. First, a trade is exited at the close
if the loss exceeds a preset percentage level. This is much like the
O’Neil concept. Second, a trade is exited when a reversal signal is
given, including when the trade is losing money
Many of the concepts discussed in this chapter, in my opinion,
would greatly improve the adaptive moving-average system. For
example, consider using a volatility stop, a MAE stop, or the devstop.
Gallacher’s Fundamental Trading
If you recall from Chapter 18, Gallacher is a fundamental trader. He
uses fundamentals to trade commodities and enters the market on
a lo-day channel breakout when the fundamentals are setups for
the market to move in a particular direction. His stop loss is simple.
It’s a I-O-day channel breakout in the opposite direction.
Although many of the ideas behind Gallacher’s trading are
very sound, readers of this book, in my opinion, would find that
many of the stop-loss approaches recommended in this book could
greatly improve upon this simple method of trading.

CHAPTER 9

Ken Roberts’ l-2-3 Methodology
Remember that Roberts’ setup is that the market makes a 9-month
high or low and then makes a l-Z-3 pattern. The entry signal is
when the market hits a new price extreme in the opposite direction
of the old high or low-in other words, when the market again
passes point 2 on the l-2-3 pattern you enter. The stop loss is simply putting the stop at a logical point on the chart-just beyond
point 3.
Once again, in my opinion, users of this approach would be
much better off with a stop that was based on a statistical extreme.
Several such stops might include (1) three times the ATR, (2) the
ATR plus three times the standard deviation of the ATR, (3) a devstop, or (4) an estimate of the MAE in this particular case and a stop
put just beyond that.
NOTES
1. This kind of trading is difficult due to the very large commissions
charged even by discount stockbrokers. However, discount Internet
trading has changed that.
2. The stock exchange promotes this by having margin calls at only 50
percent and teaching people that they could lose it all. Furthermore,
they are justified in doing so because most people don’t have a plan
to trade and are psychologically wired to lose money.
3. Suggested by J. Wells Wilder in AJew Concepts in Technicnl rrndins
Systems. See the Recommended Readings in Appendix 1.
4. Sweeney, Cumpn@ Trading. See the Recommended Readings in
Appendix I.
5. Refer to Campnign Trading for more details about MAE.
6. If slippage and commissions are $100 per trade, you have to subtract
$600 from your $1,500 profit. It basically makes your 20-R profit now
seem like a 9-R profit. This is why short-term traders must always
consider the transaction cost factor in their trading. It’s probably the
major factor influencing short-term success.
7. Dev-stop is a copyrighted indicator of Cynthia A. Kase.
8. LeBeau and Lucas have an excellent discussion of this topic. See the
Recommended Readings in Appendix I.

Knowing When to Fold ‘Em

9. W. Buffett, quoted in Fortune by Jeremy Gain, “The Bull Market’s
Biggest Winners,” Fortune, August 8,1983, p. 36.
10. YOU won’t lose all your money with such a strategy, but if a major
bear market started, you could easily lose 30 percent or more in a
short period of time.

CHAPTER

10

How to Take Profits

CHAPTER 10 How to Take Prufits

255

tle perplexed. All his research had to do with discovering entry
techniques into the market. He’d done no research into what exits
to use or how to control his position size. When I suggested to him
that he now needed to spend at least as much time developing his
profit-taking exits as he had on entry and an equal amount of time,
if not more, on position sizing, he seemed upset.
People just seem to want to ignore exits-perhaps because
they cannot control the market on the exit. Yet for those who want
control, exits do control two important variables-whether or not
you’ll make a profit and how much profit you will make. They are
one of the major keys to developing a successful system.

PURPOSE BEHIND PROFIT-TAKING EXITS

You’ve got to know when to hold ‘em; know when to fold ‘em;
know when to walk away; and know when to run.
Ktviily Rvgcrs
From The Gnmbler
Several years ago Ed Seykota, who is featured in Jack Schwager’s
Market Wizards book, remarked at one of our seminars that if you
wanted to learn how to trade, you should go down to the beach and
watch the waves. Soon you’d notice that waves wash ashore and
then turn around and go back to sea. He then suggested that you
start moving your hands in rhythm with the waves-moving them
toward you as the wave approaches and moving them away from
you as the wave withdraws. After doing that for a while, you’ll
notice that you will soon be in touch with the waves. “When you
reach that state of being in tune with the flow,” he said, “you’ll
know a lot about what it takes to become a trader.” Notice that to
be able to get in touch with the waves, it’s important for you to
know when the wave has finished its movement.
Another man came to visit me from Australia. He’d made a lot
of money in the computer software business, and he now wanted
to research trading systems. He’d been visiting people all over the
United States to learn the essence of trading. We had dinner
together, and he carefully expla~ined all his trading ideas to me.
When I finished hearing his ideas, which were all good, I was alit-

There are a lot of problems to solve with exits. If the worst case does
not happen (i.e., so you don’t get stopped out), then the job of your
system is to allow you to make the most profit possible and give the
least amount of it back. Only your exits do this!
Notice that I use the word “exits’‘-the plurnl version of the
word-because most systems need several exits to do the job properly. As a result, consider using different exit strategies for each of
your system objectives. As you design your system, keep in mind
how you want to control your risk-to-reward ratio and maximize
your profits using the types of profit-taking exits described in this
section.
There are many different classifications of exits other than
your initial stop loss. These include exits that produce a loss but
reduce your initial risk, exits that maximize profits, and exits that
keep you from giving back too much money and psychological
exits. The categories are somewhat overlapping. Several techniques for you to consider are provided with each type of exit. As
you peruse each, think about how it could be adapted to your system. Most exit strategies are incredibly accommodating to special
system objectives.

Exits That Produce a Loss, But Reduce Your Initial Risk
Your initial stop loss, discussed in Chapter 9, was designed to be
your worst-case loss that protects your capital. However, this class

256

C H A P T E R 10

How to Take Profits

of exit will also produce a loss, but these exits are designed to make
sure you lose as little as possible.
The Timed Stop
Generally, people enter the market because they expect the price to
move in their favor shortly after entry. As a result, if you have a
meaningful entry signal, then a potentially useful exit is one that
will get you out after a period of time when you are not profitable.
For example, such an exit might be “get out of the market at the
close in 2 days if this position is not profitable.” Such an exit would
cause one to lose money, but not as much as if one’s worst-case stop
were hit.
The Trailing Stop
The trailing stop is one that is adjusted on a periodic basis according to some sort of mathematical algorithm. The random entry system (described in Chapter 8) used a three-times-volatility trailing
stop that was adjusted from the close on a daily basis only when it
moved in favor of the trade. For example, after the first day of trading, if the price moves in your favor or if volatility shrinks, then the
trailing stop is moved in your favor. It might still be at a loss, but it
is moved in your favor. Thus, if the market moves against you
enough to stop you out, you would still take a loss, but it would not
be as big as your initial stop. Figure 10-l shows an example of a
volatility trailing stop. Such trailing stops could be based upon any
number of factors-volatility, a moving average, a channel breakout, various price consolidations, etc.-and each could have any
number of different variables controlling them. See the next section
for some specific examples.
The important point about trailing stops is that your exit algorithm will continually make adjustments that will move the exit in
your favor. That movement might not be profitable, but it would
reduce your potential loss.
You must give careful consideration, through testing and
examining your results, whether or not you want to do this. For
example, quite often by reducing your initial risk as you move up
your trailing stop, you merely give up your chance for a profit.
Instead, you just take a smaller loss. Be careful in this area of your

system development, and if your system does utilize tight stops, be
aware that a reentry strategy could be used.
Exits That Maximize Your Profits
In order to maximize your profits (let them run), you must be willing to give some of them back. In fact, the ironic part of system
design is if you want to maximize profits, you must be willing to
give back a great deal of the profits you have already accumulated.
As a wise and very wealthy trader once said, “You can’t make
money if you’re not willing to lose. It’s like breathing in, but not
being willing to breathe out.” Various types of exits will help you
do this (i.e., breathe fully), including trailing stops and the percent
retracement stop.
The Trailing Stop
The trailing stop also has the potential to help you gain large profits, but it will always give some of your profits back. Let’s look at
some examples of trailing stops that you might want to use,
The volatility trail& stop, &hich has already been mentioned, is a multiple of the daily volatility of the market. J. Wells
