
The Odyssean Mute

Command

Recall that the accomplishment from which I derive the most pride is my
weaning myself from television and the news media. I am currently so
weaned that it actually costs me more energy to watch television than to
perform any other activity, like, say, writing this book. But this did not
come without tricks. Without tricks I would not escape the toxicity of
the information age. In the trading room of my company I currently
have the television set turned on all day with the financial news channel
CNBC staging commentator after commentator and CEO after CEO
murdering rigor all day long. What is the trick? I have the volume
turned completely off. Why? Because when the television set is silent,
the babbling person looks ridiculous, exactly the opposite effect as when
the sound is on. One sees a person with moving lips and contortions in
their facial muscles, taking themselves seriously - but no sound comes
out. We are visually but not auditorily intimidated, which causes a
dissonance. The speaker's face expresses some excitement, but since no
sound comes out, the exact opposite is conveyed. This is the sort of
contrast the philosopher Henri Bergson had in mind in his Treatise on
Laughter, with his famous description of the gap between the

174

WAX IN MY EARS

seriousness of a gentleman about to walk on a banana skin and the
comical aspect of the situation. Television pundits lose their intimidating effect; they even look ridiculous. They seem to be excited about
something terribly unimportant. Suddenly pundits become clowns,
which is a reason the writer Graham Greene refused to go on television.
I had this idea of stripping people from language while, on a trip, I
listened (while brutally jetlagged) to a speech in Cantonese, a language I
do not understand, without the benefit of translation. Since I had no
possible clue about his subject, the animated orator lost a large share of
his dignity. The idea came to me that perhaps I could use a genetic bias,
here prejudice, to offset another genetic bias, our predisposition to take
information seriously. It seems to work.
This part, the conclusion of this book, presents the human aspect of
dealing with uncertainty. I have personally failed in a general insulation
from randomness, but I have managed a few tricks.

twelve
"4*

gamblers' ticks and
pigeons in a b o x
On gamblers' ticks crowding up my life. Why bad taxi-cab
English can help you make money. How I am the fool of all
fools, except that I am aware of it. Dealing with my genetic
unfitness. No boxes of chocolate under my trading desk.

Taxi-Cab English and Causality
irst, a flashback in time to my early days as a trader in New York.

F

Early in my career, I worked at Credit Suisse First Boston, then
located in the middle of the block between 52nd and 53rd Street,
between Madison and Park Avenue. It was called a Wall Street firm, in
spite of its midtown location - 1 used to claim to work "on Wall Street"
in spite of having been lucky enough to set foot only twice in the
physical Wall Street, one of the most repulsive areas I have visited east
of Newark, New Jersey.
Then, in my twenties, I lived in a book-choked (but otherwise rather
bare) apartment in Manhattan's upper east side. The bareness was not
ideological; it was simply because I never managed to enter a furniture
store, as I would eventually stop at a bookstore along the way and haul

176

WAX IN MY EARS

bags of books instead. As can be expected, the kitchen was devoid of
any form of food and utensils, save for a defective expresso machine, as
I learned to cook only very recently (even then ...).
I went to work every morning in a yellow cab, which dropped me off
at the corner of Park Avenue and 53rd Street. Cab drivers in New York
City are known to be rather untamed and universally unfamiliar with
the geography of the place, but, on occasion, one can find a cab driver
who can both be unacquainted with the city and skeptic of the
universality of the laws of arithmetic. One day I had the misfortune (or
perhaps the fortune, as we will see) to ride with a driver who did not
seem capable of handling any language known to me, which includes
taxi-cab English. I tried to help him navigate south between 74th Street
and 53rd Street, but he stubbornly continued the journey an additional
block south, forcing me to use the 52nd Street entrance. That day, my
trading portfolio made considerable profits, owing to considerable
turmoil in currencies; it was then the best day of my young career.
The next day, as usual, I hailed a cab from the corner of 74th Street
and Third Avenue. The previous driver was nowhere in sight, perhaps
deported back to the old country. Too bad; I was gripped with the
unexplainable desire to pay him back for the favor he had done me and
surprise him with a gigantic tip. Then I caught myself instructing the
new cab driver to take me to the north-east corner of 52nd Street and
Park Avenue, exactly where I was dropped off the day before. I was
taken aback by my own words . . . but it was too late.
When I looked at my reflection in the elevator's mirror, it dawned on
me that I wore the exact same tie as the day before - with the coffee
stains from the previous day's fracas (my only addiction is to coffee).
There was someone in me who visibly believed in a strong causal link
between my use of the entrance, my choice of tie and the previous day's
market behavior. I was disturbed for acting like a fake, like an actor
who impersonated some role that was not his. I felt that I was an
impostor. On the one hand, I talked like someone with strong scientific
standards, a probabilist focused on his craft. On the other, I had closed
superstitions just like one of these blue-collar pit traders. Would I have
to go buy a horoscope next?
A little brooding revealed that my life until then had been governed
by mild superstitions, me the expert in options and dispassionate

GAMBLERS'

TICKS

AND

PIGEONS

IN

A

BOX

177

calculator of probabilities, a rational trader! It was not the first time
that I had acted on mild superstitions of a harmless nature, which I
believed were instilled in me by my Eastern Mediterranean roots: one
does not grab the salt shaker from the hand of another person risking a
falling out; one is to knock on wood upon receiving a compliment; plus
many other Levantine beliefs passed on for a few dozen centuries. But
like many things that brew and spread around the ancient pond, these
beliefs I had taken with a fluctuating mixture of solemnity and mistrust.
We consider them more like rituals than truly important actions meant
to stave off undesirable turns of the goddess Fortuna - superstitions can
instill some poetry in daily life.
The worrying part was that it was the first time that I noticed
superstitions creeping into my professional life. My profession is to act
like an insurance company, stringently computing the odds based on
well defined methods, and making a profit because other people are less
rigorous, get blinded by some "analysis", or act with the belief that they
are chosen by destiny. But there was too much randomness flooding my
occupation.
I detected the rapid accumulation of what is called "gamblers' ticks"
surreptitiously developing in my behavior - though minute and barely
detectable. Until then these small ticks had escaped me. My mind
seemed to be constantly trying to detect a statistical connection between
some of my facial expressions and outcome of events. For example, my
income started to increase after I discovered my slight near-sightedness
and started wearing glasses. Although glasses were not quite necessary,
nor even useful, except for night driving, I kept them on my nose as I
unconsciously acted as if I believed in the association between
performance and glasses. To my brain such statistical association was
as spurious as it can get, owing to the reduced sample size, yet this
native statistical instinct did not seem to benefit from my expertise in
hypothesis testing.
Gamblers are known to develop some behavioral distortions as a
result of some pathological association between a betting outcome and
some physical move. "Gambler" is about the most derogatory term that
could be used in my derivatives profession. As an aside, gambling to me
is best defined as an activity where the agent gets a thrill when
confronting a random outcome, regardless of whether he has the odds

178

WAX IN MY EARS

stacked in his favor or against him. Even when the odds are clearly
stacked against the gambler, he sometimes transcends the odds by
believing that destiny selected him in some manner. This .shows in the
very sophisticated people one meets in casinos where they normally
should not be found. I even ran into world-class probability experts who
had a gambling habit on the side, throwing all of their knowledge to the
wind. For example, a former colleague of mine and one of the most
intelligent people I have ever met, frequently went to Las Vegas, and
seemed to be such a turkey that the casino provided him with
complimentary luxury suites and transportation. He even consulted a
fortune teller prior to taking large trading positions and tried to get
reimbursed by our employer.

The Skinner Pigeon

Experiment

At 25, I was totally ignorant of the behavioral sciences. I had been
fooled by my education and culture into believing that my superstitions
were cultural, and that, consequently, they could be shed through the
exercise of so-called reason. Taken at the general level of society,
modern life would eliminate them as science and logic would enter it.
But in my case, I was over time getting more sophisticated intellectually,
but the floodgates of randomness were bursting and I was becoming
more superstitious.
These superstitions needed to be biological - but I was brought up in
an era when the dogma was that it was nurture, rarely nature, that was
the culprit. Clearly, there was nothing cultural about my link between
my wearing glasses and a random market outcome. There was nothing
cultural in my link between my use of entrance and my performance as a
trader. There was nothing cultural in my wearing the same tie as the day
before. Something in us has not developed properly over the past
thousand years and I was dealing with the remnant of our old brain.
To probe the point further, we need to look at such formations of
causal associations in the lower forms of life. The famous Harvard
psychologist B.F. Skinner constructed a box for rats and pigeons,

GAMBLERS'

TICKS

AND

PIGEONS

IN

A

BOX

179

equipped with a switch that the pigeon can operate by pecking. In
addition, an electrical mechanism delivers food into the box. Skinner
designed the box in order to study more general properties of the
behavior of a collection of nonhumans, but it was in 1948 that he had
the brilliant idea of ignoring the lever and focusing on the food delivery.
He programmed it to deliver food at random to the famished birds.
He saw quite astonishing behavior on the part of the birds; they
developed an extremely sophisticated rain-dance type of behavior in
response to their ingrained statistical machinery. One bird swung its
head rhythmically against a specific corner of the box, others spun their
heads anti-clockwise; literally all of the birds developed a specific ritual
that progressively became hard-wired into their mind as linked to their
feeding.
This problem has a more worrying extension; we are not made to
view things as independent from each other. When viewing two events
A and B, it is hard not to assume that A causes B, B causes A, or both
cause each other. Our bias is immediately to establish a causal link.
While to a budding trader this causes hardly any worse costs than a few
pennies in cab fare, it can draw the scientist into spurious inference. For
it is harder to act as if one were ignorant than as if one were smart;
scientists know that it is emotionally harder to reject a hypothesis than
to accept it (what is called type I and type II errors) - quite a difficult
matter when we have such sayings as felix qui potuit cognoscere causas
(happy is he who understands what is behind things). It is very hard for
us to just shut up. We are not cut out for it. Popper or not, we take
•"hings too seriously.

Philostratus Redux
I offered no solution to the problem of statistical inference at a low
resolution. I discussed in Chapter 3 the technical difference between
noise and meaning - but it is time to discuss the execution. The Greek
philosopher Pyrrho, who advocated a life of equanimity and
indifference, was criticized for failing to keep his composure during a

180

WAX IN MY EARS

critical circumstance (he was chased by an ox). His answer was that he
found it sometimes difficult to rid himself of his humanity. If Pyrrho
cannot stop being human, I do not see why the rest of us should
resemble the rational man who acts perfectly under uncertainty as
propounded by economic theory. I discovered that much of the
rationally obtained results using my computations of the various
probabilities do not register deeply enough to impact my own conduct.
In other words, I acted like the doctor in Chapter 11 who knew of the
2 % probability of the disease, but somehow unwittingly treated the
patient as if the ailment had a 95% probability of being there. My brain
and my instinct were not acting in concert.
The details are as follows. As a rational trader (all traders boast so) I
believe as I discussed before that there is a difference between noise and
signal, and that noise needs to be ignored while a signal needs to be
taken seriously. I use elementary (but robust) methods that allow me to
calculate the expected noise and signal composition of any fluctuation in
my trading performance. For example, after registering a profit of
$100,000 on a given strategy, I may assign a 2% probability to the
hypothesis of the strategy being profitable and 98% probability to the
hypothesis that the performance may be the result of mere noise. A gain
of $1,000,000, on the other hand, certifies that the strategy is a
profitable one, with a 99% probability. A rational person would act
accordingly in the selection of strategies, and set his emotions in
accordance with his results. Yet I have experienced leaps of joy over
results that I knew were mere noise, and bouts of unhappiness over
results that did not carry the slightest degree of statistical significance. I
cannot help it/ but I am emotional and derive most of my energy from
my emotions. So the solution does not reside in taming my heart.
Since my heart does not seem to agree with my brain, I need to take
serious action to avoid making irrational trading decisions, namely, by
denying myself access to my performance report unless it hits a
predetermined threshold. This is no different from the divorce between
my brain and my appetite when it comes to the consumption of
chocolate. I generally deal with it by ascertaining that there are no
chocolate boxes under my trading desk.
One of the most irritating conversations I've had is with people who
lecture me on how I should behave. Most of us know pretty much how

GAMBLERS'

TICKS

AND

PIGEONS

IN

A

BOX

181

we should behave. It is the execution that is the problem, not the
absence of knowledge. I am tired of the moralizing slow-thinkers who
pound me with platitudes like I should floss daily, eat my regular apple
and visit the gym outside of the new-year resolution. In the markets the
recommendation would be to ignore the noise component in the
performance. We need tricks to get us there but before that we need to
accept the fact that we are mere animals in need of lower forms of tricks,
not lectures.
Finally, I consider myself lucky for not having a cigarette addiction.
For the best way to understand how we could be rational in our
perception of the risks and probabilities and, at the same time, be foolish
while acting on them, would be to have a conversation with a cigarette
smoker. For few cigarette smokers remain unaware of the fact that lung
cancer strikes one in three of their population. If you remain unconvinced, take a look at the huddling smoking crowd outside the service
entrance of the Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York
City's upper East side. You will see dozens of cancer nurses (and,
perhaps, doctors) standing outside the entrance with a cigarette in hand
as hopeless patients are wheeled in for their treatments.

thirteen

Cato the censor sends Carneades packing. Monsieur de Norpois
does not remember his old opinions. Beware the scientist.
Marrying ideas. The same Robert Merton helping the author
start his firm. Science evolves from funeral to funeral.

sk your local mathematician to define probability; he would most
probably show you how to compute it. As we saw in Chapter 3 on
probabilistic introspection, probability is not about the odds, but about
the belief in the "existence of an alternative outcome, cause, or motive.
Recall that mathematics is a tool to meditate, not compute. Again, let us
go back to the elders for more guidance - for probabilities were always
considered by them as nothing beyond a subjective, and fluid, measure
of beliefs.

A

CARNEADES COMES TO ROME: ON PROBABILITY AND SKEPTICISM

183

Carneades Comes to Rome
Around 155 B.C., the Greek post-classical philosopher Carneades of
Cyrene came to Rome as one of the three Athenian ambassadors who
came to beg the Roman Senate for a political favor. A fine had been
levied against the citizens of their city, and they wanted to convince
Rome that it was unfair. Carneades represented the Academy, the same
argumentative open-air institution where three centuries before Socrates
drove his interlocutors to murder him just to get some respite from his
arguments. It was now called the New Academy, was no less
argumentative, and had the reputation of being the hotbed of skepticism
in the ancient world.
On the much anticipated day of his oration, he stood up and
delivered a brilliantly argued harangue in praise of justice and how
devolving it should be at the top of our motives. The Roman audience
was spellbound. It was not just his charisma; the audience was swayed
by the strength of the arguments, the eloquence of the thought, the
purity of the language, and the energy of the speaker. But that was not
the point he wanted to drill.
The next day, Carneades came back, stood up and established the
doctrine of uncertainty of knowledge in the most possibly convincing
way. How? By proceeding to contradict and refute with no less swaying
arguments what he had established so convincingly the day before. He
managed to persuade the very same audience and in the same spot that
justice should be way down on the list of motivations for human
undertakings.
Now the bad news. Cato the elder (the "censor") was among the
audience, already quite old, and no more tolerant than he had been
during his office of censor. Enraged, he persuaded the Senate to send the
three ambassadors packing lest their argumentative spirit muddle the
spirit of the youth of the Republic and weaken the military culture.
(Cato had banned during his office of censorship all Greek rhetoricians
from establishing residence in Rome. He was too much a no-nonsense
type of person to accept their introspective expansions.)
C a r n e a d e s w a s n o t t h e first skeptic in classical times, n o r w a s he the
first t o t e a c h us t h e t r u e n o t i o n o f p r o b a b i l i t y . B u t this incident r e m a i n s

184

WAX IN MY EARS

the most spectacular in its impact on generations of rhetoricians and
thinkers. Carneades was not merely a skeptic; he was a dialectician,
someone who never committed himself to any of the premises from
which he argued, or to any of the conclusions he drew from them. He
stood all his life against arrogant dogma and belief in one sole truth. Few
credible thinkers rival Carneades in their rigorous skepticism (a class that
would include the medieval Arab philosopher A1 Gazali, Hume, and
Kant - but only Popper came to elevate his skepticism to an all-encompassing scientific methodology). As the skeptics' main teaching was that
nothing could be accepted with certainty, conclusions of various degrees
of probability could be formed, and these supplied a guide to conduct.
Stepping further back in time and searching for the first known uses
of probabilistic thinking in history, we find it harks back to sixthcentury (B.C.) Greek Sicily. There, the notion of probability was used in
a legal framework by the very first rhetoricians who, when arguing a
case, needed to show the existence of a doubt concerning the certainty
of the accusation. The first known rhetorician was a Syracusean named
Korax who engaged in teaching people how to argue from probability.
At the core of his method was the notion of the most probable. For
example, the ownership of a piece of land, in the absence of further
information and physical evidence, should go to the person after whose
name it is best known. One of his indirect students, Gorgias, took this
method of argumentation to Athens, where it flourished. It is the
establishment of such most probable notions that taught us to view the
possible contingencies as distinct and separable events with probabilities
attached to each one of them.

probability the child of

skepticism

Until the Mediterranean basin was dominated with monotheism, which
led to the belief in some form of uniqueness of the truth (to be
superceded later by episodes of communism), skepticism had gained
currency among many major thinkers - and certainly permeated the
world. The Romans did not have a religion per se; they were too
tolerant to accept a given truth. Theirs were a collection of a variety of
flexible and syncretic superstitions. I will not get too theological, except

CARNEADES COMES TO ROME: ON PROBABILITY AND SKEPTICISM

185

to say that we had to wait for a dozen centuries in the Western world to
espouse critical thinking again. Indeed, for some strange reason during
the middle ages, Arabs were critical thinkers (through their postclassical philosophical tradition) when Christian thought was dogmatic,
then after the renaissance, the roles mysteriously reversed.
One author from antiquity who provides us evidence of such thinking
is the garrulous Cicero. He preferred to be guided by probability than
allege with certainty - very handy, some said, because it allowed him to
contradict himself. This may be a reason for us, who have learned from
Popper how to remain self critical, to respect him more, as he did not
hew stubbornly to an opinion for the mere fact that he had voiced it in
the past. Indeed your average literature professor would fault him for
his contradictions and his change of mind.
It was not until modern times that such desire to be free from our
own past statements emerged. Nowhere was it made more eloquently
than in rioting student graffiti in Paris. The student movement that took
place in France in 1968, with the youth no doubt choking under the
weight of years of having to sound intelligent and coherent, produced,
among other jewels, the following demand:
We demand the right to contradict
