
336/396

about it. “Why would I do that?” he says. “It’s
kind of like you come home and your wife
asks you about your day. I’ve done it once
and I don’t want to do it again.” What he
wanted to do after a long day of being governor, more or less, was to lift weights.
We’re just a couple of miles in when he zips
around a corner and into a narrow alleyway
just off Venice Beach. He’s humoring me;
I’ve been pestering him about what it was
like for him when he first arrived in America,
back in 1968, with little money, less English,
really nothing but his lats, pecs, traps, and
abs, for which there was no obvious market.
He stops beside a tall brick wall. It surrounds
what might once have been an impressive
stone house that now just looks old and
bleak and empty. The wall is what interests
him, because he built it, forty-three years
ago, right after he had arrived and started to
train on Muscle Beach. “Franco [Columbu,
like Schwarzenegger a former Mr. Olympia]

337/396

and I made money this way. In bodybuilding
there was no money. Here we were world
champions of this little subculture, and we
did this to eat. Franco ran the business. I
mixed the cement and knocked things down
with the sledgehammer.”
Before he stumbled while running downhill
with a refrigerator strapped to his back,
Columbu was the front-runner in the 1977
contest for the title of the World’s Strongest
Man; so there was some distinction in being
hired by his operation, as Schwarzenegger
was, to be the muscle. They had a routine.
Franco would play the unreliable Italian,
Arnold the sober German. Before they cut
any deal they’d scream at each other in German in front of the customer until the customer would finally ask what was going on.
Arnold would turn to the customer and explain, Oh, he’s Italian, and you know how
they are. He wants to charge you more, but
I think we can do it cheaply.

338/396

Schwarzenegger would then name a not-socheap price. “And the customer,” he says
now, laughing, “he would always say,
‘Arnold, you’re such a nice guy! So honest!’ It
was selling, you know.”
He surveys his handiwork. “It’ll be here for
a thousand years,” he says, then points out
some erosion on the top. “I said to Franco we
ought to come back and fix the top. You
know, to show it was guaranteed for life.”
A poor kid from a small village in Austria,
the son of a former Nazi, hops on a plane to
America, starts out laying bricks, and winds
up running the state and becoming one of
America’s most prominent political leaders.
From post to wire the race takes less than
thirty-five years. I couldn’t help but ask the
obvious question.
“If someone had told you when you were
building this wall that you would wind up
governor of California, what would you have
said?”

339/396

“That would be all right,” he said, not exactly catching my drift.
“As a boy,” I said, taking another tack, “did
you believe you’d lead something other than
an ordinary life?”
“Yes.” He didn’t miss a beat.
“Why?”
“I don’t know.”
“No one has had this kind of crazy, wild
ride,” he says, as we speed away from the
brick wall, but in a tone that suggests the
ride was an accident. “I was influenced a lot
by America,” he said. “The giant six-lane
highways, the Empire State Building, the risk
taking.” He still remembers vividly the
America he heard and read about as a boy in
Austria: everything about it was big. The
only reason he set out to grow himself some
big muscles was that he thought it might be a
ticket to America.
If there had not been a popular movement
to remove a sitting governor, and the chance

340/396

to run for governor without having to endure
a party primary, he never would have
bothered. “The recall happens and people are
asking me: what are you going to do?” he
says, dodging vagrants and joggers along the
beach bike path. “I thought about it but decided I wasn’t going to do it. I told Maria I
wasn’t running. I told everyone I wasn’t running. I wasn’t running.” Then, in the middle
of the recall madness, Terminator 3: Rise of
the Machines opened. As the movie’s leading
machine he was expected to appear on The
Tonight Show to promote it. En route he experienced a familiar impulse—the impulse to
do something out of the ordinary. “I just
thought, This will freak everyone out,” he
says. “It’ll be so funny. I’ll announce that I
am running. I told Leno I was running. And
two months later I was governor.” He looks
over at me, pedaling as fast as I can to keep
up with him, and laughs. “What the fuck is
that?”

341/396

We’re now off the beach and on the surface
roads, and the traffic is already heavy. He
veers left, across four lanes of traffic, arrives
on the other side, and says, “All these people
are asking me, ‘What’s your plan? Who’s on
your staff?’ I didn’t have a plan. I didn’t have
a staff. I wasn’t running until I went on Jay
Leno.”
His view of his seven years trying to run
the state of California, like the views of his
closest associates, can be summarized as follows. He came to power accidentally, but not
without ideas about what he wanted to do. At
his core he thought government had become
more problem than solution: an institution
run less for the benefit of the people than for
the benefit of politicians and other public
employees. He behaved pretty much as
Americans seem to imagine the ideal politician should behave: he made bold decisions
without looking at polls; he didn’t sell favors;
he treated his opponents fairly; he was quick

342/396

to acknowledge his mistakes and to learn
from them, and so on. He was the rare elected official who believed, with some reason,
that he had nothing to lose, and behaved accordingly. When presented with the chance
to pursue an agenda that violated his own
narrow political self-interest for the sake of
the public interest, he tended to leap at it.
“There were a lot of times when we said, ‘You
just can’t do that,’ says his former chief of
staff, Susan Kennedy, a lifelong Democrat,
whose hiring was one of those things a Republican governor was not supposed to do.
“He was always like, ‘I don’t care.’ Ninety
percent of the time it was a good thing.”
Two years into his tenure, in mid-2005,
he’d tried everything he could think of to
persuade individual California state legislators to vote against the short-term desires of
their constituents for the greater long-term
good of all. “To me there were shocking moments,” he says. Having sped past a DO NOT

343/396

ENTER sign, we are now flying through inter-

sections without pausing. I can’t help but notice that, if we weren’t breaking the law by
going the wrong way down a one-way street,
we’d be breaking the law by running stop
signs. “When you want to do pension reform
for the prison guards,” he says, “and all of a
sudden the Republicans are all lined up
against you. It was really incredible and it
happened over and over: people would say to
me, ‘Yes, this is the best idea! I would love to
vote for it! But if I vote for it some interest
group is going to be angry with me, so I
won’t do it.’ I couldn’t believe people could
actually say that. You have soldiers dying in
Iraq and Afghanistan, and they didn’t want
to risk their political lives by doing the right
thing.”
He came into office with boundless faith in
the American people—after all, they had
elected him—and figured he could always appeal directly to them. That was his trump

344/396

card, and he played it. In November 2005 he
called a special election that sought votes on
four reforms: limiting state spending, putting an end to the gerrymandering of legislative districts, limiting public employee union spending on elections, and lengthening
the time it took for public school teachers to
get tenure. All four propositions addressed,
directly or indirectly, the state’s large and
growing financial mess. All four were defeated; the votes weren’t even close. From
then until the end of his time in office he was
effectively gelded: the legislators now knew
that the people who had elected them to behave exactly the way they were already behaving were not going to undermine them
when appealed to directly. The people of
California might be irresponsible, but at least
they were consistent.
A compelling book called California
Crackup describes this problem more generally. It’s written by a pair of journalists and

345/396

nonpartisan think tank scholars, Joe
Mathews and Mark Paul, and they explain,
among other things, why Arnold Schwarzenegger’s experience as governor was going
to be unlike any other experience in his career: he was never going to win. California
had organized itself, not accidentally, into
highly partisan legislative districts. It elected
highly partisan people to office and then required these people to reach a two-thirds
majority to enact any new tax or meddle with
big spending decisions. On the off chance
that they found some common ground, it
could be pulled out from under them by
voters through the initiative process. Throw
in term limits—no elected official now serves
in California government long enough to
fully understand it—and you have a recipe
for generating maximum contempt for elected officials. Politicians are elected to get
things done and are prevented by the system
from doing it, leading the people to grow

346/396

even more disgusted with them. “The vicious
cycle of contempt,” as Mark Paul calls it.
California state government was designed
mainly to maximize the likelihood that
voters will continue to despise the people
they elect.
But when you look below the surface, he
adds, the system is actually very good at giving Californians what they want. “What all
the polls show,” says Paul, “is that people
want services and not to pay for them. And
that’s exactly what they have now got.” As
much as they claimed to despise their government, the citizens of California shared its
defining trait: a need for debt. The average
Californian, in 2011, had debts of $78,000
against an income of $43,000. The behavior
was unsustainable, but, in its way, for the
people, it works brilliantly. For their leaders,
even in the short term, it works less well.
They ride into office on great false hopes and

347/396

quickly discover they can do nothing to justify those hopes.
In Paul’s view, Arnold Schwarzenegger had
been the best test to date of the notion that
the problem with California politics was personal; that all the system needed to fix itself
was an independent-minded leader willing to
rise above petty politics and exert the will of
the people. “The recall was, in and of itself,
an effort by the people to say that a new governor—a different person—could solve the
problem,” says Paul. “He tried every different way of dealing with the crisis in services.
He tried to act like a Republican. He tried to
act like a Democrat. He tried making nice
with the legislature. When that didn’t work
he called them girlie men. When that didn’t
work he went directly to the people. And the
people voted against his proposals.”
The experiment hadn’t been a complete
failure. As governor, Schwarzenegger was
able to accomplish a few important

348/396

things—reforming worker compensation, enabling open primaries, and, at the very end,
ensuring that legislative districts would be
drawn by an impartial committee rather
than by the legislature. But on most issues,
and on virtually everything having to do with
how the state raised and spent money, he
lost. In his first term Schwarzenegger had set
out to cut spending and found he could cut
only the things that the state actually
needed. Near the end of his second term, he
managed to pass a slight tax increase, after
he talked four Republicans into creating the
supermajority necessary for doing so. Every
one of them lost his seat in the next election.
He’d taken office in 2003 with approval ratings pushing 70 percent and what appeared
to be a mandate to fix California’s money
problems; he’d left in 2011 with approval ratings below 25 percent, having fixed very
little. “I was operating under the common
sense kind of thing,” he says now. “It was the

349/396

voters who recalled Gray Davis. It was the
voters who elected me. So it will be the
voters who hand me the tools to do the job.
But the other side was successful enough for
the voters to take the tools away.”
David Crane, his economic adviser—at that
moment, rapidly receding into the distance—could itemize the result: a long list of
depressing government financial statistics.
The pensions of state employees ate up twice
as much of the budget when Schwarzenegger
left office as they did when he arrived, for instance. The officially recognized gap between
what the state would owe its workers and
what it had on hand to pay them was roughly
$105 billion, but that, thanks to accounting
gimmicks, was probably only about half the
real number. “This year the state will directly
spend thirty-two billion dollars on employee
pay and benefits, up sixty-five percent over
the past ten years,” says Crane later. “Compare that to state spending on higher

350/396

education [down 5 percent], health and human services [up just 5 percent], and parks
and recreation [flat], all crowded out in large
part by fast-rising employment costs.” Crane
was a lifelong Democrat with no particular
hostility to government. But the more he’d
looked into the details, the more shocking he
found them to be. In 2010, for instance, the
state spent $6 billion on fewer than 30,000
guards and other prison system employees.
A prison guard who started his career at the
age of forty-five could retire after five years
with a pension that very nearly equaled his
former salary. The head parole psychiatrist
for the California prison system was California’s highest-paid public employee; in 2010
he’d made $838,706. The same fiscal year
that the state spent $6 billion on prisons, it
had invested just $4.7 billion in its higher
education—that is, 33 campuses with
670,000 students. Over the past thirty years
the state’s share of the budget for the

351/396

University of California had fallen from 30
percent to 11 percent, and it was about to fall
a lot more. In 1980 a Cal student paid $776 a
year in tuition; in 2011 he would pay
$13,218. Everywhere you turned, the longterm future of the state was being sacrificed.
This same set of facts, and the narrative it
suggested, would throw an ordinary man into depression. He might conclude that he
lived in a society that was ungovernable.
After seven years of trying and mostly failing
to run California, Schwarzenegger is persuasively not depressed. “You have to realize
the thing was so much fun!” he says. “We
had a great time! There were times of frustration. There were times of disappointment.
But if you want to live rather than just exist,
you want the drama.” As we roll to a stop
very near the place on the beach where he
began his American bodybuilding career, he
says, “You have to step back and say, ‘I was
elected under odd circumstances. And I’m

352/396

going out in odd circumstances.’ You can’t
have it both ways. You can’t be a spoiled
brat.”
The odd circumstances were the neverending financial crises. He’d come to power
in the bust after the Internet bubble; he’d left
in the bust after the housing bubble. Before
and after our bike ride, I had sat down with
him to get his view of this second event. It
was in the middle of 2007, he said, when he
first noticed something was not quite right in
the California economy. He’d been finishing
up budget negotiations and arrived at a
number, however phony, where the budget
could be declared balanced. An aide walked
into his office to give him a heads-up: the tax
receipts for that month were less than expected. “We were all of a sudden short three
hundred million dollars in revenue for the
month,” says Schwarzenegger. “I somehow
felt, Uh-oh. Because there was something in
the air.” Soon after that he visited the George

353/396

W. Bush White House, where he gave a talk
that was, as ever, upbeat. “At the end of it
this guy—he was the guy who was in charge
of housing, I forgot the name. Great guy. For
some reason or other he was very honest
with me. I don’t know why. He probably
didn’t think I’d go out and blab, which I
didn’t. He says, ‘That was a great speech you
gave, but we’re heading to a major problem.’
I said, ‘What do you mean?’ He said, ‘I
looked at some of the numbers, and it’s going to be ugly.’ That’s all he said. He wouldn’t
elaborate.” A housing price decline in the
United States meant a housing price collapse
in California; and a housing price collapse in
California meant an economic collapse, and
a decline in tax revenues. “The next month
our revenues came in short six hundred million dollars. By December we were short a
billion.”
The hope that California would generate
the tax revenues needed to pay for even

354/396

newly reduced services vanished. “This crisis
consumed the last three years,” says Schwarzenegger. “All of a sudden you are pissing off
everyone. The parks don’t get money and all
of a sudden everyone is in love with parks.
People pay attention so much to how does it
affect them immediately: that’s just the way
the human mind works.”
How the further degradation of public services affected people immediately would not
have been immediately obvious to a governor
sitting in Sacramento. As Meredith Whitney
had pointed out, the state has great ability to
paper over its financial problems by pushing
them down to cities. In May 2011, to take
just the most cinematic of countless examples, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a
ruling that California’s prison conditions
constituted cruel and unusual punishment
and violated the Eighth Amendment. The
ruling ordered the state either to build more
prisons or to release thirty thousand

355/396

inmates. The state—still overpaying its prison guards—has chosen to release the prisoners and, with them, their social cost. There
will probably be more crime, and heavier dependency on local public services, but it
must be paid for by local communities. At
some point in our talks I had asked Schwarzenegger how much time he had spent, as
governor, grappling with the on-the-ground
local implications of the big state crisis. The
question pretty clearly bored him. “I’m not
into the local stuff,” he’d said. “I was born for
the world.”
ABOUT AN HOUR into the weekly meeting of the

San Jose City Council I find myself wishing
that I, too, was born for the world. A hundred citizens yawn and text as the council
honors National Farmer’s Market Week; the
few people who seemed to be paying attention get up and leave after the honor is bestowed. The council commemorates August 7
as Assyrian Martyrs Day, “honoring the

356/396

massacre of three thousand people in August
1933, and recognizing 2,000 years of persecution of Assyrian Christians.” Maybe thirty
people turn their attention from their cell
phones to the ceremony but then they, too,
rise and exit the chamber. A mere handful of
people are left to hear the San Jose city manager offer the latest bleak financial news: the
state of California was clawing back tens of
millions of dollars more, and “one hundred
and forty employees have been separated
from the city.” (New times call for new euphemisms.) A pollster presents his finding
that, no matter how the question is phrased,
the citizens of San Jose are unlikely to approve any ballot measure that raises taxes. A
numbers guy gets to his feet and explains
that the investment returns in the city’s pension plan are not likely to be anything like as
high as was assumed. In addition to there
not being enough money in this particular
pot to begin with, the pot is failing to expand

357/396

