What happened last year?
It all happened in December. At the start of the month, 1 was up 30
percent for the year. I thought the rise in Internet stocks was a
mania. Valuations had risen to levels we had never seen before. For
example, Schwab has been publicly traded for over ten years. At the
time I went short, the ratios of the stock price to the valuation
measures—sales per share, earnings per share, cash flow [earnings
plus depreciation and amortization] per share, book value per
share—were higher than they had ever been before. [As he talks
about these events, the pain of the experience is still very evident in
his voice.]
What levels were these ratios at?
As an example, the price/earnings ratio was at 54 to 1. In comparison,
at prior price peaks in the stock, the ratio had been anywhere from 20
to 1, to 35 to 1.
The valuation measures were at record highs and getting higher
all the time. What made you decide to go short at that particular
juncture?

AHMIT O K U M U S

Insiders [company management] were selling heavily. In Schwab,
insiders always sell, but in this instance, the insider sales were particularly high.
Out of curiosity, why are insiders always net sellers in Schwab?
Because the company issued a lot of options to management, which
get exercised over time.
What happened after you went short?
The stock went up 34 percent in one week and was still going up
when I finally covered my position.
What other Internet or Internet-related stocks did you short in
December 1998?
Amazon.
How can you even evaluate a company like Amazon, which has
no earnings and therefore an infinite price/earnings ratio?
You can't evaluate it in any conventional sense. However, I had an
idea of what price it shouldn't be, and Amazon was at that level.
When I went short, Amazon's capitalization [the share price multiplied by the number of shares outstanding] was $17 billion, which
made it equivalent to the fourth largest retailer in the United States.
This seemed absurd to me.
Also, book sales fall off sharply during the first quarter following
the heavy Christmas season sales. I thought the prospect of lower
sales in the next quarter would cause the stock to weaken. When I
went short, Amazon was up ninefold during the prior year and fourfold during the previous two months.
At what price was Amazon trading when you went short?
I didn't actually go short. I sold out-of-the-money call options. [In this
transaction, the option seller collects a premium in exchange for
accepting the obligation to sell the stock at a specific price above the
market price.*] Since the options I sold were way out-of-the-money,
the market could still go up a lot, and I wouldn't lose. I thought I
might be wrong and the stock could go up some more, but I didn't
think the stock would go up that much.
* Readers unfamiliar with options may find it useful to consult the short primer on
options in the appendix.

F R O M I S T A N B U L T<LflH,L S T R E E T B U L L

What was the strike price of the options you sold?* Where was
the market at the time?
The stock was trading around 220, and I sold the 250 calls. The stock
could go up another 30 points before I lost any money on the trade.
How much did you sell the options for?
I sold them for 1 Vs, but there were only three days left until expiration. I figured the stock was not going to go up 15 percent in three
days. The day after I went short, one of the prominent analysts for the
stock revised his price projection, which had already been surpassed
by the market, from $150 to $400. Overnight, the stock moved from
220 to 260, and one day later it nearly reached 300. The options I had
sold for I'/s were selling for 48. [Options trade in 100-share units.
Therefore, each option he had sold for $112 was now worth $4,800.]
How much did you lose on that trade?
The trade killed me. Amazon cost me 1 7 percent of my equity, and
Schwab cost me another 12 percent.
Had you used this type of strategy before—selling out-of-themoney calls?
Sure, but these types of price moves were totally unprecedented.
There are a lot of Internet stocks that are up twenty- or thirtyfold during the past year, but I'm not touching them. I'm just sticking to what
I know best: fundamentals and value.
What lesson did you learn from this entire experience?
Not to short Internet stocks [he laughs}.

Any broader lessons?
Don't get involved when there is too much mania. Just stick to things
that have some predictability. You can't forecast mania. If a stock that
should be selling at 10 is trading at 100, who is to say it can't go to 500.
What was your emotional state during this entire experience?
The funny thing is that I was already upset at the start of December
because the year was almost over, and I was up only 25 percent, which
was my worst year ever. After I took the loss on Schwab and Amazon
*The strike price is the price at which the option buyers could buy the stock by exercising their options. Of course, they would exercise their options only if the market
price was above the strike price at the time of the option expiration.

and was barely up for the year, I was devastated. I remember going to
Bloomingdale's with my girlfriend and not being able to stay in the
store because every time I saw a price sign, it reminded me of the
stock market. After ten minutes, I just had to leave. For about a week
after I got out of these trades, I couldn't look at the Investor's Business
Daily section that showed how the market was doing to date.
Was this your worst emotional experience in the market?
Absolutely. It was by far the worst experience; I had never felt like
that before.
But when I look at your track record, I see that December 1998,
when you lost 16 percent, was only your second worst month and
was far eclipsed by August 1998, when you lost a staggering 53
percent. How come August 1998, which seems so much worse on
paper, doesn't register on your emotional barometer?
The reason my August 1998 decline was so large was that I was
caught 200 percent long during the month's big stock market decline.
Even though I was down much more during August, I was confident
in the fundamentals of my stocks. They were just selling at ridiculously low valuations. The price/earnings ratio of my portfolio was
only 5. Some of the stocks I was long were even selling below net
cash—you never see that. I knew the stocks I held were absolute bargains and that they couldn't stay that low for long. I wasn't worried
about their going down much further. In contrast, in December I lost
money because I was short Internet stocks, and there was no way to
know when they would stop going up.
So the difference between August and December was your confidence level: In August you felt completely confident, even
though you lost much more, and in December you felt out of
control.
Exactly.
Even though you recovered August's entire huge loss in only two
months, do you consider it a mistake to have put yourself in a
position of being 200 percent long during a bear market?
Yes. This led to one of the three changes I made to my trading rules at
the start of 1999. The first, which we discussed before, was don't par-

ticipate in mania. The second was never to have more than a 100 percent net position, either long or short. [In August 1998 Okumus had
been 200 percent long and 0 percent short, or 200 percent net long.]
What was the third change in your trading rules?
I started using options for the specific purpose of reducing downside
volatility.
Was this change a response to investor feedback? Were some of
the investors who were impressed by your net returns scared off
by the volatility in your returns, especially the 53 percent
decline in August 1998?
Yes, the rule changes I made were definitely influenced by investor
feedback. Investors told us that they didn't want month-to-month
volatility. Consequently, I started focusing much more on month-tomonth performance. Before, when I was managing money for only
myself, my family, and a few clients, my sole goal was long-term capital appreciation. It was as if I were running a marathon and only concerned about my finish time; I didn't care about the individual split
times. Now that I am managing much more money for investors who
are concerned about the monthly numbers, it's as though I'm running
a marathon, but everyone is paying attention to every hundred
meters. As a result, even though my main goal is still long-term capital appreciation, I'm focusing a lot more on the monthly numbers
because I want to grow the fund much larger.
How did you first get involved in the stock market?
I was always interested in finance and currencies. As a kid, I would
read the sports page of the newspaper, just like my friends, but 1 also
read the financial page. In 1986, they opened the Istanbul Stock
Exchange. The newspapers didn't even have a stock market column
until 1987. When they did start reporting stock prices, I noticed that
the prices changed every day. It got my attention. I figured if you were
smart, you could make money off of this because there had to be a
reason why prices were changing.
At first, I just followed prices in the paper. Then I realized that the
stock exchange was close to my school. One day, I skipped school to
go down to the exchange and see how it worked.

F R O M I S T A N B U L TO W A L L S T R E E T B U L L

Describe the Istanbul Stock Exchange.
It's completely modernized now, but at the time there was a bar
across the middle of the room, which separated the spectators from
the floor brokers. In the front of the room there were boards with bid
and asked prices for each stock.
How many stocks were traded on the exchange at the time?

About thirty.
Was there one floor broker for each stock?
No, the floor brokers worked for different brokerage firms; they could
all trade in any stock.
How did you interact with the broker if you wanted to buy or sell
a stock?
You would yell, "Hey, come here."
How big was the exchange?
Oh, about ten times bigger than this office [translation: extremely
small].
How long did you watch the market before you made your first
trade?
I watched it for a few weeks. One of the stocks, a construction company, which I knew was constantly getting new contracts, went down
almost every day. This didn't make any sense to me, so I decided to
buy some shares. The broker warned me not to buy the stock, assuring me that it was headed lower. But I bought the stock anyway
because I knew it was a good company. Within two weeks after I
bought it, the stock doubled. That experience really got me hooked. I
said to myself that logic works. I realized that stocks moved for a reason, and I was determined to find the reason.
At the time, there was no market research whatsoever. I started
doing my own research. The Istanbul Stock Exchange published
sheets that showed current and previous year revenues, earnings,
debt, and a few other statistics. No one paid any attention to these
numbers. Since there were no books or articles available on the stock
market, I just tried to interpret the statistics logically.
For example, if a company made $20 profits for every $100 in
sales, I assumed it was a good company; if it only made $2 profits on
every $100, I figured it wasn't so hot. I looked at the shares outstand-

ing and the amount of profits, and I calculated what I thought the
stock should be selling at. In effect, I created the price/earnings ratio
for myself. When I came to the United States to attend college, I discovered that the price/earnings ratio and the other statistics I was
looking at were the basic data people used to analyze stocks.
Did you continue to be net profitable after your first winning
trade?
I did pretty well. Within a year or so, the people at the brokerage firm
I was using started listening to me for advice. During this time, the
stock market in Turkey went down from 900 to 350 and then back to
900. During the big decline, I managed to more than hold my own,
and then when the market went back up, I did very well.
How were you able to make even a small profit during the phase
when the stock market was going down sharply?
The stock market in Turkey is very speculative. The exchange has a 10
percent daily price limit. [The maximum permissible daily price move
(up or down) in each stock was limited to 10 percent. Typically, when
a market reaches limit up, trading will virtually cease, as there will be
many buyers, but few sellers. An analogous situation would apply
when the market is limit down.] Daily price limits are very common. I
had a rule that I would buy a stock if it went down the daily limit three
days in a row and then sell it on the first short-term bounce.
In other words, you were taking advantage of speculative
excesses. Do you still trade that way?
No, I trade on the fundamentals.
Say you select a stock because you like the fundamentals. How
do you decide when to begin buying it? Do you still wait for a
sharp sell-off before you buy it?
Not necessarily. I have an idea of the value of the stock in my head,
and when the stock goes low enough relative to that price, I'll buy it.
For example, say I believe a stock has a value of $35. In order to give
myself a wide margin of safety, I might buy it if it goes down to $20.
Do you always wait for the stock to reach your price before you
buy it?
Definitely. I am never in a rush. I wait patiently until the stock gets to
my number.

AHMET OKUMUS

Using that approach, I assume you miss a lot of stocks.
Certainly, but my main goal is to make money on every investment,
not necessarily to catch every trade. I don't have to make a lot on each
trade, as long as I make something. Since 1992, 90 percent of my
trades have been winners.
What percent of the stocks you research and decide to buy actually come down to your price?
Not many, maybe 10 to 20 percent. I follow what the other value
managers in the industry are doing, and I know why they buy the
stocks they do. I'm much stricter on my entries than they are. They
may be willing to buy a company at sixteen times earnings, whereas
I'm not willing to pay more than twelve. "Buy low and sell high" is
something a lot of people say but very few people do. I actually do it.
When did you come to the United States?
I came here in 1989 to attend college. The funny thing is that when I
came to the United States, the Turkish stock market, which had gone
from 900 to 350 and back to 900 while I was trading it, went from
900 to 4,000 in six months. I was very upset.
Did you come just to attend college, or did you have any
thoughts of trying to stay permanently?
My intention from the very beginning was to become a fund manager
in the United States. This is the biggest market, and in the United
States the sky is the limit, whereas in Turkey, the opportunity is very
limited.
Did you ever look at the United States stock market before you
came here?
No, but from the first day I arrived in the United States, I started to
focus on the U.S. stock market. I wanted to learn what made stocks
move.
How did you start?
By reading as much as I could.
WTiat books did you find most beneficial or influential?
I very much liked Stock Market Logic by Norman Fosback. For one
thing, that book taught me to focus on insider trading [buying and
selling by a company's senior management and board of directors],

F.ROM I S T A N B U L - 7 0 W A L L S T R E E T B U L L

which has become an important element in my approach. I also
found books on Warren Buffet's methodology very useful.
What aspect of Warren Buffet's methodology appealed to you?
The concept of determining a stock's value and then buying it at a discount to that number in order to allow for a margin of safety.
What other books did you find useful?
One Up on Wall Street by Peter Lynch gave me an appreciation of the
importance of common sense in stock investing. Peter Lynch also
pointed out that your odds in a stock are much better if there is significant insider buying.
How do you measure whether insider buying is significant?
I compare the amount of stock someone buys with his net worth and
salary. For example, if the amount he buys is more than his annual
salary, I consider that significant.
So you're looking at a breakdown of insider buying statistics, not
just the total numbers.
I am very detailed. I don't think there is one other person who is more
focused on insider activity than I am.
What else is important in interpreting insider trading activity?
You have to make sure that insider buying represents purchases of
new shares, not the exercise of options.
Is insider buying an absolute prerequisite, or will you sometimes
buy a stock you like that reaches your entry price target, even if
there is no insider buying?
Most of the time I won't. I want to see the insiders putting their
money in their own company. Of course, if management already owns
a significant portion of the company, they don't have to buy more. For
example, insiders already own about 65 percent of the shares in J. D.
Edwards—a stock I currently like—so I don't need to see any additional buying. In contrast, in some companies, insiders only own
about 1 percent of the firm. In companies with low insider ownership, management's primary motivation will be job security and
higher bonuses, not a higher stock price.
Do you do your research by computer or manually?
Manually. I think that's the best way because you learn much more.

0 K U M U Si

What is the universe of stocks that you are following?
Anything on the Big Board and Nasdaq.
How many stocks is that, roughly?
About ten thousand.
How can you possibly do research on ten thousand stocks manually?
I spend a hundred hours a week on research. I follow all the stocks
that I have researched at one time or another during the past eleven
years, which is a substantial number. I also pay close attention to
stocks making new fifty-two-week lows. A good company that I've
identified from previous research does not have to make a new low for
me to get interested. If it is down a lot, even if it doesn't hit a new low,
I'm on it.
How are you aware of all the stocks that have witnessed significant declines?
Besides looking at the list of new fifty-two-week lows, the Daily
Graphs chart book contains about half the stocks I follow, and I
review it weekly to see which stocks have declined a lot.
So you're always looking at stocks that have done poorly.
Always. I usually don't even consider buying a stock unless it's down
60 or 70 percent from its high. In the seven years I have traded U.S.
stocks, I have never owned a stock that made a new high. I think that
must be a pretty unusual statement.
Are you implying that when you flip through the charts, you only
pay attention to stocks that have been moving down?
That's correct, with one exception: If the stock has been moving
sideways and the earnings have been moving up, I might pay attention.
Then are all the stocks you buy at or near recent lows?
Not all. If it's a company that 1 know well and the fundamentals are
very strong, I might go long, even if the stock is significantly above its
low. For example, Microchip Technology is currently at $35, which is
well below its high of $50, but also well above last year's low of $15.
Even though it's well off its low, I'm still selling puts in the stock
because their business is improving tremendously.

F R O M I S T A N B U L TWflLl S T R E E T B U L L

Selling puts represents a bullish position. The seller of a put
receives a premium for the obligation to buy a stock at a price called
the strike price during the life span of the option. This obligation is
activated if the option is exercised by the buyer, which will happen if
the stock price is below the strike price at the option expiration.
For example, assume that a stock is trading at $13 and that a put
option on the stock with a $10 strike price is trading at $1. If the
stock is trading above $10 when the option expires, the seller will
have a $1 profit per share (a $100 profit per option contract, which
represents 100 shares). If the stock is trading below $10 at the option
expiration, the option will presumably be exercised, and the seller of
the option will be required to buy the stock at $ 10, no matter how low
the stock is trading.
Okumus, who typically sells puts with strike prices below the current market price (called out-of-the-money puts), will earn a profit
equal to the option premium paid by the option buyer if the stock
declines modestly, remains unchanged, or goes up. However, if the
stock declines by a wide margin, he will be obligated to buy the stock
at an above-market price (the strike price) at the time of the option
expiration.

What motivates you to sell puts in a stock instead of just buying
the stock?
Any stock that I sell a put on, I am happy if they put me the stock
[exercise the put option, requiring Okumus to buy the stock at the
strike price]. I don't sell a put on a stock unless I would be happy to
own the stock at the strike price.
For example, I'm currently short some $10 puts on J. D. Edwards,
which is trading near $13. I hope they put me the stock because I
would love to own it at $ 10. If they do, I'll still have the premium, and
if I buy the stock at $ 10, I know I will make money.
But most of the time when I sell puts, the market never declines
enough for the option to be exercised. This, of course, is okay too
because I still keep the premium as a profit.

F R O M ISTANBULHPlBiiL ST.SiET B U L L

In other words, selling put options is an alternative way for you
to be buying stocks. If it doesn't go down to the strike price, you
still earn the premium, and if does go down to the strike price,
that's also fine because that's the price you would have bought
the stock at anyway.
Exactly. By selling puts, I am getting paid by the market while I'm
waiting for the stock to come down to my price. Also, for some stocks,
it may only be possible to make money by selling puts as opposed to
buying the stock.
For example, value stocks have been very much out of favor in
recent years. There are stocks that are trading at only five to six times
earnings. The earnings are growing, insiders are buying, and the
stocks are just sitting there. At the same time, the S&P is going up
like crazy. You can't make money by buying these stocks, but you can
by selling the puts. If you sell put options, you don't have to be right
about the stock going up; all you need in order to make money is for
the stock not to go down by much.
Let's say that there is a stock trading at 35, and you decide you
would like to be a buyer at 30. Why not always sell the 30 put
and collect the premium, since if it went to 30, you would buy it
anyway? This way, you would always make the premium as a
profit, whether the stock went down to 30 or not.
Because you always have to consider your opportunity costs. If I sell
puts, I need to put up margin against the position. Sometimes the
premium I could collect for selling the put wouldn't justify tying up
the money needed for the position. I could do better investing that
money elsewhere.
Let's go back to when you arrived in the United States. You said
earlier that you started researching the U.S. stock market when
you first came here, which also approximately coincided with the
beginning of college. How did you allocate your time between
studying for college and studying the stock market?
On average I would say 35 percent school and 65 percent stock market, but the stock market percentage kept going up over time. By the
beginning of my senior year, I was devoting 90 percent of my time to
the stock market, and I quit school altogether.
